Hong Kong (CNN) Governments around the world have always struggled to stop the spread of disease, from the deadly swine flu which struck the globe in 2009, to ongoing attempts to rein in Ebola in West Africa .  No health authority has ever tackled the challenge currently faced by China , however, as the country grapples with a new coronavirus just as hundreds of millions prepare to travel during the Lunar New Year period -- the largest annual human migration on Earth.  During the Lunar holiday, people from across the country will cram themselves into homebound trains, buses and planes for family reunions. Others will take advantage of the time off to holiday overseas. Last year, close to 7 million Chinese tourists traveled abroad for Lunar New Year, according to state media.  The holiday -- the most important in the Chinese calendar -- comes at the worst possible time for health authorities racing to contain the outbreak which has put the rest of Asia on alert.  Medical staff members carry a patient into Wuhan's Jinyintan hospital, where patients infected by the Wuhan coronavirus are being treated, on January 18, 2020.  The virus, which was first identified in the central Chinese city of Wuhan, is known to have infected more than 300 people and spread to at least three other countries already. On Monday, China's National Health Commission confirmed that the Wuhan coronavirus can be passed from human-to-human and that medical staff had also been infected.  The spread of the mysterious respiratory virus to Thailand, Japan, South Korea, Taiwan, and the United States , is fueling fears of a broader epidemic, as China enters its busiest travel period of the year.  "One of the consequences of a more connected world is that outbreaks have the potential to spread internationally much more rapidly than was the case 50 years ago," said Mike Turner, director of science at the Wellcome Trust, a UK-based global health charity.  More cases have also been reported within China, evidence that the outbreak has spread well beyond Wuhan, creating a risk of unpredictable further infection.  As of Tuesday morning, five cases have been confirmed in Beijing, two in Shanghai, and 14 in the southern province of Guangdong -- all hundreds of miles from Wuhan. Additional suspected cases have been reported across the country, from eastern Shandong province to Sichuan province in the southwest.  Chinese scientists on January 8 identified the pathogen as a new strain of coronavirus , the same family as severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS). In 2002 and 2003, SARS infected more than 8,000 people and killed 774 in a pandemic that ripped through Asia, spreading as far as Canada.  During a news conference Monday, Zhong Nanshan, a Chinese government-appointed expert who helped discover the SARS coronavirus, said the infectiousness of the new Wuhan coronavirus was not as strong as SARS, but that the disease was "climbing" and suggested that the "death rate at the moment is not so representative." Since December, four people infected with the Wuhan coronavirus have died.  Uncertainties about the Wuhan coronavirus -- including its unidentified source -- have prompted fears there may be more people infected than currently reported.  Jeremy Farrar, an infectious disease expert who heads the Wellcome Trust, said the outbreak is "extremely concerning."  "It is possible that often mild symptoms, and probability of people being affected and infectious without experiencing symptoms, from this coronavirus may be masking the true numbers of people who have been infected, and the extent of person to person transmission," said Farrar.  Initial symptoms of the Wuhan coronavirus include fever and coughing -- which are also common flu symptoms, a viral infection prevalent in the winter months. Some patients infected with the coronavirus also have difficulty breathing and invasive lesions on the lungs, according to the World Health Organization (WHO).  The WHO will convene an emergency meeting on Wednesday to discuss the outbreak in China.  Transportation hub  The recent spike in confirmed Wuhan coronavirus cases appears to point to a wider area of contamination. According to a recent study by Imperial College London, the number of infections in Wuhan itself are likely a gross underestimation, raising the risk that carriers of the virus may have already traveled elsewhere within China before screening measures were put in place.  Chinese Foreign Ministry spokesman Geng Shuang said Monday that since the outbreak, China has been taking active measures to handle the epidemic and formulate prevention and control plans.  China's National Health Commission said Sunday that the situation of the outbreak is "still preventable and controllable."  The more than 200 cases officially confirmed in China is a far cry from the 1,700 the British researchers estimate to have been infected by January 12. The UK team based their calculations on the number of cases reported already in Thailand and Japan, and the estimated number of people departing Wuhan's international airport.  More than 60 routes connect Wuhan with other countries, including direct flights to New York, San Francisco, Sydney, Paris and London, as well as over a hundred internal flights to other major Chinese cities. The central city of 11 million people is also a hub for the country's high-speed rail network.  Governments around the world have begun responding to the perceived threat. On Tuesday, Australia said it is adding border measures for flights from Wuhan to Sydney. The US also announced screening measures for passengers arriving from Wuhan at airports in New York, San Francisco and Los Angeles last week, following similar measures taken by governments in Asia.  In Wuhan itself, infrared thermometers have been installed at the airport, train stations, coach terminals and passenger piers to measure the temperatures of passengers departing the city since January 14, according to state media.  Those measures were only put in place five weeks after the initial outbreak, meaning countless passengers have left the city without undergoing any screening.  Nor is it clear that the screening or heightened attention in Wuhan is working: the woman diagnosed with the coronavirus in South Korea had visited a doctor in the city after developing a fever and muscle pains. She was prescribed cold medicine and sent on her way.  This photo taken on February 10, 2018 shows passengers travelling on a crowded train during the 26-hour journey from Beijing to Chengdu, as they head home ahead of the Lunar New Year.  Cover-up concerns  The legacy of SARS hangs long over the current outbreak. During that pandemic, the Chinese government was initially slow to release information, censoring news and downplaying the severity of the outbreak. The lack of transparency sparked backlash at home and drew heavy criticism from foreign governments and the WHO.  In April 2003, a prominent doctor in Beijing went on the record to accuse the government of a coverup. Later in the month, China sacked its health minister and the mayor of Beijing over their mishandling of the outbreak.  This time around, the Wuhan Municipal Health Commission declared the outbreak on December 31, three weeks after the first patient developed symptoms. Chinese scientists identified the pathogen a week later and shared the genome sequence of the virus with the WHO -- a speedy response that earned praise from the WHO and scientists around the world.  The Wuhan health commission has also been posting frequent -- and now daily -- updates on the latest infection numbers on its website, but that has failed to allay fears over the disease spreading.  The Wuhan health commission announced Monday that 136 new cases had been diagnosed on Saturday and Sunday, including one death. The number was a significant jump from the 62 reported during the weekend, but far short of the estimate by the Imperial College London researchers.  The WHO said the spike in reported cases was the result of "increased searching and testing" of the virus among people with respiratory illness.  JUST WATCHED This may explain the spread of China's new virus Replay More Videos ... MUST WATCH This may explain the spread of China's new virus 03:38  Before this weekend, Wuhan authorities had maintained for two weeks that no new cases had been detected since January 3. Even as cases were confirmed overseas, there was a complete lack of information on potential infections elsewhere in China, leading to a growing sense of unease and accusations of a coverup by local or national authorities.  On Weibo, a Twitter-like social media service, many people questioned the silence from the provincial authorities in particular, pointing out the unlikeliness that only those people who left the country were found to be carrying the virus.  "Does it mean that Wuhan residents only travel abroad but not to other (Chinese) cities?" one user asked in a popular post.  Increased concerns around person-to-person transmission, combined with the mass travel expected in the coming weeks, will have health authorities -- and the public -- on edge to see just how far the new virus spreads.  On Monday, Chinese President Xi Jinping instructed authorities to take "resolute efforts" to contain the spread of the Wuhan coronavirus, the first time the country's leader has publicly spoken on the outbreak.  According to a statement carried on state news agency Xinhua, Xi "stressed putting people's safety and health as the top priority" and urged relevant departments to release information promptly and deepen international cooperation.
(CNN) The National Institutes of Health is working on a vaccine against the new virus that has infected hundreds and killed four in Asia.  "The NIH is in the process of taking the first steps towards the development of a vaccine," said Dr. Anthony Fauc i, director of the National Institutes of Allergy and Infectious Diseases.  Fauci said it would take a few months until the first phase of the clinical trials get underway and more than a year until a vaccine might be available.  The latest  The virus, which was first reported at the end of December, has infected more than 200 people, according to a Chinese government-appointed expert. The bulk of the cases have been in China, but there have been four cases in Thailand, South Korea and Japan.  The virus originated in animals and can be spread from person to person. While most of the patients visited an animal and seafood market in Wuhan, a city about 700 miles south of Beijing, some did not.  Working on a vaccine  A team of scientists in Texas, New York and China are also at work on a vaccine, according to Dr. Peter Hotez, a vaccine scientist at Baylor College of Medicine in Houston.  "The lesson we've learned is coronavirus infections are serious and one of the newest and biggest global health threats," Hotez said.  He added that it's less challenging to develop a vaccine for coronaviruses than for other viruses such as HIV or influenza.  "Every virus has its challenges, but coronaviruses can be a relatively straightforward vaccine target," Hotez said.  If a vaccine is developed, he said, health care workers might be among the first to receive it because they're exposed to infected patients.  It is "remarkable" that scientists are able to start developing a vaccine for a virus that was identified less than a month ago, he said.  He credited Chinese researchers, who quickly sequenced and published the virus's genome.  "With SARS, it took almost a year to be able to identify and map the full genetic code," he said. "Now we're doing this in just a few weeks."  'An evolving situation'  Fauci emphasized there are still many questions about this new virus.  "This is an evolving situation, and it's tough to predict ultimately where it will go," he said. "But we have to take it very seriously."  A few things are clear. One, the virus jumped from animals to humans, just like SARS did nearly two decades ago.  He added it's unclear whether just one type of animal is transmitting the virus to humans, or more than one type.  Get CNN Health's weekly newsletter Sign up here to get The Results Are In with Dr. Sanjay Gupta every Tuesday from the CNN Health team.  He also said while it's clear this new virus can be spread from person to person, it's unclear how easily that spread can happen.  "Is it a continual spread? Is it sustained? We're not quite sure yet," he said.  Michael Osterholm, director of the Center for Infectious Disease Research and Policy at the University of Minnesota, agreed there are many questions.  "This is one of those inflection moments in outbreak history where we have enough information to be very concerned, but not enough information to say this is going to be an international crisis," he said.
(CNN) The United States has its first confirmed case of a new virus that appeared in Wuhan, China, last month, the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention announced Tuesday. The coronavirus has already sickened hundreds and killed six people in Asia.  CDC officials said the United States will be more strict about health screenings of airplane passengers arriving from Wuhan.  The patient, who is not being named, is in isolation at Providence Regional Medical Center in Everett, Washington. He is in his 30s and lives in Snohomish County, Washington, just north of Seattle. He had recently returned from Wuhan.  He arrived at Seattle-Tacoma International Airport on January 15, before any health screenings for the Wuhan coronavirus began at US airports. He sought medical care on January 19. The CDC and Washington state are now tracing the people he was in contact with to see if he might have spread the disease to someone else.  "We believe the risk to the public is low," said John Wiesman, secretary of health for the state of Washington.  The patient became ill four days after arriving in the United States and sought care. Based on the patient's symptoms and travel history, doctors suspected the novel Wuhan coronavirus and sent specimens to the CDC in Atlanta, where tests Monday confirmed the virus.  The patient is faring well but is still being kept in isolation out of an abundance of caution, health officials said.  Health screenings at more US airports  Soon, passengers from Wuhan to the United States, whether on direct or indirect flights, will only be allowed to land at one of the five US airports doing health screenings. Screenings include a temperature check and observation for symptoms such as a cough and trouble breathing.  Last weekend, the CDC started health screenings for Wuhan passengers arriving at John F. Kennedy International Airport in New York, Los Angeles International Airport and San Francisco International Airport.  Starting this week, Wuhan passengers will also be screened at Hartsfield-Jackson Atlanta International Airport and Chicago O'Hare International Airport.  The CDC raised its travel notice for Wuhan, China, from level 1 to level 2 of three possible levels, according to its website . As of Tuesday afternoon, the agency advised travelers to "practice enhanced precautions." The highest level, "Warning - Level 3," advises travelers to "avoid nonessential travel."  Person-to-person transmission of Wuhan virus  The Wuhan coronavirus is in the same family as severe acute respiratory syndrome, or SARS , which killed more than 700 people in 2002 and 2003, and Middle East respiratory syndrome, or MERS.  To date, the Wuhan coronavirus has infected more than 300 people and killed six in an outbreak that has struck China, Thailand, South Korea, Japan and now the US.  Get CNN Health's weekly newsletter Sign up here to get The Results Are In with Dr. Sanjay Gupta every Tuesday from the CNN Health team.  It's not known how many of the cases became infected from animals and how many from another person.  On Tuesday, the CDC activated its emergency response system in response to the Wuhan coronavirus. The CDC activates this system on a temporary basis to centralize how the agency monitors, prepares for and responds to public health threats.  The outbreak started in late December at an animal market in Wuhan, about 700 miles south of Beijing. The virus can jump from animals to people.  While there's much to learn about how easily the virus can be transmitted human-to-human, health officials said it appears that it's not spread as easily as some other viruses.  "This isn't anywhere near in the same category as measles or the flu," Dr. Martin Cetron, director of CDC's division of global migration and quarantine, told CNN.
The spread of the respiratory virus to Thailand, Japan, South Korea, Taiwan, and now the United States, is fueling fears of a broader epidemic, as China enters its busiest travel period of the year.  Wuhan, the central Chinese city where the coronavirus was first detected, announced a series of new measures Tuesday, including the cancellation of upcoming Lunar New Year celebrations, which had been expected to attract hundreds of thousands of people.  Tour agencies have been banned from taking groups out of Wuhan and the number of thermal monitors and screening areas in public spaces will be increased. Traffic police will also conduct spot checks on private vehicles coming in and out of the city to look for live poultry or wild animals, after the virus was linked to a seafood and live animal market, according to a report by state media outlet the People's Daily, citing Wuhan's Municipal Health Commission.  The new measures come after Chinese President Xi Jinping ordered "resolute efforts to curb the spread" of the virus Monday.  There are now fears, however, that efforts to contain it are coming too late, hampered by a slow-moving Chinese bureaucracy which failed to put sufficient measures in place in time.  In the coming days, hundreds of millions of Chinese are expected to begin traveling across the country and overseas as the annual Lunar New Year break gets fully underway, compounding concerns of a further spike in cases.  Though infections were first detected in Wuhan in mid-December, infrared temperature screening areas were not installed in the city's airports and stations until January 14, according to state media.  More than 440 cases of the virus have been confirmed across China, with the majority in Wuhan itself, but also as far afield as Beijing, Shanghai and Guangdong province, near Hong Kong.  The death toll rose to nine Wednesday morning. Among the victims are a 66-year-old man and a 48-year-old woman who died on January 20, according to the Wuhan Municipal Health Commission. The majority of those who have died as a result of the virus have been elderly and had pre-existing conditions.  Cases confirmed worldwide  Around a month after the virus was first identified in Wuhan, it has already spread well beyond mainland China.  In Asia, cases have been detected in Taiwan, South Korea, Thailand and Japan, while authorities in the US confirmed their first case on Tuesday and there have been reports of potential cases in Australia.  Despite initial reports that the virus was unlikely to spread between humans, Chinese health authorities have now said there is "definitely human-to-human transmission." One patient is believed to have infected as many as 14 medical staff in one hospital, suggesting the disease can be spread far more easily than previously thought.  The specter of SARS (severe acute respiratory syndrome), which infected more than 8,000 people and killed 774 in a pandemic that ripped through Asia in 2002 and 2003, has loomed large over discussion of the current virus.  During the SARS outbreak, Chinese authorities initially downplayed the dangers and censored coverage, preventing people from realizing the severity of the virus and taking action in time to stop its spread.  Zhong Nanshan, an expert with China's National Health Commission who is investigating the Wuhan virus, told state media Monday that while it is not as serious as SARS, the number of people with the disease was "climbing" and suggested that the "death rate at the moment is not so representative."  A study by researchers in the UK estimated that the number of infections in Wuhan is still grossly underestimated , with the real number closer to 1,700, based on the spread of the virus to other cities and countries in a relatively short period of time.  US authorities announced the country's first confirmed case on Tuesday. The patient, a young man, had been traveling and arrived at Seattle-Tacoma International Airport in Washington state before health screenings for the virus began.  Travelers wear face masks as they walk outside of the Beijing Railway Station in Beijing, Monday, January 20, 2020.  Worldwide effort  Even before cases were detected in other countries, the efforts to contain the Wuhan coronavirus were international. Wuhan alone has connections to dozens of overseas destinations, and Beijing and Shanghai have hundreds more.  Airports across Asia have stepped up temperature screening of incoming passengers, as have several hubs in the US with connections to Wuhan, including New York, San Francisco and Los Angeles.  With all indications that the virus has a relatively slow incubation time, however, these efforts may be insufficient to stop its spread.  "You cannot absolutely prevent entry into the country of a disease like this. The incubation period is probably a week," Australia's chief medical officer, Brendan Murphy, said Tuesday . "It's about identifying those with a high risk and making sure people with a high risk know about it and know how to get medical attention."  He said that while there was no cause for immediate alarm, the true number of cases was likely far higher than currently reported and urged people to be vigilant about potential symptoms.  Australian authorities on Tuesday quarantined a man in Brisbane who had returned from Wuhan with possible symptoms of the coronavirus. He will remain in isolation until his symptoms have resolved, Queensland Health authorities said.  Raising concerns about how difficult it is to detect those with the virus, even if they have some symptoms, a patient in South Korea told doctors there she had developed a fever and muscle pains on Saturday and was prescribed cold medicine by a doctor in Wuhan, before being sent on her way. She was later confirmed to have the coronavirus during a check in Seoul.  In the US, the National Institutes of Health is working on a vaccine for the new virus, though it will take at least a few months until the first phase of clinical trials get underway and more than a year until a vaccine might be available.  Scientists in Texas, New York and China are also at work on a vaccine, according to Peter Hotez, a vaccine scientist at Baylor College of Medicine in Houston.  "The lesson we've learned is coronavirus infections are serious and one of the newest and biggest global health threats," Hotez told CNN.  The World Health Organization will convene an emergency meeting on Wednesday to determine whether the outbreak constitutes a public health emergency of "international concern" and what recommendations should be made to help manage its spread.
Washington state health officials said Wednesday that investigators have identified 16 “close contacts” of a 30-year-old man who is the first confirmed case of coronavirus diagnosed in the United States.  The Snohomish County resident, who has not been named, identified people that he has interacted with since returning from Wuhan. Those named will be actively monitored for signs of any illness by local health officials.  Health officials said that they consider a “close contact” to be anyone who is within 6 feet of an infected person, like having a meal or meetings together, but that they are not asking those contacts to isolate themselves unless they have symptoms.  Health staff will reach out to the contacts daily to see if they have a fever or cough and to check if they develop any symptoms. Dr. Chris Spitters, the health officer for the Snohomish Health District, said there is also a call center set up to take resident’s questions about the virus.
Hong Kong (CNN) The death toll from the Wuhan coronavirus has risen to 17, as dozens more cases were reported across China and as far afield as the western United States , sparking fears of a possible pandemic.  On Wednesday, the Chinese city of Wuhan -- where the virus was first identified -- said it would "temporarily" close its airport and railway stations for departing passengers. All public transport services will also be suspended, as authorities attempt to contain the virus.  The city lockdown begins at 10 am local time Thursday (9 pm ET Wednesday), according to an announcement from the city's coronavirus command center.  Chinese health authorities said that at least 547 cases had been confirmed in the mainland, with eight new deaths linked to the virus in Hubei, the central Chinese province of which Wuhan is the capital. Cases were also confirmed in the Chinese territory of Macao and the self-governing island of Taiwan.  Beyond China, officials in Washington state on Tuesday confirmed the first case on US soil. The patient is a male in his 30s who is under observation at Providence Regional Medical Center Everett, said John Wiesman, Washington's secretary of health, at a press conference Wednesday.  Health officials have reviewed the travel history of the patient, said Dr. Chris Spitters, Snohomish Health District acting health officer on the patient's contact investigation. "As of now, there are at least 16 identified close contacts," Spitters said. "Local health departments started reaching out to them yesterday and continued doing so today."  Spitters said "the risk to the general public remains low and the public health system and our health care partners are working swiftly and collaboratively to address this situation."  Cases have also been reported in South Korea, Thailand and Japan, and suspected cases detected in Australia.  Worldwide, a total of 555 cases have been confirmed since the outbreak was detected in mid-December.  However, the World Health Organization (WHO) has not yet declared the virus a "public health emergency of international concern," which might merit a coordinated global response.  The organization's emergency committee met Wednesday in Geneva, but decided more information was needed to declare the status of the outbreak and what recommendations should be made regarding it. It is expected to take up the matter again on Thursday.  China on Tuesday announced it was adopting Class A prevention and control measures, typically used for major outbreaks such as plague and cholera. This means health officials will get sweeping powers to lock down affected areas and quarantine patients. China previously used such measures in 2009 to tackle an outbreak of H1N1, introducing mandatory quarantine for anyone who had "close contact" with an infected person, including foreigners arriving in the country from areas where H1N1 outbreaks had been reported.  Li Bin, China's national health commissioner, said that officials are aware of around 2,200 cases of "close contact" with known virus carriers. Regarding suspected cases, 715 patients have been discharged while more than 300 patients remain on medical watch.  The disease is mainly transmitted "through the respiratory tract," said Li, adding that "there is possibility of viral mutation and further spread of the disease."  While there are indications that Chinese authorities are ready to ramp up controls on travel -- including ordering that all trips to Wuhan be canceled and refunded -- it remains to be seen whether the virus, already reported in around a dozen locations, can be reined in before the Lunar New Year travel period truly kicks in.  The largest annual human migration on Earth, hundreds of millions of people will travel across China and overseas during the four-week period, which began in mid-January and continues until February. Many will go by train or plane, raising the risk of infection as they are put in close contact with other travelers  JUST WATCHED Gupta: Here's what's keeping health officials up at night Replay More Videos ... MUST WATCH Gupta: Here's what's keeping health officials up at night 02:36  What we know about the virus  First identified in Wuhan in mid-December, the novel coronavirus (2019-nCoV) is in the same family of infections as severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS) and Middle East respiratory syndrome (MERS).  Coronaviruses are transmitted by animals and people, and the Wuhan strain has been linked to a market in the city which was selling seafood and live animals, including wild species. SARS was previously linked to similar markets, particularly the sale of civet cats, a delicacy in some parts of China.  Speaking Wednesday, Li, the Chinese health official, said that Wuhan and Hubei provincial authorities should tighten the regulation of farm markets and wild animals. He also urged the public to avoid crowds and minimize large gatherings.  Chinese health officials said human-to-human transmission of the virus has been confirmed, raising the chance of its spread. In one instance, 14 doctors and nurses operating on a patient unknown to be carrying the virus were all infected with it, suggesting it can be spread relatively easily.  People were seen at a train station Wednesday trying to get train tickets to leave Wuhan.  People in a ticket line trying to get out of Wuhan in Wuchang train station in China.  The true extent of the virus is unclear, and official figures may be an underestimation. A study by British researchers previously estimated -- based on the spread of the virus overseas in a relatively short time -- that the number of people infected in Wuhan alone was likely around 1,700.  However, so far the death toll is relatively low, and almost all cases involved elderly people with preexisting conditions: of the more than 400 confirmed cases in China, nine deaths have been reported so far, or 2.25%. By comparison, SARS had a mortality rate of around 10%, and was even more deadly among vulnerable populations.  Medical staff transfer patients to Jin Yintan hospital on January 17, 2020 in Wuhan, China.  Worldwide effort  With cases and suspected cases already reported across Asia and now as far afield as the US and Australia, containment efforts are being put in place in many travel hubs.  Wuhan alone has connections with more than 60 overseas destinations through its international airport, while Beijing, Shanghai and Shenzhen, all of which have reported cases, have hundreds more.  Airports across Asia have stepped up temperature screening of incoming passengers, as have several hubs in the US, including New York, San Francisco and Los Angeles.  Officials at Seattle-Tacoma International Airport put up signs at the international arrivals area instructing travelers from Wuhan to watch for symptoms of the virus. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention started displaying the sign in English and Chinese on January 14, an airport spokesman said.  A sign at the international arrivals area of Seattle-Tacoma International Airport instructs travelers coming from Wuhan, China, to watch for symptoms of coronavirus.  The International Air Transport Association (IATA) issued a statement saying it was closely monitoring developments and is actively working with the WHO secretariat, the International Civil Aviation Organization and the CDC.  With all indications that the virus has a relatively slow incubation time, however, these efforts may be insufficient to stop its spread.  "You cannot absolutely prevent entry into the country of a disease like this. The incubation period is probably a week," Australia's chief medical officer, Brendan Murphy, said Tuesday . "It's about identifying those with a high risk and making sure people with a high risk know about it and know how to get medical attention."  Raising concerns about how difficult it is to detect those with the virus, even if they have some symptoms, a patient in South Korea told doctors there she had developed a fever and muscle pains on Saturday and was prescribed cold medicine by a doctor in Wuhan, before being sent on her way. She was later confirmed to have the coronavirus during a check in Seoul.  In the US, the National Institutes of Health is working on a vaccine for the new virus, though it will take at least a few months until the first phase of clinical trials get underway and more than a year until a vaccine might be available.  Scientists in Texas, New York and China are also at work on a vaccine, according to Peter Hotez, a vaccine scientist at Baylor College of Medicine in Houston.  "The lesson we've learned is coronavirus infections are serious and one of the newest and biggest global health threats," Hotez told CNN.
An outbreak of new coronavirus has sickened about 1,400 people worldwide and killed at least 41 in mainland China, while spreading to countries around the world.  Its emergence has fueled fears of a deadly epidemic as hundreds of millions of people travel in China, or around the Asian region, during the Lunar New Year holiday.  What is the virus?  Coronavirus is a large family of viruses, which include severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS) and Middle East respiratory syndrome (MERS).  Common symptoms include a runny nose, cough, sore throat, and possibly a headache. Those who have a weakened immune system, particularly the young and the elderly, are at risk of the virus turning into a more serious respiratory tract illness.  Authorities said the Wuhan coronavirus was passed from animals to humans; can be spread from person to person; and appears to cause pneumonia in people who have weakened immune systems.  It is thought to be milder that SARS and MERS and take longer to develop symptoms. Patients to date have typically experienced a mild cough for a week followed by shortness of breath, causing them to visit a hospital.  Experts are now trying to understand how it is being transmitted, who is at most risk and whether transmission is occurring mostly in hospitals or in the community.  In one instance, 14 doctors and nurses operating on a patient -- who was not known to be carrying the virus -- were all infected with it, suggesting it can be spread relatively easily.  Where is this happening?  Where it started: Ground zero  The outbreak emerged last month in the largest city in central China, Wuhan, a city of 11 million people in Hubei province.  Officials linked it to Huanan Seafood Wholesale Market, saying wild animals sold there are the likely source of the virus. The market has been closed since January 1 for disinfection and officials are scrambling to discover its animal source.  Snakes -- the Chinese krait and the Chinese cobra -- may be responsible for transmitting coronavirus to humans.  Scientists in China say that the virus might have jumped from bats to snakes, which were sold in the local seafood market in Wuhan, and then to humans.  However, how the virus could adapt to both the cold-blooded and warm-blooded hosts remains a mystery, and further tests are necessary to determine the source animal.  At least 30 people died in the province, many of them elderly and suffering from pre-existing conditions.  As deaths mount in the city, officials imposed a number of new measures including the postponement of New Year celebrations in Wuhan, a ban on tour agencies from bringing groups of people out of the city and thermal monitors and screening in public spaces.  Regional spread  From the first reported case in December, in Hubei province, the virus has spread to almost all of China's administrative regions this week.  The country has adopted prevention and control measures that are typically used for major outbreaks such as plague and cholera. This means health officials will get sweeping powers to lock down affected areas and quarantine patients.  Wuhan "temporarily" closed its airport and railway stations on Thursday for departing passengers, and all public transport services are suspended until further notice.  The city's coronavirus task force also announced the closure of highways out of the city.  Meanwhile, the city made it mandatory for everyone to wear face masks in public places after confirmed coronavirus cases passed the 500 mark.  Unprecedented lockdown  Authorities in China have imposed indefinite travel restrictions in 15 cities in Hubei province, the most affected area in the country, impacting an estimated 32 million people.  Wuhan, a city of 11 million, is under effective lockdown, with all public transport in and out of the city closed.  Other cities across the province are under less severe travel restrictions.  A global threat: Confirmed cases around the world  The virus has spread well beyond mainland China, so far to 13 places including Hong Kong, Macau, Taiwan, Singapore, South Korea, Thailand, Japan, Vietnam, Australia and the United States.  Airports around the world have increased health screenings and implemented new quarantine procedures as officials race to slow the spread of the virus.  International flights from Wuhan  Wuhan is a major transportation hub.  Not only is the city a center for China's high-speed rail network, it has flights going to more than 60 international destinations from Tianhe International Airport.  On Thursday, as confirmed cases ramped up across the country, government officials announced the temporary closure of Wuhan's airport and railway stations.  All train tickets in and out of Wuhan have also been suspended, while multiple international airlines have canceled flights to the city.  China has encouraged passengers traveling to and from Wuhan to change their travel plans during the busy Lunar New Year holiday period, by exempting them from service charges for refunds for all modes of transport.  How does this compare to the SARS virus?  Scientists say the infectiousness of the virus is not as strong as SARS, but have added that the number of people infected is climbing.  A study by researchers in the UK estimated that the number of infections in Wuhan is still grossly underestimated, with the real number closer to 4,000 as of January 18, based on the spread of the virus to other cities and countries in a relatively short period of time.  SARS infected more than 8,000 people and killed 774 in a pandemic that ripped through Asia in 2002 and 2003.  On Thursday, David Heymann, the chairman of a World Health Organization committee gathering data on the outbreak, said the virus spreads more easily from person to person than previously thought.  But there is still much that is not known about the virus and, as the above graphic shows, its death rate is far smaller than that seen during the SARS outbreak.
Wuhan, China (CNN) The Lunar New Year -- the most important festival in the Chinese calendar -- is just three days away, but in the Chinese city of Wuhan, there are few reasons to celebrate.  A deadly outbreak of the new coronavirus emerged in this city of 11 million people last month. Within weeks, the virus has killed nine people , sickened hundreds and spread as far as the United States.  Wuhan has been on high alert since the number of confirmed infections surged into the hundreds earlier this week.  New year celebrations that had been expected to attract hundreds of thousands of people have been canceled. In some parts of the city, including a major shopping area, streets remain largely empty, with most people walking outside donning face masks.  In the city's center, the Huanan Seafood Wholesale Market sits empty, its rows of stalls shuttered. Police and security officers in face masks stand guard outside, prohibiting anyone from filming or entering a cordoned off area.  The market has always been a popular spot at this time of the year, packed with shoppers stocking up on fish and seafood for Lunar New Year feasts with family and friends.  But this year, Chinese authorities and scientists say wild animals sold at this market are the likely source of the new strain of coronavirus, which is in the same family of viruses as the deadly severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS).  The virus -- which can infect humans and animals -- has since spread to Thailand, Japan, South Korea, Taiwan and the United States. Officials in Washington state confirmed the first case on US soil Tuesday.  The market has been closed since January 1 for disinfection, but health authorities have not found out which animals are the source.  'How can I not be worried?'  Not far from the Huanan Seafood Wholesale Market, Xiao Chuan'an, from a neighboring city, is selling sugar cane she imported from southern Guangdong province.  "I do feel a bit scared," she told CNN. "How can I not be worried? The situation sounds really serious. The news on the phone sounds really scary."  The country's National Health Commission confirmed this week the virus can be transmitted between people, after Wuhan health authorities maintained for two weeks that there was "no clear evidence of human-to-human transmission."  The closed Huanan Seafood Wholesale Market has been linked to the coronavirus outbreak in China.  A staff member talks with a driver as he checks the body temperatures of passengers at an exit of a highway in Wuhan on Tuesday.  In Hubei province, where Wuhan is located, 270 people have been infected as of Wednesday, and nine of them have died, according to the commission. At least 453 cases had been confirmed throughout China, leading to fears of a possible epidemic.  Xiao said her family had repeatedly urged her to go home, fearing that she will catch the virus in Wuhan. But she wants to stay to sell the sugar cane. However, business has been bad -- people are too scared to come to the market to shop, she said.  "You can see now -- does it look like the atmosphere of Chinese New Year?" she said. "I don't know when the pneumonia epidemic will stop... I might have to eat instant noodles during Chinese New Year."  A hospital in Wuhan, where China's coronavirus outbreak first emerged.  Emergency measures  The city government announced a series of new measures Tuesday to contain the outbreak -- efforts some critics say came too late -- the virus has already spread to a dozen provinces across the country.  Tour agencies in Wuhan have been banned from taking groups out of the city. Infrared thermometers have been installed at the airport, train stations, coach terminals and passenger piers to measure the temperatures of passengers departing the city since January 14, according to state media.  Staff members disinfect the Hankou Railway Station in Wuhan on Wednesday.  The city has over 60 routes connecting Wuhan with international cities, including direct flights to New York, San Francisco, Sydney, Paris and London, as well as over a hundred internal flights to other major Chinese cities. It is also a hub for the country's high-speed rail network.  At the high-speed rail station, the only faces that stand out are the uncovered ones, with the vast majority of passengers donning masks. As they prepare to exit the station, a railway staff member -- also wearing a mask and gloves -- puts a thermometer at the head of each passenger, checking for a fever.  Commuters wearing face masks walk in Hankou railway station in Wuhan, where China's coronavirous outbreak first emerged last month.  On a high speed train from Beijing to Wuhan, railway attendants and security guards left their faces uncovered. A train attendant told CNN they were asked by management not to wear masks, as it may trigger a panic among passengers.  But she added that the train company is preparing to purchase masks and they will begin wearing them should the situation worsen.  Some hotels in the city said they will also screen guests, checking their temperature and asking them to sanitize their hands upon entry.  Commuters wait in line at Wuchang railway station in Wuhan on Wednesday.  On Wednesday, the general manager of the Westin hotel in Wuhan told CNN he had asked staff to start wearing face masks "for both their safety and for the safety of our guests."  Others, however, are less worried about the outbreak. Yan Weixi, a jackfruit seller who did not wear a mask, said she did not find the situation "so scary."  "I have been checking online instructions... like drinking more water or washing your hands more frequently. I think that should be fine," said Yan, from northeastern Heilongjiang province, who is spending her first Lunar New Year in Wuhan.  "The most important thing is to keep a positive attitude, because if you're more scared, it's more likely you would catch the virus," she said. "That's my opinion."
Jennifer Williams, adviser to Vice President Mike Pence for European and Russian affairs, returns to testify before the House Intelligence Committee on November 19. Win McNamee/Getty Images  At the end of tonight’s proceedings in the Senate impeachment trial, Chief Justice John Roberts said a “a single one paged classified document identified by the House managers for filing with the Secretary of the Senate” will be made available for senators to review in a classified setting.  The document pertains to supplemental testimony from Jennifer Williams, a national security aide to Vice President Mike Pence who testified before the House impeachment inquiry in November.  “On November 26, 2019, the House Intelligence Committee received supplemental testimony from Jennifer Williams, assistant to Vice President Mike Pence. On December 11, 2019, after consultation with the ranking minority member, Chairman Schiff transmitted that supplemental testimony to the House Judiciary Committee to be made part of the record in consideration of articles of impeachment," a Democratic official working on the impeachment trial said in a written statement.  The official added: “Although there appears to be no basis for keeping it classified, the Office of the Vice President has ignored two requests to declassify this document. This supplemental testimony will allow the Senate to see further corroborative evidence as it considers articles of impeachment, and, if declassified, it would provide the public further understanding of the events in question.”  More on Williams' testimony from November: Williams described President Trump's July 25 call with Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelensky in her deposition as "inappropriate." Trump's July 25 call is at the center of the impeachment trial, in which a whistleblower complaint alleges Trump asked for dirt on former Vice President Joe Biden, a 2020 presidential rival, and his son Hunter Biden. There is no evidence of wrongdoing by either Biden in Ukraine.
Brynn Anderson/AP Mary Faye Cochran sings "You Are My Sunshine" to her son Stacey Smith from her senior-living facility in Smyrna, Georgia, on Sunday, May 10. It was Mother's Day in the United States. In pictures: The novel coronavirus outbreak  Brynn Anderson/AP Mary Faye Cochran sings "You Are My Sunshine" to her son Stacey Smith from her senior-living facility in Smyrna, Georgia, on Sunday, May 10. It was Mother's Day in the United States.  The novel coronavirus has now spread across the world.  The illness was first reported in late December in Wuhan, a city of 11 million people in central China's Hubei province. It has found a foothold on every continent except for Antarctica, and many countries have declared a national emergency.  The World Health Organization declared it to be a pandemic, the first since the H1N1 flu in 2009.  Coronavirus symptoms can look like a common cold or flu. But for those with a weaker immune system, the virus could cause more serious illnesses like pneumonia or bronchitis.
(CNN) Authorities have widened a travel lockdown in central China, ring-fencing millions of residents in a race to contain a deadly virus that is spreading throughout Asia and across the world.  The clampdown -- which comes amid the Lunar New Year, China's busiest travel period -- reflects mounting fears that the outbreak of a new strain of coronavirus could give rise to a pandemic. The virus has killed at least 25 people in China, several of whom did not have pre-existing conditions before they contracted the illness, with more than 830 infected.  Still, the World Health Organization's (WHO) emergency committee said Thursday it was too early to declare the outbreak an international public health emergency.  Earlier in the day, David Heymann, the chairman of a WHO committee gathering data on the virus, said the virus spreads more easily from person to person than previously thought.  It initially appeared to spread only by very close contact that would typically occur within a family -- such as hugging, kissing, or sharing eating utensils -- but now evidence is accruing that shows more distant contact could spread the virus, such as if a sick person were to sneeze or cough near someone else's face.  He said there is no evidence at this point that the virus is airborne and could be spread across a room, as happens with the flu or measles.  Mounting evidence suggests the virus is spreading outside mainland China, with various countries reporting their first cases.  In Scotland, five people were tested for suspected coronavirus after traveling from Wuhan.  Hong Kong confirmed two cases of the virus and Singapore confirmed its first, a 66-year-old Chinese national who had also been in Wuhan.  Saudi Arabia has denied there are any cases of the virus in its territory, following reports that an Indian nurse working in the country had been diagnosed.  China's race to contain it  Wuhan -- ground zero for the pneumonia-like respiratory virus -- "temporarily" closed its airport and railway stations on Thursday for departing passengers. All public transport services in the city of 11 million people have also been suspended until further notice.  On Thursday afternoon, transport authorities began shutting down some of the main highways leaving Wuhan, according to state news agency Xinhua.  The wearing of face masks is now mandatory in all public places in the city, including hotels, restaurants, parks, cafes, and shopping malls.  "People who don't obey the requirements shall be dealt with by authorities in accordance with their respective duties and laws," a statement from Wuhan's municipal government said on Wednesday.  Authorities in Huanggang, about 80 kilometers (50 miles) east of Wuhan, announced a series of similar measures cutting off the city as of midnight local time (11 a.m. ET on Thursday).  Government officials said in a statement that the city's subway and train stations will close, per a report in the People's Daily, a state-run newspaper. All theaters, internet cafes and indoor public culture, tourism and entertainment facilities in the city will also stop business, People's Daily reported.  Hundreds of thousands of people will likely be affected. The entire administrative area of Huanggang has a population of 7.5 million, but People's Daily reported that the lockdown only applies to the urban area, which is only a part of the total population.  In Ezhou, the city's railway station has been closed "in order to fully conduct prevention and control of the new type of pneumonia ... effectively cut off the transmission of the virus, resolutely curb the spread of the epidemic, and ensure the safety and health of the people," according to a statement from city's Coronavirus Disease Prevention Control Headquarters on Thursday.  There was an unusual flurry of activity around the train stations in Wuhan early Thursday morning, as passengers -- most of them wearing face masks -- scrambled to leave the city before the lockdown began. Families were seen unloading their cars and hurrying to get into lines that already stretched outside the doors.  Travelers at Wuhan's Hankou railway station queue to leave the city early on Thursday morning before the citywide lockdown came into effect.  At Wuhan's Hankou railway station, one of the country's busiest high-speed rail hubs, officials used thermal detectors to scan for potential fevers as dozens of passengers filed through the security screening. Inside, crowds were shoulder to shoulder as they waited for trains out of the city.  The mass exodus was met with anger from many users of the Weibo microblogging platform.  "Wuhan people, get out of Shanghai," one person posted. "Don't sneak in and spread chaos."  Others shared their fears over the virus, and cautionary warnings. "Don't panic and try not to go out," one person said.  Another person posted they had considered fleeing Wuhan. "I was thinking about my parents and children -- if I bring them, where can we escape to?"  The decision to stop trains and planes to and from Wuhan comes shortly before Lunar New Year begins on January 25 amid what is considered the biggest human migration on the planet, with hundreds of millions of people visiting families and traveling in China or throughout Asia.  Inside Wuhan, the epicenter  Wuhan is one of China's most important cities. Located on the confluence of the Yangtze River and its largest tributary, the Han River, it is considered the political and economic capital of central China.  For those remaining in the city, there is a sense of unease. Jan Renders, a 29-year-old PhD student in Wuhan, told CNN that many shops are closing for the Lunar New Year holiday, so people had already been stocking up on supplies. He said he was able to buy enough food for at least a week.  "But of course people aren't sure whether shops will be going back to normal soon," he said.  Another man in Wuhan sent CNN a photo inside a grocery store Thursday morning that showed several empty shelves. The man, who asked not to be identified, said most of the food was sold out.  The Wuhan New-type Coronavirus Pneumonia Command -- a task-force set up to deal with the crisis -- said in a statement that Wuhan has a sufficient supply and reserve of food, medical supplies and commodities.  "There is no need for the general public of the city to panic or hoard in order to prevent unnecessary wastes," the command said.  The scale of the challenge facing authorities tasked with implementing the blockade is immense. By way of comparison, the lockdown is akin to closing down all transport links for a city more than three times the size of Chicago, two days before Christmas.  "The Chinese new year is the most important festival for Chinese. And many of the mobile population, they're coming from rural China to work in Wuhan, and now you ask them not to leave to see their relatives, that is difficult," professor Yuen Kwok-yung, a leading microbiologist, told CNN.  Yuen was part of a group of high-level experts who visited Wuhan earlier this week and recommended on Sunday that the Chinese central government should stop people traveling to and from the city.  "It has to be done," he said. "If you allow people to go out of Wuhan, especially those who may have symptoms, then the exported case numbers will continue to surge, and that is not a good thing for the whole outbreak control."  "The mainland government policy now is that nobody should leave Wuhan and nobody should come into Wuhan," he continued.  A growing number of cases  Chinese health authorities said on Friday that at least 830 cases of the Wuhan coronavirus had been confirmed. The death toll rose on Friday to 25, from 17 the day before -- with all but one of those deaths in Hubei, the central Chinese province of which Wuhan is the capital.  The other death was in Hebei province, close to Beijing.  Cases of the virus have now been reported in nearly every Chinese province, with two cases confirmed in Macao, and two in Hong Kong. The self-governing island of Taiwan has also confirmed a case.  Beyond China, officials in Washington state said on Tuesday that a man in his 30s is the first confirmed case on US soil . A total of nine cases have also been reported in Singapore, South Korea, Thailand, Japan and Vietnam.  The true extent of the Wuhan coronavirus is unclear, however, and official figures may be an underestimation as mild symptoms and delayed onset mean cases are likely to have been undetected, a team of scientists have said.  Scientists at Imperial College London estimate that around 4,000 people are likely to have been infected in Wuhan city alone as of January 18.  Passengers wearing face masks onboard one of the last trains to leave Wuhan before a citywide lockdown came into effect.  What we know about the virus  Officially called the novel coronavirus (2019-nCoV), the contagion is in the same family of infections as severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS) and Middle East respiratory syndrome (MERS). SARS infected 8,000 people and caused 774 deaths in 2002 and 2003.  Coronaviruses are transmitted by animals and people, and the Wuhan strain has been linked to a market in the city that was selling seafood and live animals, including wild species. The coronavirus that causes SARS was traced to the civet cat, a wild animal considered a delicacy in parts of China that was sold in similar markets.  Chinese health officials said human-to-human transmission of the virus has been confirmed, raising the chance of its spread. In one instance, 14 doctors and nurses operating on a patient unknown to be carrying the virus were all infected with it, suggesting it can be spread relatively easily.  The disease is mainly transmitted "through the respiratory tract," Li Bin, China's national health commissioner said on Wednesday, adding that "there is possibility of viral mutation and further spread of the disease."  Li said that Wuhan and Hubei provincial authorities should tighten the regulation of farm markets and wild animals. He also urged the public to avoid crowds and minimize large gatherings.  China on Tuesday announced it was adopting Class A prevention and control measures, typically used for major outbreaks such as plague and cholera. The designation has given health officials sweeping powers to lock down affected areas and quarantine patients.  China previously used such measures in 2009 to tackle an outbreak of H1N1, introducing mandatory quarantine for anyone who had "close contact" with an infected person, including foreigners arriving in the country from areas where H1N1 outbreaks had been reported.  International containment efforts  Japanese officers work at a health screening station as they observe passengers arriving on a flight from Wuhan, China.  As officials race to slow the spread of the Wuhan coronavirus, containment efforts are being put in place in many travel hubs.  Airports around the world are increasing health screenings and implementing new quarantine procedures, including in major airports in the US, Thailand, Singapore and Australia.  Hong Kong's Mass Transit Railway (MTR) has halted the sale of high-speed railway tickets to and from Wuhan, according to its public relations manager Dobie Yam.  Several countries, including the UK and Japan, have advised against all but essential travel to Wuhan.  However, the World Health Organization (WHO) has not yet declared the virus a "public health emergency of international concern," which might merit a coordinated global response.  The organization's emergency committee met Wednesday in Geneva, but decided more information was needed to declare the status of the outbreak and what recommendations should be made regarding it. It is expected to take up the matter again on Thursday.  Meanwhile, a senior State Department official said Wednesday the United States is concerned about transparency inside the Chinese government on the Wuhan coronavirus.  "I do believe that the concern you see both inside China and internationally is a reflection of what we've seen in the past. 2003 was SARS, and a number of issues, where the government has been slow to respond out of fear of embarrassment or making things look worse than they are. And that reluctance to respond in a rapid manner doesn't give the global community a secure feeling for this being managed inside China," the official said.
(CNN) Of all the alarming aspects of the rapidly spreading new virus out Wuhan, China, this is perhaps the most alarming: A single patient has infected 14 health care workers.  That's what's called a "super spreader," and disease detectives are hot on that patient's trail. It's one element to stopping the spread of this coronavirus that's killed 17 people and infected more than 500 in five different countries, including the United States.  CNN goes to ground zero of Wuhan coronavirus outbreak in China  CNN goes to ground zero of Wuhan coronavirus outbreak in China 02:45  CNN goes to ground zero of Wuhan coronavirus outbreak in China  Super spreaders are a crucial part of a disease outbreak. Think about Mary Mallon, or "Typhoid Mary," who was responsible for widely spreading typhoid in New York City in the early 1900s. Or the Chinese doctor who in 2003 spread SARS , or severe acute respiratory syndrome, to four different countries. Or the single patient at a South Korean hospital who in 2015 infected 82 people with MERS, or Middle East respiratory syndrome.  The Wuhan virus is a cousin of SARS and MERS. All three are coronaviruses.  The presence of a super spreader in Wuhan indicates that the virus can spread with some ease, said Michael Osterholm, an epidemiologist and professor at the University of Minnesota School of Public Health.  He calls them "super shedders," since they shed the virus -- for example, in sneezes or coughs -- in larger quantities than most other people.  "You only need one super shedder to say, 'This dog is going to hunt,' " he said. "It really does speak to the potential for this virus to be transmitted."  He added that there are probably more super spreaders -- or shedders -- of the Wuhan coronavirus than this one patient.  "If we have one super shedder, that tells us we're going to have more super shedders," he said. "If there's one, there will be more."  Osterholm's team at the Center for Infectious Disease Research and Policy is investigating the super spreader, and their research shows there might be more health care workers in or near Wuhan who've become infected than the 14 mentioned by the health official earlier this week.  Super spreaders in coronavirus outbreaks  On Tuesday, the mayor of Wuhan said one patient spread the coronavirus to a doctor and 13 nurses.  The mayor, Zhou Xianwang, said a patient wasn't screened for the virus before being admitted to Union Hospital in Wuhan for neurosurgery, and after surgery developed a fever. Zhou, who spoke on CCTV, the state-run television station, did not specify when this occurred.  Osterholm said his team's research shows that 20 health care workers have been infected by patients, with the other six cases possibly at hospitals in Wuhan and the nearby city of Huanggang.  Public health officials are trying to avoid devastating super spreader events that happened with SARS and MERS.  In 2003, a Chinese doctor who was staying at the Metropole Hotel in the city of Guangzhou infected other hotel guests who then traveled back to Vietnam, Hong Kong, Singapore and Canada. In Singapore alone, 94 cases of SARS can be traced back to the hotel, according to WHO  Get CNN Health's weekly newsletter Sign up here to get The Results Are In with Dr. Sanjay Gupta every Tuesday from the CNN Health team.  In 2015, there were five super-spreading events of MERS at hospitals in South Korea. In one case, a single patient spread the infection to 82 other people.
Pierre Albouy/AFP/Getty Images  The Wuhan coronavirus does not yet constitute a public health emergency of international concern, according to an emergency committee convened by the World Health Organization.  "The advice to the [director-general], which is provided by the emergency committee, is that now is not the time” and that it is "too early to consider that this event is a public health emergency of international concern,” committee chairman Dr. Didier Houssin told reporters Thursday.  The announcement came shortly after the committee was convened over two days in Geneva to advise WHO leadership on the outbreak. The organization was expected to make an announcement Wednesday, but WHO Director-General Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus then told reporters that he did not have enough information to make a decision, and the committee was asked to reconvene a second day.  WHO defines a public health emergency of international concern as "an extraordinary event" that constitutes a "public health risk to other States through the international spread of disease" and "to potentially require a coordinated international response." Previous emergencies have included Ebola, Zika and H1N1.  While Ghebreyesus praised the Chinese government and its cooperation with WHO on Wednesday, Houssin then expressed that the information they had from Chinese authorities was too limited and imprecise for the committee to make a recommendation that day. The committee remained divided — roughly 50/50 — over the course of the two-day meeting, Houssin said Thursday.  Advisers to the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention have told CNN they are concerned that Chinese health officials have still not released basic epidemiological data about the Wuhan coronavirus outbreak, making it more difficult to contain.  WHO has played a number of roles in the international response to the outbreak, including coordinating with international authorities and researchers, as well as developing guidance for lab testing, treatment and prevention measures.
(CNN) Advisers to the CDC say a lack of data from China about the Wuhan coronavirus is curtailing international efforts to quell the outbreak.  While the advisers commended the Chinese researchers for mapping the virus's genome in just a few weeks, they said there's a glaring lack of basic epidemiological evidence about who's getting infected with the virus and how it's spreading.  "This is Epi 101," said Dr. William Schaffner , medical director of the National Foundation for Infectious Diseases and a longtime CDC adviser. "I don't want to denigrate our Chinese colleagues, but when information is not presented clearly, you have to wonder."  The outbreak has grown quickly. The first cases were reported to the World Health Organization on December 31, and by January 3, there were 44 cases in China. Now, not even three weeks later, there are more then 600 cases, and the outbreak has spread to Thailand, South Korea, Japan, Singapore, Saudi Arabia and the United States, where there is one case.  The CDC advisers said since there's no vaccine against this new virus, public health efforts, such as catching cases early and instituting quarantine rules, are crucial. But they say it's hard to know whom to quarantine and for how long without knowing how people are getting infected, at what point and for how long they're capable of spreading the virus to others.  "This information is critically important. It tells you how to control the outbreak and what to worry about and whom to worry about," said Dr. Paul Offit, a specialist in pediatric infectious diseases at the Perelman School of Medicine at the University of Pennsylvania, and a longtime CDC adviser.  At a press conference in Beijing on Wednesday, Li Bin, the vice minister of China's National Health Commission said his country is "committed to public disclosure of information as well as international exchanges and cooperation."  "We will disclose information on the outbreak in a timely, open and transparent manner, objectively reporting outbreak developments," Li said, adding that China will share information with the WHO and other countries "on outbreak monitoring, investigation and treatment as well as risk assessment opinions in a timely manner so that we can discuss and improve measures together."  Crucial questions left unanswered  On Thursday, Chinese authorities presented top officials from the World Health Organization with new epidemiological information that revealed an increase in the number of cases, suspected cases, affected provinces and the proportion of deaths that are occurring. They reported fourth-generation cases in Wuhan -- meaning one infected person can give the virus to a second person, who can give it to a third person, who can give it to a fourth person. They reported second-generation cases outside of Wuhan, as well as some clusters outside Hubei province, according to a WHO media release.  But the CDC advisers said that's not nearly enough. They said there are very specific pieces of information about the spread of the Wuhan coronavirus that are still missing.  Among them: Of more than 600 cases, how many contracted the virus from handling animals at the market where the virus emerged and how many contracted it from people who had been at the market?  Among those who never went to the market, are they family members of the people who got infected at the market or colleagues who sit next to each other at work? Or maybe they don't know anyone who is sick and it's unclear where they caught it?  Looking at that chain of infection, are people spreading the disease before they have symptoms, while they have symptoms or after they've recovered?  Answers to those questions would help officials decide how long to isolate sick patients and who needs to be quarantined to see if they do develop symptoms.  "You've got to understand how this spreads," said Patricia Stinchfield , vice president of the National Foundation for Infectious Diseases and a CDC adviser. "And you want to know what people's symptoms are and who's having mild versus severe disease. How many people are hospitalized? How many in the intensive care unit?"  Stinchfield , a pediatric nurse practitioner and senior director of infection control at Children's Minnesota and Schaffner, an infectious disease doctor at Vanderbilt University Medical Center, are both liaison members of the CDC's Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices. Offit was a voting member of that group from 1998-2003 and has been on CDC working groups since then.  JUST WATCHED What do you need to know about Coronavirus? Replay More Videos ... MUST WATCH What do you need to know about Coronavirus? 02:29  A CDC spokesperson declined to comment for this story.  A WHO official said he understands the frustration about a lack of epidemiological information, but that it's possible that some CDC staffers know the answers to some of these questions and just haven't shared them with the advisers or the general public.  Dr. David Heymann, chair of the WHO's Strategic and Technical Advisory Group for Infectious Hazards , said at the beginning of an outbreak, sometimes different groups know different pieces of information.  "The CDC might have access to info that WHO doesn't have, and vice versa," he said.  In general, the more information public health officials know, the better, Schaffner said.  "The more you know, the more comprehensive you can be in defining and controlling what the issue is," he said.
Hong Kong (CNN) Speaking on the 10th anniversary of the 2003 SARS crisis , Zhong Nanshan, one of the heroes in China's fight against that disease, described it as a "turning point" for the nation.  "SARS forced the whole country to pay attention to the livelihood of the people," he said , before adding a warning. "We've made huge progress, but our footsteps are slow, especially in terms of healthcare."  With the Wuhan coronavirus spreading across the country , killing at least 25 people so far, China is now facing a major test of just how much it has changed since 2003, both in terms of the healthcare system's ability to react to a new deadly pathogen -- and crucially, how the central government handles the developing crisis.  Speaking this week, Chinese President Xi Jinping ordered "all-out efforts" to contain the virus' spread and treat those affected. His intervention seemed to carry with it a clear message: the mistakes of SARS will not be repeated.  Wuhan is only the latest crisis to face Xi since he secured personal control of the Communist Party, joining the US-China trade war, ongoing anti-government unrest in Hong Kong, and the recent Taiwan election, in which Tsai Ing-wen, much loathed by Beijing, handily won reelection against a more pro-China candidate  More than any leader since Mao Zedong, Xi has centralized power around himself. He is the state, and while this gives him immense control, it also means that every crisis is a test of his leadership -- Wuhan perhaps most of all, as the country looks to their leader for reassurance and confidence.  Since Xi's statement, efforts to control the virus have ramped up nationwide, with health authorities ordering the highest level response, typically used to tackle outbreaks of plague or cholera. On Thursday, Wuhan itself -- all 11 million people -- was partially quarantined , with public transport "temporarily suspended," including all planes and trains departing the city.  Despite the laudatory efforts of Chinese healthcare workers, however, and forceful statements from Beijing, allegations of an initial -- and potentially even ongoing -- cover-up continue to hang over the Wuhan outbreak.  This virus could have been China's chance to exorcise the ghosts of SARS once and for all, instead it may have exposed that, for all the progress in the past 17 years, fundamental flaws remain in place when it comes to handling a crisis like this -- ones that could result in far greater danger in future.  Crisis and cover-up  The first cases of what would later be called severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS) were identified in southern China in November 2002. The virus would go on to infect more than 8,000 people worldwide, the majority of them in China.  Even as the deadly pathogen spread throughout Guangdong province, however, media reports were censored and patients and their families prevented from speaking out. If they addressed the issue at all, officials downplayed it , unwilling to risk upsetting the economy or "social stability" -- important metrics for future promotion.  It was not until whisteblower Jiang Yanyong , a retired Chinese army doctor, came forward in early 2003 that much of China and the rest of the world became aware of the true danger -- by which time SARS had already spread widely. The virus was soon declared a "global threat" by the World Health Organization (WHO) and efforts to contain its spread were put in place worldwide.  In the months that followed, China's government officially apologized for its slow reporting of the outbreak, and the country's health minister was sacked , along with the mayor of Beijing at the time. "Never again" was the message of the day, one that has been repeated ad nauseum regarding the Wuhan virus.  While the Communist Party's grasp on power in China has grown stronger than ever under Xi, it's popular legitimacy is much more fragile. The SARS scandal, and similarly mishandled crises such as the 2008 Sichuan earthquake , had a devastating effect on that legitimacy, greatly alarming officials who place "stability" above all else.  Xi's gathering of power around himself also means the Wuhan crisis will be more of a test of his personal control of the Party and country -- and of the highly-centralized system he's put in place in recent years.  Initial problems  By a number of measures, China's handling of the current crisis has been infinitely better than during SARS. Authorities in Wuhan alerted the public to the new virus in mid-December, soon after the first cases were identified. Xi's statement four weeks later drastically boosted the response and publicized the risk.  In 2003, by comparison, it was over two months after the first patients were diagnosed with SARS that the WHO was alerted -- by a whistleblower, not the Chinese authorities -- of a "strange contagious disease" that has "already left more than 100 people dead."  But behind this outwardly competent handling of a crisis there are signs of a deeper problem.  One of the oldest cliches in Chinese politics is that "the mountains are high and the emperor is far away." Despite being an intensely centralized state, provincial authorities do not always act as Beijing would prefer, nor do commandments from on high -- to crack down on corruption or reign in pollution, or to increase transparency -- always trickle down to the provinces.  While unconfirmed, there are numerous indications that officials in Wuhan downplayed the risks of the virus for several weeks, delaying proper action and potentially increasing its spread.  it was not until January 14 that officials in Wuhan introduced any screening measures. In the intervening period, a major meeting of the Hubei provincial party was held in the city, and more than 40,000 families were invited to attend Though the first case was detected on December 8 --it was not until January 14 that officials in Wuhan introduced any screening measures. In the intervening period, a major meeting of the Hubei provincial party was held in the city, and more than 40,000 families were invited to attend a banquet in an attempt to set a world record.  Speaking to state media, Wuhan officials downplayed the danger, saying the virus was unlikely to be spread from human to human. State officials initially repeated this assessment: Wang Guangfa, head of a team of researchers sent from Beijing to investigate the situation, said on January 11 that it was under control -- he has since been diagnosed with the virus  At the same time, Wuhan authorities also tried to clamp down on discussion of the virus. State media reported that police arrested eight people in early January for spreading "rumors" that the virus was related to SARS, something which has since been confirmed by health authorities.  Even as researchers in the UK estimated that the initial spread of the virus could have affected at least 1,700 people, no new cases were reported in Wuhan itself, despite patients being identified in other countries. "Does the virus only affect overseas travelers?" people asked darkly on Chinese social media, where accusations of a cover-up quickly spread and were censored.  It was not until inspectors sent from Beijing had assessed the situation that the alarm was properly raised. In an interview with state broadcaster CCTV, Zhong Nanshan, the SARS hero, said there was " definitely human-to-human transmission ," and warned the infection rate was "climbing."  Passengers who arrived on one of the last flights from the Chinese city of Wuhan walk through a health screening station at Narita airport in Chiba prefecture, outside Tokyo, on January 23, 2020.  Worst possible timing  Speaking to state media this week, Wuhan Mayor Zhou Xianwang admitted that the city's "warnings were not sufficient."  Whether because of bureaucratic incompetence or a politically-motivated cover-up, the delay could not have come at a worse time. China is currently in the middle of the Lunar New Year travel rush , in which hundreds of millions of people move across the country, packed close together on trains, coaches and planes.  Revelations about the true spread and severity of the virus only came after the four-week travel period had got underway, and restrictions on people leaving Wuhan itself did not come into place until Thursday. One woman identified as having the virus in South Korea even told health officials there that she visited a doctor in Wuhan with symptoms -- after screening measures were introduced -- but got sent on her way and was able to leave the country.  The pervasive censorship of the Chinese press and internet undoubtedly played a role in this, as did Xi's years-long crackdown on civil society groups, forcing people to rely on official accounts and the transparency of officials whose own motivations are often completely apposite.  Once Xi intervened, essentially signaling that the Wuhan virus was fair game for Chinese media, reporters rushed to the scene. Both Caixin and the Beijing News -- some of the most independently minded outlets in the country -- quickly began producing in-depth coverage , some of which exposed oversights by local officials and punched holes in their narrative. Writing on WeChat from Wuhan, Caixin reporter Gao Yu compared the situation to SARS, saying that "the lack of transparency, public supervision and truth (have) caused huge damage to public safety."  China learned hard lessons in 2003 at a terrible cost. The legacy of SARS could be seen in the central government's response this month, and that of Chinese scientists, both of which deserve a great deal of credit.  But Xi has also reversed gradual liberalization and opening up which occurred post-SARS, massively centralizing power within the Communist Party once again. At the same time, he has overseen a crackdown on the internet, the press and civil society, and an anti-corruption purge that, while it has turfed out plenty of bad apples, may also have left provincial officials more afraid of angering Beijing.  Xi is the closest China has had to an emperor since Mao, but like the old saying goes, he's often far away. The Wuhan virus shows what happens when the country has to rely on information filtering up to the top for decisive action to be taken.
The University of Chester campus in November 2018. Shutterstock  Chinese students have been warned by a British university that they risk being quarantined on their return to the UK, if they travel home to celebrate the Lunar New Year.  The quarantine advice from the University of Chester was issued before travel restrictions were imposed by Chinese authorities.  The University of Chester has a relatively small Chinese student cohort and they are being appropriately supported. All students have been advised they must not interrupt their studies to return to China at this point."  British universities are "monitoring the coronavirus situation as it unfolds and universities with students in affected areas are working to identify appropriate actions," according to Universities UK.  It added that universities will continue to follow travel advice by the UK Foreign Office "and to monitor the situation, which is evolving rapidly.”  Chinese nationals make up the biggest proportion of international students for higher education institutions in the UK, according to the Higher Education Statistics Agency (HESA).  In the 2017-18 academic year, there were a total of 106,530 Chinese nationals studying in the UK.
Paris, France (CNN) Three cases of Wuhan coronavirus have been identified in France, the Health Ministry announced Friday. They are the first European cases of the newly discovered virus, officials said.  One patient is a 48-year-old man in the southwestern city of Bordeaux, Health Minister Agnès Buzyn told reporters.  Buzyn said the man traveled to China and visited Wuhan before returning to France on January 22. A day later, he sought medical examination and has remained in isolation since then.  "He's in isolation and he's doing well," Buzyn said.  Two other patients have been admitted to a hospital in Paris, the ministry said in a statement.  Read More
Hong Kong (CNN) Fifteen more people have been confirmed dead in Hubei province from a deadly new coronavirus , according to the provincial health authority, raising the death toll to 41 in mainland China.  Authorities in China have imposed indefinite travel restrictions on tens of millions of people across 11 cities in an unprecedented effort to contain the spread, as hospitals at the epicenter of the outbreak struggle to handle a surge in new patients.  The virus, which was first discovered in the city of Wuhan in December, has spread to every province in China, except the remote autonomous regions of Qinghai and Tibet.  Another 180 cases of the virus were confirmed in Hubei, said the provincial health authority. This raises the total number of confirmed Wuhan coronavirus cases to more than 1,200 in mainland China.  The weeklong Lunar New Year holiday, which began Friday, has led to concerns that the outbreak could quickly accelerate, as hundreds of millions of people travel across the country to visit friends and relatives.  Wuhan, the largest and most populous city in central China, was placed under lockdown Thursday, while public transport has been suspended in 10 neighboring cities. Numerous other measures and restrictions on public gatherings have also been implemented in the region. More than 30 million people could be affected.  Posts on social media show an atmosphere of fear and anxiety among those inside Wuhan, amid rising uncertainty over the ability of authorities to handle the potential epidemic.  People spoke of sick family members turned away from hospitals due to a lack of beds, or wards packed with feverish patients and limited screening or quarantine.  Video from Chinese social media appears to show hospitals in the city totally overwhelmed. In one video, a hospital corridor appears to be flooded with patients waiting for test results. In another, medical workers tend patient wearing full protective suits. CNN has not been able to independently verify the videos.  The Wuhan Municipal Health Commission acknowledged in a statement that there were a shortage of beds and long outpatient queues in the city. In response, it said seven hospitals will now be used solely for fever patients and more than 3,000 beds will be made available for suspected and confirmed cases of the virus.  Speaking to Chinese state broadcaster CCTV, medical workers in Wuhan have described an incredibly intense environment, where they must balance dealing with the overload of patients and suspected patients while also keeping themselves safe.  Residents wear masks to buy vegetables in a market in Wuhan.  "Today, I heard one of my colleagues say that she has got blisters on her face," Wang Jun, a nurse at Jinyintan Hospital, told the broadcaster. "It happened because she had to keep the face mask on tight for a long time."  On Friday, Chinese authorities announced they would construct a 1,000-bed dedicated pneumonia hospital in the city within six days to help treat the hundreds of people affected by the virus. According to state-backed newspaper Beijing News , the hospital will be a prefabricated, box-type model that can be built in the short time frame.  A similar hospital was built during the SARS epidemic in 2003 in Beijing. According to the paper, the dedicated SARS hospital treated almost 700 patients, and had a mortality rate of 1.18%, far below the national average.  In the meantime, hospitals have asked for donations of medical supplies, including masks, medical gloves and protective suits.  On Thursday, the World Health Organization (WHO) moved to declare the new coronavirus an emergency within China but has refrained from classifying the outbreak as an epidemic of international concern.  Mounting evidence suggests the virus is spreading outside mainland China, however, with various countries and territories reporting their first cases, including the United States and Europe.  Health officials in France confirmed two cases of coronavirus on Friday. French Health Minister Agnès Buzyn told reporters one patient is in Paris and another one in Bordeaux.  Cases of the virus have been confirmed in Hong Kong, Macau, Taiwan, Singapore, South Korea, Thailand, Japan and Vietnam.  Three people were tested for suspected coronavirus in Scotland, "as a precautionary measure only" after traveling from Wuhan, a government spokesperson said. Cases are also under investigation in Canada and Australia, health officials said.  Third generation spread  On Thursday, David Heymann, the chairman of a WHO committee gathering data on the outbreak, said the virus spreads more easily from person to person than previously thought. "We are now seeing second and third generation spread," Heymann said.  Coronaviruses are transmitted by animals and people, and the Wuhan strain has been linked to a market in the city that was selling seafood and live animals, including wild species.  Third generation means that someone who became infected after handling animals at the market spreads the virus to someone else, who then spreads it to a third person. The announcement marks a development in the progress of the spread of the virus.  It initially appeared to spread only by very close contact that would typically occur within a family -- such as hugging, kissing, or sharing eating utensils -- but now evidence is accruing that shows more distant contact could spread the virus, such as if a sick person were to sneeze or cough near someone else's face.  Heymann said there is no evidence at this point that the virus is airborne and could be spread across a room, as happens with the flu or measles.  On Friday, an 80-year-old man died of the Wuhan coronavirus in Hebei province, near Beijing -- the first death outside of the outbreak's epicenter, according to the provincial health authority.  The man had visited Wuhan and stayed with relatives for over two months, health authorities said.  In a press conference on Thursday, WHO director general Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus said that of those infected, a quarter of patients have experienced severe disease, Ghebreyesus added.  He acknowledged that there is "still a lot we don't know" about how -- and how quickly -- the virus spreads.  "We don't know the source of this virus, we don't understand how easily it spreads and we don't fully understand its clinical features or severity."  As officials race to slow the spread of the Wuhan coronavirus, containment efforts are being put in place.  The US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) raised its travel notice to the highest level "warning" for Wuhan from level 2 to level 3, which recommends that travelers avoid all nonessential travel to the city.  CDC advisors are concerned about the lack of data coming out of Wuhan and worry that Chinese health officials still have not released basic epidemiological data more than three weeks into the outbreak.  Lunar New Year celebrations canceled  Chinese passengers, most wearing masks, arrive to board trains before the annual Spring Festival at a Beijing railway station.  Saturday marks the first day of the Lunar New Year, as countries across Asia greet the Year of the Rat.  But celebrations will be considerably smaller in China than in previous years, as authorities move to cancel many large public gatherings in order to help contain the Wuhan coronavirus.  In Beijing, officials have canceled all large-scale New Year celebrations "in order to control the epidemic," including the city's traditional temple fairs. In Shanghai, the popular Disneyland theme park announced it would close from Saturday until further notice.  Celebrations have also been canceled in Hong Kong, and many other cities have issued guidance to citizens to avoid large public gatherings.  On Friday, China's two most important cities launched a Level 1 emergency response -- the highest level for a public health emergency -- to combat the outbreak, according to state broadcaster CGTN.  A total of 29 cases of the virus were confirmed in Beijing, according to CGTN, with more than 20 cases confirmed in Shanghai.  Hubei, the province at the center of the virus outbreak, declared a Level 1 response earlier Friday.
Laurie Garrett is a Pulitzer Prize-winning writer and policy analyst, and the author of "The Coming Plague: Newly Emerging Diseases in a World Out of Balance." The views expressed in this commentary belong to the author. View more opinions at CNN.  (CNN) On this date 17 years ago, I was covering the severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS) virus for several months as it spread across Asia, eventually reaching 37 countries, sickening 8,098 people and killing 774 of them.  So, as I read the first reports of a cluster of animal-market related illnesses, with the first patient exhibiting symptoms of pneumonia as early as December 12, 2019 , I had a chilling sense of déjà vu. By New Year's Eve, it was obvious something akin to SARS -- as it turns out, the Wuhan coronavirus is in the same family of viruses as SARS and MERS (Middle East respiratory syndrome) -- was unfolding in China.  The mysterious pneumonia virus that emerged from a live animal market in China's central city of Wuhan last month has now infected far too many people, over far too vast a geographic area, to be easily controlled.  The first American case -- involving a man in his 30s who recently traveled to Wuhan -- was confirmed outside Seattle on January 21, before the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention announced on Friday a second case in Chicago. As of Friday, at least 41 people have died from the illness.  I warned that China appeared to be taking more aggressive steps shutting down social media posts, arresting people accused of spreading "rumors" and capping the flow of information about the outbreak than it was halting the transmission of the virus. For more than a week, the reported number of cases barely changed after local authorities shut down the Huanan Wholesale Seafood Market , the putative source of the virus. And authorities insisted the cause was neither SARS, nor similar viruses like the flu, avian flu, or MERS.  They also repeatedly stated that there was no evidence of human-to-human spread of the disease (which turned out to be false), leading the World Health Organization and outside world to believe that closing the live animal market effectively brought the outbreak to a halt.  As recently as January 18, the Chinese Center for Disease Control and Prevention posted stern warnings against paying heed to "rumors" and insisted there were no cases of the disease in hospitals outside of Wuhan, adding that the outbreak was "preventable and controllable."  But we now know that was far from true.  Officially, there are more than 1,000 cases of the Wuhan coronavirus. Unofficially, however, the toll is likely to be far higher, and more than 20 Chinese cities have reported cases of the coronavirus.  Separate studies from London's Imperial College and Hong Kong University Medical School estimated that some 1,300 to 1,700 people were infected during the first week of January, when Chinese officials reported just a handful of cases and downplayed the epidemic's severity. This week, the Imperial College team estimated that there were a total of 4,000 cases (with the possibility of up to 9,700 cases in the worst-case scenario) by January 18, when the official tally was still at 62 cases  Using a different statistical method, scientists at Northeastern University in Boston reckon that 5,900 were infected by January 23.  Despite the wide disparity in the figures, this new epidemic seems poised to eclipse the scale of the 2003 SARS epidemic, and is already well outside of the reach of simple control measures.  Hong Kong University virologist Guan Yi, who was part of the team that discovered the SARS virus, tells the Washington Post that the epidemic is so out of control now that "a bigger outbreak is certain." He said that even with a conservative estimate, the outbreak could be 10 times bigger than the SARS epidemic -- with a reach of more than 80,000 cases.  Speaking on background, other SARS veterans tell me there may already be "many thousands" of infected individuals in China.  Because authorities initially downplayed the seriousness of the outbreak instead of implementing swift control measures, people have traveled to and from Wuhan -- a major transportation hub with a population of 11 million people -- and unwittingly carried the virus with them.  Chinese authorities have shut down flights, ferries, highways, and trains leaving Wuhan, as well as public transportation within the city. Twelve other cities in China have issued travel restrictions in an unprecedented move to contain the virus just days before the Lunar New Year on January 25, which usually ushers the largest human migration on earth, with hundreds of millions of people traveling to see relatives.  Following my January 8 claim that the Chinese government was covering up a significant epidemic, pressure mounted from United Nations agencies, Ministries of Health worldwide and the scientific community. Finally, Wuhan provincial communist party chief Jiang Chaoliang, and his counterparts in neighboring districts, came under veiled criticism from President Xi Jinping who ordered Party leaders to "put people's safety and health as the top priority and take effective measures to curb the spread of the virus."  On January 20, China's National Health Commission designated the new disease a Class B infection, although it was treating the virus as a Class A infection -- meaning mandatory quarantines and community lockdowns may be used to stop its spread.  And the following day, the Central Political and Legal Affairs Commission posted on social media that, "Anyone who puts the face of politicians before the interests of the people will be the sinner of a millennium to the party and the people." The commentary also warned that "anyone who deliberately delays and hides the reporting of cases out of his or her own self-interest will be nailed on the pillar of shame for eternity" and stressed that transparency was the best defense against rumors and widespread fear.  Not surprisingly, reported numbers of cases from all over China jumped dramatically after Xi's speech and subsequent pressure from Beijing. This has confused matters considerably, making it impossible to tell how much of the soaring epidemic toll is due to a surge in actual new infections, versus release of case numbers that local authorities had been covering up.  Worse, despite calls for openness, SARS hero Dr. Zhong Nanshan , who was celebrated for his 2003 efforts, gave a televised interview on January 20 in which he warned that 14 healthcare workers were infected in Wuhan, the risk to medical personnel is acute, and severity of threat will rise if the virus mutates. Zhong, who had initially made several appearances on Chinese television, has not been featured on broadcasts in recent days, with some speculating that the government is now silencing him  But Zhong's warning represented sound science. As the leading Chinese virology team wrote, after comparing the genetics and proteins of the new virus and SARS, "the Wuhan nCoV poses a significant public health risk for human transmission," because it -- like SARS -- has the ability to bind to a protein found on the surface of most human lung cells. "People also need to be reminded that risk and dynamic of cross-species or human-to-human transmission of coronaviruses are also affected by many other factors," like the host's immune response, the speed with which the viruses can multiply inside human lungs, and the potential mutations that might make the virus more virulent or transmissible.  In 2003, a fresh food market continues to trade despite the threat of the SARS virus in Guangzhou, the capital of Guangdong province, China.  Regardless of how transparent Beijing may now become, what I witnessed tracking SARS across Hong Kong and China, and subsequent investigations of sites hit by the disease in Hanoi, Bangkok, Singapore, Toronto and Hong Kong augurs poorly for this new viral epidemic and China's ability to bring it to a rapid resolution.  While 17 years has brought significant improvements in virology, diagnostics development, international health regulations and the WHO, and we know more today about the nCoV2019 virus (as the Wuhan coronavirus is awkwardly dubbed) than we did one month into the SARS epidemic, there is no magic wand that can wave this highly dispersed, airborne-spread, human-to-human transmitting microbe away.  After the initial coverup, Beijing is now executing the playbook that ultimately stopped SARS. The city of Wuhan is now on lockdown and fever checkpoints are operating in most major transit hubs across the country while Lunar New Year celebrations have been canceled. Instant contagious quarantine 1,000-bed facilities are under construction, with one due to open next week outside Wuhan. One key step -- closing all live animal markets nationwide -- has not yet been implemented.  I discovered in 2003 that wildlife dealers and animal breeders sell their living creatures all over the country, so that an infected animal in one city's market may well have a counterpart from the same dealer, on sale in another market hundreds of miles away. It is not yet known what beast was the source of nCoV2019, though one study suggests, based on genetic analysis of the virus, that it came from a snake . The SARS virus was transmitted to restaurant workers who bought and slaughtered live civets -- raccoon-like animals in a Guangzhou live animal market, which I investigated before authorities shut it down.  Like the Guangzhou market, Wuhan's Huanan Wholesale Seafood Market sells a vast range of animals , including civets as well as other exotic wild animals. All live animal markets throughout China and neighboring Asian countries should be shut down immediately, and not reopen until the source of the nCoV2019 epidemic is identified. Until then, it should be assumed that any live animals sold in markets from Hanoi, Vietnam, to Ulan Bator, Mongolia, might be dangerous to hold, slaughter or consume.  To stop the SARS epidemic in 2003, governments, hospitals and public health authorities resorted to measures that mirrored infection control in the early 20th century, focusing on taking temperatures to find individuals with fevers, and then placing those people -- regardless of the causes of their febrile states -- in mandatory quarantine. Eventually, with the feverish souls separated from the rest of humanity, the virus stopped spreading. By June 2003 the Chinese government was able to declare victory over SARS, eight months after the virus first emerged.  This photo taken on January 22, 2020 shows medical staff members wearing protective suits at the Zhongnan hospital in Wuhan in China's central Hubei province.  Here is what it will take, then, to stop the Wuhan virus.  First, the flow of people who are infected has to stop and transportation across the entirety of China must be monitored or restricted. The Wuhan animal market from which nCoV2019 arose is located less than 0.5 miles from one of the city's train stations, where several high-speed rails stop. It must be assumed that people, and their live animals, walked that short distance earlier this month to take the trains -- possibly carrying the virus with them to cities across China.  A post from Wuhan Railway that has since been deleted said 300,000 people traveled out of Wuhan by train on Wednesday. It is imperative that the tough lockdown measures unfolding this week presage nationwide travel restrictions.  During the SARS epidemic, a brave military physician leaked medical documents to Time magazine , providing proof that SARS patients were secretly being treated in People's Liberation Army facilities in Beijing. Once word was out, I watched as tens of thousands of Beijing residents climbed onto trains, fleeing the city -- and taking SARS to every corner of the country.  After the exodus from Beijing in 2003, authorities erected fever check stations in every air, bus and train terminal in China, and placed policed health stations along the nation's highways. Fever-check stations were so abundant that I was typically tested 10 to 12 times a day in Beijing, and every 10 to 20 miles while driving on major highways.  The Chinese government has started erecting a network of fever stations in transit hubs , and I expect this will ramp up considerably over the coming week. Social media posts already show several photos and videos of officials erecting roadblocks, barricades, and traffic diversions to police-manned fever stations and similar measures reminiscent of what I witnessed in 2003.  Currently, family members of known nCoV2019 patients are tested for infection and placed under surveillance. Chinese authorities are already tracking hundreds of close contacts of known patients, and this will escalate radically over coming days. Apartment complexes and hotels that are known to have housed a nCoV2019-infected person will also be scoured.  Medical staff wearing protective gear go about their duties in the Alice Ho Miu Ling Nethersole Hospital in Tai Po where seven hospital workers have gone down with flu-like symptoms on August 27, 2003.  There must also be a safe place to quarantine people who are running temperatures. In 2003 I watched in frank astonishment as teams of Chinese workers erected entire hospitals -- complete with air filters, special sewage systems and electricity -- in just days, province-by-province. A similar effort is now underway in Wuhan  By far the most important measures to stop the Wuhan coronavirus will be those related to hospitals and how well medical teams can contain the virus. Both MERS and SARS spread like wildfire through unprepared medical facilities, regardless of the comparative wealth and sophistication of the hospitals. Most of the SARS cases in Hong Kong went to two hospitals: one had just a single healthcare worker infected, while the other suffered terrible losses in both health workers and patients who were being treated for other medical ailments.  The key difference? The teams in the better hospital had years of infection control training, which taught staff to work in teams and make sure that any contaminated protective gear was safely removed without contact with the skin, face, eyes or hands.  Over the last few days, many Chinese social media users have posted dramatic videos and photos of over-crowded hospital emergency room facilities, in which frantic patients and family members are crammed together and healthcare workers are hard-pressed to control the influx, as the infectious spread of the virus is surely occurring. In the SARS epidemic, hospitals eventually realized the need to set up fever check stations outside the facilities, screening would-be patients, and ushering febrile individuals into an entry separate from other hospital admissions.  In Toronto and Singapore, which have remarkably good healthcare systems and state-of-the-art facilities, hospital workers struggled mightily to stop spread of SARS, and healthcare workers who were infected died. In some of my discussions with physicians and nurses that went through the SARS nightmares, I have learned that the wealthier facilities were, perhaps, at greater risk because they had more equipment and procedures to apply to patients, including intubation and lavage, which was used to remove fluids from the lungs that built up in response to infection.  Get our free weekly newsletter Sign up for CNN Opinion's new newsletter. Join us on Twitter and Facebook  When SARS hit Hanoi, patients were originally taken to the prestigious French Hospital, where modern interventions were used, but the virus readily spread, taking the lives of doctors and nurses. When patients were moved to the far less sophisticated Bach Mai Hospital, which lacked some of the more advanced equipment, windows were open due to a lack of air conditioning.  According to some of the doctors, this slowed the spread of the virus by preventing it from adhering to surfaces and people in the hospital.  China is likely to take a serious economic hit as a result of the nCoV2019 virus. The SARS epidemic cost the global economy $54 billion, according to a World Bank estimate, and the Wuhan coronavirus is likely to affect Chinese tourism and trade. Seventeen years after SARS, China -- now the second largest economy in the world -- is likely to experience a higher scale of costs and burdens to execute nationwide containment strategy. But Beijing has no choice. The virus is already everywhere.
NYEIN CHAN NAING/POOL/AFP via Getty Images  Chinese President Xi Jinping chaired a meeting with top officials of the ruling Communist Party on the prevention and control of the Wuhan coronavirus outbreak, China’s state media reported Saturday.  During the meeting, Xi pointed out that in facing the grave situation of the rapid spreading epidemic of the deadly new coronavirus, it is necessary to strengthen the centralized leadership of the Party Central Committee.  He also said that he has been paying very close attention to the virus outbreak and demanded that the government at all levels to put people’s life and health as the top priority.  "Life is of paramount importance. When an epidemic breaks out, a command is issued. It is our responsibility to prevent and control it," Xi said, stressing the importance and urgency of the work.  What else is being done to address the outbreak: Xi ordered officials in the Hubei Province to take more rigorous measures to prevent the virus from spreading and to put all patients in centralized quarantine for treatment. He urged the party committees and governments at various levels to fully implement the decisions and policies made by the Party’s Central Committee, make all-out efforts and mobilize all the available resources to curb the spread of the virus.  He called for strengthening the protection of medical staff, ensuring the market supply of materials in need, intensifying disclosure of related information to guide the public opinion as well as the mobilization of social forces to uphold the overall stability of society.  Xi and other leaders also made new arrangements for further studies on the treatment of patients already infected with the virus.
(CNN) The US government is arranging a charter flight to evacuate American diplomats and citizens from the Chinese city that has become ground zero for a new deadly strain of coronavirus, a US official with knowledge of the matter told CNN Saturday.  The United States has a contract with a transporter to evacuate about three dozen diplomats and their families from the US consulate in Wuhan, China. The consulate is closed and all US diplomats are "under ordered departure," the official said.  Details of the flight plan are still being finalized -- for example, officials were still deciding between a narrow-body Boeing 737 and a wide-body Boeing 767 -- and the source said "a lot depends on what the Chinese authorities will allow us to do," adding that Beijing has been "very cooperative." The Wall Street Journal first reported the planned evacuation.  The State Department and White House have not yet responded to CNN's request for comment on the matter.  The US consulate in Wuhan reached out to Americans registered with the consulate and offered them seats on a flight, the official told CNN. The flight will have medical personnel aboard to treat anyone with the virus and make sure it is contained.  Read More
Beijing (CNN) The death toll from the Wuhan coronavirus in China continues rising as authorities and health care workers struggle to contain the outbreak .  Fifty-six people have been killed by the novel coronavirus in China, health officials said on Saturday. Over 1,900 confirmed cases have been reported across the country.  China's state-run Xinhua news agency reported that 237 patients are in critical condition.  Healthcare workers in the Chinese city of Wuhan say hospitals are running low on supplies as they treat an increasing number of patients.  The Chinese central government announced it would send more than 1,200 health workers — as well as 135 People's Liberation Army medical personnel -- to the cityin an unprecedented effort to contain the spread of the virus.  Lunar New Year celebrations -- the country's most important holiday -- have been greatly impacted in Beijing, Hong Kong and other major cities due to the virus. More than 60 million people are under partial lockdown in the provinces of Hubei and Guangdong.  While most confirmed cases of the virus are in China, at least 13 places outside mainland China, including France, Australia and the United States are reporting their first cases.  In Canada, health officials on Saturday announced the first "presumptive" positive case of coronavirus. The case is pending additional confirmation from the country's national medical laboratory.  In Wuhan, ground zero for the virus, four healthcare workers -- including doctors -- have told CNN of the difficulties facing medical crews on the ground. They have asked to remain anonymous to avoid repercussions.  Through telephone conversations with CNN and posts on Chinese social media, they told of low hospital resources. In private groups online, those identified as hospital staff are coordinating with members of the public to import protective equipment as they treat an increasing number of infected patients.  "In terms of resources, the whole of Wuhan is lacking," one Wuhan-based healthcare worker told CNN by phone. This person said they were looking for more protective clothing, protective goggles and masks.  "It's really like we're going into battle stripped to the waist," one healthcare worker added, using a Chinese idiom that equates to "going into battle without armor".  One hospital staff member claims healthcare workers have resorted to wearing diapers to work so as to avoid having to remove their HAZMAT suits, which they say are in short supply. A doctor on her Chinese social media Weibo page described similar accounts at another Wuhan hospital.  "My family members are definitely worried about me, but I still have to work," another doctor told. But she said that she is hopeful they will ultimately get the gear they need. "Our bosses, our hospital suppliers will definitely find a way to get these stocks to us," she added.  It's not clear if these accounts are anecdotal or whether there are widespread shortages across Wuhan.  Chinese state media has also shared posts from multiple Wuhan hospitals in which they ask for public donations of medical supplies. They report that one hospital staff member said the current supplies "are only able to sustain three or four days".  The Wuhan Health Commission has requisitioned over 10,000 beds from 24 hospitals to be used in the treatment of confirmed and suspected cases.  On Friday, Wuhan officials acknowledged that local hospitals were struggling to accommodate people seeking medical attention and said measures were being put into place to alleviate the situation.  State media also reported that the city aims to build a 25,000 square meter (269,100 square foot) new facility within a week, increasing hospital capacity by 1,000 beds, and that several medical centers in Hubei province are asking for medical gear donations.  Locking down the virus over Lunar New Year  Authorities have imposed indefinite restrictions on public transport and travel.  All motor vehicles will be banned in Wuhan's city center starting Sunday to control the flow of people, according to the Wuhan Command Center, the taskforce set up to combat the virus. Only vehicles with special permits, free shuttles and government vehicles will be allowed to circulate.  Amid the lockdown, countries like the US and France have been attempting to evacuate their citizens from the central Chinese city.  The US government is arranging a charter flight to evacuate American diplomats and citizens from Wuhan, a US official with knowledge of the matter told CNN.  The French government says it's planning to set up a bus service to move French nationals out of Wuhan.  Meanwhile, 56 Indian students have been trapped in Wuhan for three days, with some afraid to leave their dorm room and fearful of running out of food.  Ganesan Deepshikha, a student at the Wuhan University School Of Medicine, told CNN that the students have been told by the Indian Embassy that they are safe in Wuhan but have not received any assistance.  The virus, which was first discovered in Wuhan in December, has spread to every province in China, except the remote autonomous region of Tibet.  Among those infected is a 2-year-old girl in the southern region of Guangxi, the local health authority said. She is believed to be the youngest patient infected.  The week-long Lunar New Year holiday, which began Saturday, has led to concerns that the outbreak could quickly accelerate, as hundreds of millions of people travel across the country to visit friends and relatives.  Lunar New Year is to China what the Christmas-New Year holiday period is to the United States -- except China's 1.4 billion population is more than four times that of the US.  In many cities, festivities have been called off. Authorities in Beijing have canceled all large-scale Lunar New Year celebrations, including traditional fairs and celebrations around temples.  Shanghai Disneyland has temporarily closed its doors. Seven blockbuster movies that were set to hit theaters this weekend have been canceled or postponed.  Businesses are also taking measures to protect staff and the public.  On Saturday, coffee giant Starbucks said it has closed all 90 of its Hubei stores indefinitely. The closures will continue throughout the Spring Festival, which runs until the end of January.  "All Starbucks stores and special star delivery in Hubei will be temporarily closed. Hubei employees are asked to rest at home, minimize going out, take care to protect themselves and their families. All store employees who were scheduled to work during the closing period will be paid as usual," a statement from the company said.  A global concern  JUST WATCHED What do you need to know about Coronavirus? Replay More Videos ... MUST WATCH What do you need to know about Coronavirus? 02:29  On Thursday, the World Health Organization (WHO) moved to declare the coronavirus an emergency within China -- but refrained from classifying the outbreak as an epidemic of international concern.  Mounting evidence suggests the virus is spreading outside mainland China, however, with 13 countries and territories reporting confirmed cases, including the United States and France.  Australia confirmed that three men who traveled from China to Sydney had tested positive, health authorities in the city said. The country has now confirmed a total of four cases.  Nepal also confirmed its first case, a spokesman for the country's Health Ministry told CNN. The patient is a 31-year-old Nepali man studying for his PhD in Wuhan, spokesman Mahendra Kumar Shrestha said. The student flew to Nepal earlier this month and was admitted to a hospital in Kathmandu on January 13 with fever and respiratory problems.  In South Korea, the country's Centers for Disease Control has announced a third confirmed case of the virus. A 54-year-old South Korean man who lives in Wuhan and traveled to South Korea on January 20 called a hotline on Saturday to report his symptoms, the agency said.  Hong Kong leader Carrie Lam announced that the Hong Kong Disease contingency plan has been upgraded from "serious" to "emergency" level. Schools in the Chinese territory will be suspended until February 17.  On Thursday, David Heymann, the chairman of a WHO committee gathering data on the outbreak, said the virus spreads more easily from person to person than previously thought. "We are now seeing second and third generation spread," Heymann said.  Coronaviruses are transmitted by animals and people, and the Wuhan strain has been linked to a market in the city that was selling seafood and live animals, including wild species.  Third generation means that someone who became infected after handling animals at the market spreads the virus to someone else, who then spreads it to a third person. The announcement marks a development in the progress of the spread of the virus.  Heymann said there is no evidence at this point that the virus is airborne and could be spread across a room, as happens with the flu or measles.
Hong Kong (CNN) The death toll from the Wuhan coronavirus now stands at 80, with almost 2,800 cases confirmed across China, as the country initiates emergency procedures to try and rein in the pathogen's global spread.  Making that task more difficult is the fact that the virus can be spread before any symptoms appear , Chinese health authorities said Sunday, meaning carriers may not realize they are infected before they transmit the virus to others.  Across China, 15 cities with a combined population of over 57 million people -- more than the entire population of South Korea -- have been placed under full or partial lockdown.  Wuhan itself has been effectively quarantined, with all routes in and out of the city closed or highly regulated. The government announced it is sending an additional 1,200 health workers -- along with 135 People's Liberation Army medical personnel -- to help the city's stretched hospital staff.  Wuhan Mayor Zhou Xianwang said on Sunday that the number of cases could rise by another thousand.  The disease has also spread widely across China, with almost 70 cases confirmed in the capital Beijing, including a nine-month-old girl -- the youngest known case to be confirmed so far.  China has extended the Lunar New Year holiday to February 2 in an attempt to dissuade people from traveling and spreading the virus further. Almost all mass celebrations for the festival have been canceled, and authorities have urged people to avoid holding traditional large family gatherings.  Shanghai's government said Monday that all businesses in the city should remain shut until February 9. Schools in the city have been suspended until February 17, and quarantine inspections for workers returning to the city have been strengthened.  Only businesses the government deems vital to the operation of China's biggest city -- such as gas stations, pharmacies and supermarkets -- will be allowed to remain open, the municipal government said.  The severity of the emerging crisis is evident in the government's response . The Standing Committee of the Chinese Communist Party -- the country's top political body, headed by President Xi Jinping -- has taken direct control of operations. Chinese Premier Li Keqiang arrived in Wuhan Monday to tour local hospitals, according to state media.  China's Ministry of Finance and National Health Commission has allotted 60.33 billion yuan (US$8.7 billion) towards fighting the deadly coronavirus this year, the ministry said on Monday.  Meanwhile, Zhou has admitted that the government didn't disclose information on the coronavirus in a "timely fashion."  In a live interview with state-run CCTV, Zhou said he took responsibility for the decision to lock down the city at the center of the outbreak -- a move he called "unprecedented in human history."  He said he knew that people were "not satisfied" with the rate at which his government had released information on the coronavirus.  "If anyone is asked to take the responsibility or people are complaining, as long as the epidemic can be controlled, we are willing to resign to take on the responsibility [of locking down the city]," he said on Monday.  Worldwide effort  The virus has spread quickly around the world since it was first discovered in Wuhan last month. In a paper published Sunday, scientists at Imperial College London estimated that each person infected has gone on to spread the virus to two or three others.  "This implies that control measures need to block well over 60% of transmission to be effective in controlling the outbreak," they added.  At a press conference on Monday, Professor Gabriel Leung of the University of Hong Kong warned that "self-sustaining epidemics" could be expected in major cities across China, now that the virus has spread there. Major cities such as Beijing, Shanghai, Guangzhou and Shenzhen, all of which have reported cases, could export infections to different places around the world.  "We hope that with intervention in other cities in China, the situation will be more positive," he said. "(However), containment measures may not always be effective, and will certainly be ineffective at some point in the long term."  Outside mainland China, at least 13 other places have reported cases of the virus, including France, Australia, Canada and the United States. Australia reported its fifth confirmed case Monday.  Switzerland's Federal Office for Public Health confirmed on Monday that authorities are testing for several suspected coronavirus cases at one hospital in the country.  In Hong Kong, authorities said residents of Hubei, the province of which Wuhan is the capital, and people who have visited the region in the last 14 days, will not be able to enter the city. The order does not cover Hong Kong residents, though they may be placed under quarantine.  There were protests in the northern Hong Kong town of Fanling -- near the Chinese border -- after it was announced that an unoccupied apartment building there would be converted to a "temporary" quarantine center. Residents set up roadblocks and clashed with police, and on Sunday the authorities said they were abandoning the plan.  Memories of the deadly 2003 SARS outbreak run deep in Hong Kong, and paranoia is already starting to settle in, with a rush purchases of face masks leading to shortages which may not be relieved until February, due to the Lunar New Year holiday and demand from China.  Hong Kong leader Carrie Lam announced over the weekend that the threat level from the virus has been raised from "serious" to "emergency." Schools in the semi-autonomous Chinese city will be suspended until February 17.  On Thursday, David Heymann, the chairman of a World Health Organization (WHO) committee gathering data on the outbreak, said the virus spreads more easily from person to person than previously thought. "We are now seeing second and third generation spread," Heymann said.  In the US, where five cases of the disease have been confirmed, Nancy Messonnier, director of the US Center for Disease Control and Prevention's National Center for Immunization and Respiratory Diseases, said that "we need to be preparing as if this is a pandemic, but I continue to hope that it is not."  Repatriation efforts to begin  Several countries, including the US, Australia, France and Spain are looking to repatriate citizens and government employees from China.  Australia's Health Minister Greg Hunt told national broadcaster ABC Radio Monday that Canberra was working on a plan to bring 100 "young Australians" out of Wuhan.  JUST WATCHED CNN goes to ground zero of Wuhan coronavirus outbreak in China Replay More Videos ... MUST WATCH CNN goes to ground zero of Wuhan coronavirus outbreak in China 02:45  "We are working to make sure that there's support for those Australians and that we are there. We are also working on, as are other countries, to try to secure their ability to return to Australia," Hunt said.  France's Health Minister Agnes Buzyn said on Sunday that France will fly its citizens back from Wuhan to France "in the middle of next week." Buzyn said those who return to France will be monitored in one place for 14 days, to avoid any spread of the virus.  A spokesman for the Spanish Foreign Ministry told CNN that it was "working with other European countries affected to organize a joint repatriation flight."  Italian, UK and Dutch authorities all said on Monday that they were considering evacuation or repatriation efforts to remove their citizens from the affected area.  Tracing the virus  Since the Wuhan virus was first identified in December, Chinese and international scientists have been studying it intensely, tracking its origin and working on a vaccine to fight it.  Officials from the Chinese Center for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) said Monday that they had successfully isolated the virus in environmental samples taken from a seafood and wildlife market in Wuhan believed to be the source of the outbreak.  Thirty-three of the 585 environmental samples collected from the Wuhan's Huanan Seafood Wholesale Market were found to contain the nucleic acid of the coronavirus, according to state-run news agency Xinhua  Of those samples, 31 came from the section of the market dedicated to the sale of wild animals, the CDC said.  Chinese authorities announced Sunday that the trading of wild animals would be suspended nationwide, as experts lobbied for the government to put in permanent restrictions or even a ban.  Any form of wildlife trade will be strictly prohibited on platforms including marketplaces, supermarkets, dining places and e-commerce sites, the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Affairs and the National Forestry and Grassland Administration said in a statement. All sites were wild animals are raised will be quarantined.  Considerable attention has been paid on both the Chinese internet and in the western tabloid press to the eating of wild animals in parts of China -- particularly bats and civet cats, a mammal native to Asia that was previously linked to the 2003 SARS outbreak.
The confirmed coronavirus patient in Orange County, California, is in isolation at an area hospital in good condition, Dr. Nichole Quick, health officer for the Orange County Health Care Agency, told CNN on Sunday. The patient, a man in his 50s, recently returned from Wuhan through Los Angeles International Airport, though Quick would not confirm whether he returned before or after airport screenings began on January 17.  According to Quick, the county was first alerted to the case on Thursday, January 23. The patient was exhibiting symptoms of upper and lower respiratory tract infections. His test specimens were collected with the help of the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, which confirmed the results as positive for coronavirus on Saturday. Upon learning of the positive results, the Orange County Health Care Agency worked with local providers to transport and admit the man to a local hospital.  The man is one of two confirmed cases of Wuhan coronavirus in California – the other being in Los Angeles County. The CDC on Sunday updated the national number of cases to five on Sunday afternoon.
Hong Kong (CNN) As the world watches the developing crisis around the deadly Wuhan coronavirus , it's difficult to know how worried to be. One thing is clear, however: China is treating the matter extremely seriously.  With the number of confirmed cases in the country approaching three thousand, and at least 80 deaths, China has placed almost 60 million people on lockdown, with full or partial travel restrictions on 15 cities across Hubei, the central Chinese province of which Wuhan is the capital.  Thirty provinces and major cities have activated their highest level of emergency response, with checkpoints erected on roads and screening of travelers at airports and train stations. The semi-autonomous region of Hong Kong has initiated a complete ban on anyone from Hubei, or non-residents traveling from the province, arriving in the city.  In Beijing, the Politburo Standing Committee -- the Communist Party's top body, headed by President Xi Jinping -- has taken direct control of the response. Premier Li Keqiang arrived in Wuhan Monday for a personal inspection of hospitals in the stricken city.  The unprecedented scale of the response speaks in part to the sheer size of China -- 60 million people is greater than the entire population of South Korea, and Hubei spans the equivalent area as Syria. Such a lockdown has never been carried out in China before, not even during the 2003 SARS outbreak. The cost of it is staggering, not just in terms of manpower or funds, but also the economic hit Hubei will take and the knock on effect this will have on the wider Chinese economy during a sensitive period.  That China is able to pull something like this off is thanks to the ability of a centralized, powerful leadership to react in a crisis. It's also a sign of just how vital it is for that leadership not to screw up  Writing on Sunday , analysts Adam Ni and Yun Jiang said that the Chinese Communist Party's "prestige and legitimacy are both on the line" in how they handle the crisis.  "Having realized just how serious this is, and how potentially destabilizing it is for the Party, the Party is now scrambling to fully mobilize resources to tackle the crisis," they added.  "Xi's prestige is likely to take a hit, putting pressure towards collective leadership instead of the paramount leader model. Centralization of power under Xi means that inevitably Xi will take the blame if things go wrong , as would he be showered with glory when things go right. This is high risk, high reward for him."  Contrasting response  As more and more becomes known about the initial spread of the virus and the dangers posed by it, suspicion has grown over how authorities in Wuhan handled the first weeks of the outbreak.  While there is always some uncertainty at first with regard to new pathogens, that officials in Wuhan held a major provincial Communist Party meeting, an attempt at a world record for the largest potluck lunch involving 40,000 families, and had police go after people spreading "rumors" about the virus online, does not cast them in the most positive light.  Many observers have speculated that some officials will be punished in the days and weeks to come, especially after Wuhan Mayor Zhou Xianwang admitted on state TV that the city's warnings "were not sufficient" and the infection rate will likely continue to climb.  There is also the almost staggering contrast in how the crisis has been handled since the central government got involved. Xi himself last week ordered "all-out efforts" to contain the virus' spread and treat those affected, about a month after the virus was first detected.  Beijing-based commentator Wang Xiangwei described that as a "watershed moment."  However, he added that the slow response from local officials was likely the result of "deeply entrenched issues," ones that may have actually been exacerbated by Xi's much vaunted anti-corruption campaign.  "Ironically, the Chinese leadership's keen efforts to push for accountability from bureaucrats and promise stiffer punishment for those who shirk responsibilities have contributed to their propensity to cover up disasters," Wang said. "As Xi has consolidated his power and urged other officials to conform completely to the Party leadership, this has also strengthened a tendency to avoid making any important decisions and instead wait for specific instructions from the Party leadership."  Huge effort  With more than a dozen countries now reporting cases of the virus, along with almost every region of China, the ability to rein in the pathogen's spread may be somewhat out of the hands of the Chinese government.  All eyes will be on the World Health Organization this week, to see if it reverses the decision to hold off on classifying the Wuhan virus as a "public health emergency of international concern." Doing so could enable a more concerted international response, though many affected countries have already independently begun putting in the types of screenings and quarantines that might be recommended.  Inside China, since January 22 when Xi intervened the government response has been colossal, but this does not seem to be having the desired effect, perhaps because of how far the virus spread before a reaction was ordered.  Construction continues at a field hospital on January 26, 2020 in Wuhan.  Two brand new hospitals are being constructed in Wuhan itself to aid its overstretched healthcare system, due to be completed by next week, while an additional 1,200 health workers -- along with 135 People's Liberation Army medical personnel -- will soon arrive in the city.  But the hugely advanced infrastructure that China is relying on to contain the virus and transport aid and support to where it's needed, is also what helped spread the pathogen in the first place.  A month ago, few outside China may have heard of Wuhan, yet the city -- and a small wildlife market within it -- has managed to impact countries the world over; a sign of just how connected we all are in a globalized world. Attempting to control this inter-connectivity, as China's and other governments must do to stop the virus, may be far harder than reaping the economic benefits.  The stringent measures placed on Hubei have also attracted criticism. Prominent Chinese human rights lawyer Zhang Xuezhong denounced them as "savage" online, earning him the opprobrium of many panicked commentators. They may also carry major downsides in the long run, Xi Chen, a public health expert at Yale University, pointed out that lockdowns not only have negative economic repercussions but also break down the "social cohesion that binds people at this special moment."  As Xi and the rest of the Standing Committee meet this week to discuss how to tackle the virus's continued spread, they may decide on more draconian tactics. Whether their response is successful remains to be seen, as perhaps the world's most powerful state apparatus grapples with what has bedeviled many of its predecessors -- the sheer size and scale of China itself.
Facebook has restricted non-essential employee travel to China and has asked its China-based employees to work from home, a Facebook source confirmed to CNN Monday.  The move comes amid concerns about the spread of the coronavirus, the source added.  The California-based company is also asking employees who have recently returned from China to work from home, according to the source.
Hong Kong (CNN) Hong Kong announced Tuesday that it was closing many of its border crossings with mainland China in a bid to contain the Wuhan coronavirus , as the death toll from the outbreak topped 100 , with more than 4,600 cases in the mainland.  The virus has also spread globally to more than 17 countries. On Tuesday, experts from the German Robert-Koch-Institute said they believed that a man who tested positive for coronavirus in Germany is the first case of human-to-human infection in Europe.  Carrie Lam, Hong Kong chief executive, told a news conference that the closure of crossings into the semi-autonomous Chinese city would be "temporary." Lam added that the city was also slashing the number of tourist visas it issues to visitors from mainland China, and halving the number of inbound flights from the mainland.  Authorities in Hubei, the Chinese province at the center of the outbreak, earlier said an additional 1,300 cases had been confirmed, bringing the total in the region to over 2,700. The majority of those are still in hospital, with more than 125 in critical condition. Between Sunday and Monday, there was a 65% jump in the number of reported cases in mainland China, from around 2,700 to over 4,500.  Elsewhere in China, cases have been confirmed in every province and territory except for Tibet, which this week announced the indefinite closure of all tourist attractions and a mandatory two-week quarantine for all travelers entering the region.  The move to close off Hong Kong comes after intense pressure from lawmakers and medical unions, one of which had threatened to strike if the border was not shut.  On Monday, the US Centers for Disease Control (CDC) issued a level 3 alert warning against "all nonessential travel to China" -- its highest alert on a scale of 1 to 3.  "There is an ongoing outbreak of respiratory illness caused by a novel (new) coronavirus that can be spread from person to person," the CDC said in a statement, warning "there is limited access to adequate medical care in affected areas."  Worldwide concern  More than a dozen countries around the world have confirmed cases of the Wuhan virus, as authorities struggle to stop its spread.  Across Asia, numerous countries have put in extra screening at airports and warned citizens to avoid travel to China. To China's north, neighboring Mongolia has imposed stringent border checks on travelers coming into the country, while Hong Kong earlier banned all visitors from Wuhan.  Indonesia and the Philippines have both introduced extra restrictions on Chinese tourists, while Japan has upgraded its response, allowing authorities to "force the suspicious cases for hospitalization and testing."  Three cases of Wuhan coronavirus were identified in France on Friday and on Tuesday German officials confirmed that a 33-year-old man who had not traveled to China tested positive for the virus.  Speaking at a meeting with United Nations Secretary General Antonio Guterres Monday, China's ambassador to the UN said the country has "full capability and confidence in winning the battle against the epidemic."  "Putting the interests of the people first, China has taken rapid and strong measures, putting in place a nationwide prevention and control mechanism," Ambassador Zhang Jun said.  "China has been working with the international community in the spirit of openness, transparency and scientific coordination. With a great sense of responsibility, China is sparing no effort in curbing the spread of disease and saving lives. Now is a crucial moment, and China has full capability and confidence in winning the battle against the epidemic."  Some 60 million people have been placed under travel restrictions in Hubei, with almost all movement in and out of Wuhan itself stopped and much of the city on lockdown.  Officials have also cracked down on the trade of wild animals , after the Wuhan coronavirus was linked to a seafood market selling exotic live mammals, including bats and civet cats, which have previously been linked to the 2003 SARS outbreak.  Rapid spread  The first cases of the coronavirus were detected in Wuhan in mid-December. Since then the number of confirmed cases has increased a thousandfold, and infections have been reported worldwide.  Hospitals in Wuhan are already massively overstretched, and hundreds of emergency medical personnel have been dispatched to the city to help. Two new hospitals are also being built on the city's outskirts, due to be operational by next week.  Wuhan and Hubei officials have faced criticism for apparently downplaying the danger of the virus in the early weeks of the outbreak. There was a marked shift in the handling of the crisis once the national government got involved on January 22.  Despite the colossal effort -- and potential social and economic cost -- of effectively quarantining Hubei, it appears that this has come too late to stop the virus' spread. By the time Wuhan introduced even basic screening of travelers leaving the city, the virus had been reported in Japan, Thailand and South Korea, and spread to most of the rest of China.  Part of the problem is that the virus can apparently be spread before symptoms appear, according to China's health minister, Ma Xiaowei.  "It means the infection is much more contagious than we originally thought," William Schaffner, a longtime adviser to the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, told CNN. "This is worse than we anticipated."  While the current outbreak does not appear to be as deadly as SARS, which killed over 700 people worldwide, it may be spreading more rapidly. That could be due to being more contagious, or the increased interconnectedness of both China and the world than in 2003.  As of mid-March 2003 , roughly a month after the World Health Organization (WHO) was alerted to SARS by Chinese authorities, and three months after the first cases were detected in China, the number of confirmed cases worldwide stood at around 3,200, with 159 confirmed deaths.  Growing fears in Hong Kong  Fears of the virus' spread have led to calls for increased action in multiple countries and territories, not least in Hong Kong, where memories of SARS still run deep.  Effective midnight on Thursday until further notice, Lam said Hong Kong's measures also include decreasing the number of inbound buses from the mainland, and the suspension of cross-border coach services at the Hong Kong-Zuhai-Macau Bridge. All cross-border ferry services will also be suspended.  Operations at Hong Kong's West Kowloon Train Station -- which operates high speed rail services to the mainland -- will shut. Passenger services will also be temporarily suspended at the border crossings of Hung Hom, Sha Tau Kok, and Man Kam To.  In addition to the closing many of its borders with China, the city's government announced that government workers would be encouraged to work from home when the Lunar New Year holiday ends on Wednesday. The directive, which excluded emergency service workers and people who work for essential public services, urged the private sector to enforce similar arrangements.  The sweeping moves follow calls from one of the city's leading health experts for "substantial draconian measures" to limit population mobility in order to rein in the virus. Speaking at a news conference Monday, Gabriel Leung, chair of public health medicine at the University of Hong Kong, warned that the number of cases could potentially double every six days in the absence of decisive government action.  "This epidemic is growing at quite a fast rate and it's accelerating," said Leung, who is also the founding director of the WHO Collaborating Center for Infection Disease Epidemiology and Control in Hong Kong. He predicted the actual number of cases -- including those who are incubating the virus but not yet showing symptoms -- could be 10 times what has been reported.  Leung's team modeled two scenarios -- one with a population quarantine as has been seen in Wuhan and one without -- but found more or less identical results, because the virus has already spread to other major population centers in China, which could soon see their own self-sustaining epidemics.  Leung said the findings had concerned the team enough that it felt the need to alert the authorities and the public, predicting a peak of cases between April and May.  He added people need to prepare for a potential global pandemic -- though "not a certainty by any stretch of the imagination ... we must prepare better for it," he said.
A senior administration official is denying a report that the White House has asked US airlines to suspend flights between the US and China as a way to help contain the spread the deadly coronavirus.  “The White House did not call the airlines and hasn’t asked for a suspension of flights between the US and China,” the official said.  A White House aide said that at a Monday session looking at ways to contain the spread of the virus, the notion of travel restrictions to China was raised. And on Tuesday, Health and Human Services secretary Alex Azar declined to rule out such a possibility, saying nothing was off the table.  Azar also told reporters that he and Trump were "speaking regularly" about the coronavirus outbreak, which has infected close to 6,000 people in China and that he was in daily contact with White House officials.  "The President is highly engaged in this response and closely monitoring the work we're doing to keep Americans safe," Azar said.  A White House source described the attitude toward coronavirus as a "sense of urgency, not panic." Inside the White House, the government's cross-agency response is being coordinated by the National Security Council, with Matt Pottinger, the deputy national security adviser, leading near daily meetings, according to administration officials.
(CNN) A California-bound flight chartered by the US State Department left the China city at the epicenter of the coronavirus outbreak on Wednesday morning local time, a department spokesman said.  About 240 Americans could be on the flight from Wuhan Tianhe International Airport. It will stop to refuel in Anchorage, Alaska, before arriving early Wednesday at a military base near Riverside, California -- instead of a nearby civilian airport in Ontario, California, as first planned.  The plane will land at March Air Reserve Base instead of Ontario International Airport, officials said. No reason was immediately given for the change in itinerary.  While in Anchorage, passengers will be screened by US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention officials, who will decide if they are healthy enough to continue on to California.  "Any passenger(s) who are found to have cough, fever, or shortness of breath in Anchorage will be further assessed by CDC and DHSS medical experts," a news release from the Alaska DHSS says.  Read More
Hong Kong (CNN) The number of confirmed cases of the Wuhan coronavirus has overtaken the 2003 SARS outbreak inside of mainland China, as multiple countries evacuated their citizens from the city at the heart of the outbreak.  As of Wednesday, there were 6,061 confirmed cases of the virus in mainland China, including 132 deaths, according to Chinese officials. The number of cases grew by around 1,500 from Tuesday, a more than 30% increase. The figures do not include Hong Kong and Macau, both of which have reported a small number of cases.  There have also been at least 91 cases of the virus reported outside mainland China.  Wuhan's Communist Party chief Ma Guoqiang said Tuesday that testing had been streamlined in recent days, leading to a spike in diagnoses. "This does not mean the speed of the disease spreading has increased drastically," he added.  Authorities in China also reported a suspected case of the Wuhan virus in Tibet, previously the only region to have avoided the virus . If confirmed, the spread to Tibet despite the implementation of strict checks on travelers and closing of tourist sites will renew concerns about how easily the virus is transmitted, particularly when people are asymptomatic.  The semi-autonomous city of Hong Kong, which has reported eight cases of the virus, announced Tuesday it was closing many of its border crossings with mainland China, slashing the number of tourist visas it issues to mainland Chinese visitors, and halving the number of inbound flights from the mainland.  Hong Kong has also instructed government employees to work from home for the rest of the week, and requested private companies do the same. The streets and public transport were noticeably quiet on Wednesday morning, the first day back from the Lunar New Year holiday.  Chinese President Xi Jinping on Tuesday vowed to do everything to tackle the "demon" epidemic.  Speaking during a meeting with World Health Organization (WHO) director general Tedros Adhanom in Beijing, Xi said the Chinese people "are engaging in a serious battle against the outbreak of the new coronavirus."  "People's lives and health are always the first priority for the Chinese government, and the prevention and control of the epidemic is the most important task at present, so I have been directing and deploying the works myself," Xi added. "I believe as long as we can strengthen our confidence, stand together, scientifically prevent and control the epidemic and adopt precise measures, we will definitely defeat this epidemic."  First evacuees leave Wuhan  Wuhan, the capital city of Hubei province at the center of the virus outbreak, is on effective lockdown and countries have begun repatriating their citizens trapped there.  A flight carrying 206 Japanese nationals arrived in Tokyo Wednesday morning. The passengers are all quarantined on board and those with any pneumonia-like symptoms will be taken to a special medical center for treatment. Passengers without symptoms will be taken to separate hospitals for further screening.  Around 450 more Japanese citizens have not yet departed. Japanese citizens who live close to the Huanan Seafood Market -- pinpointed by Chinese authorities as the likely source of the virus -- and highly populated areas in Wuhan were given priority on the first flight.  A plane carrying approximately 210 US citizens -- mostly diplomats and their families -- has also left Wuhan, according to a State Department spokesperson, bound for Riverside, California via Alaska. More Americans remain in the city, hoping to be evacuated at a later date.  The plane had originally been destined for California's Ontario International Airport, but officials said late Tuesday that it would instead land at a military base near Riverside. No reason was immediately given for the change in itinerary.  As of early Wednesday morning, the plane had landed in Anchorage, Alaska, where it will refuel before heading on to the US west coast. The Alaska Department of Health and Social Services said passengers will undergo health screenings there to ensure they are not experiencing coronavirus symptoms before traveling onward.  After landing in the US, passengers will be placed in isolation for between three days and two weeks, a California official told CNN earlier. Doctors have previously recommended a two-week quarantine for people exposed to the virus.  South Korea and New Zealand are chartering flights to bring their citizens home. More controversially, Australia said it will charter a flight to fetch citizens, but they will be transported to quarantine on Christmas Island, site of a former offshore detention camp for migrants.  Virus spreads worldwide  The first cases of the coronavirus were detected in Wuhan in mid-December. Since then, the number of confirmed cases has increased exponentially, and infections have been reported worldwide.  Hospitals in Wuhan are already massively overstretched, and hundreds of emergency medical personnel have been dispatched to the city to help. Two new hospitals dedicated to treating the virus are also being built on the city's outskirts, due to be operational by next week.  Authorities in the city said that as of January 27 there were still more than 4,000 Wuhan residents overseas. The Wuhan culture and tourism bureau said that all tour groups were canceled after the lockdown was announced, but groups that left prior to that date were still slowly returning to the city.  More than a dozen countries have confirmed cases of the Wuhan virus, as authorities struggle to stop its spread.  Across Asia, many countries have put in extra screening at airports and warned citizens to avoid travel to China. To China's north, neighboring Mongolia has imposed stringent border checks on travelers coming into the country. Indonesia and the Philippines have both introduced extra restrictions on Chinese tourists, while Japan has upgraded its response, allowing authorities to "force the suspicious cases for hospitalization and testing."  Around a hundred cases have been reported worldwide, with the most, 14, detected in Thailand, a popular destination for Chinese travelers. Countries with colder climates are more at risk for future spread, as coronaviruses thrive in cold environments and do not transmit as well in sunny, hot locales.  While most cases reported outside of China have a direct link to Wuhan, there are indications the virus is beginning to spread within other countries. Three new cases were reported in Germany on Tuesday, including what is believed to be the first human-to-human transmission in Europe.  Multiple countries have advised citizens not to visit China due to the ongoing outbreak. On Tuesday, the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) issued a level 3 alert advising against all "nonessential travel" -- its highest alert on a scale of 1 to 3. However, the White House denied reports suggesting it was planning to suspend all flights between the US and China.  Cases will continue to spread  With much of China seeing the type of cold weather ideal for the coronavirus, and uncertainty remaining on just how contagious it is, experts expect the number of cases to continue to rise for several weeks.  Speaking to state media Tuesday , Zhong Nanshan, one of China's leading respiratory experts and a hero of the 2003 fight against SARS, said he expected the peak to come in up to 10 days.  "It is very difficult to definitely estimate when the outbreak reaches its peak. But I think in one week or about 10 days, it will reach the climax and then there will be no large-scale increases," Zhong said.  However, other experts have warned that while the outbreak in Hubei may peak in the coming weeks, other Chinese megacities may see self-sustaining epidemics that continue to spread the pathogen around the country and worldwide.  "We modeled epidemic curves out to August 2020 for all the major city clusters: Chongqing, Shanghai-Guangzhou, Shenzhen and Beijing. Chongqing is predicted to have the largest epidemic due to large population and most intense traffic volume coupled to Wuhan," Gabriel Leung, a leading Hong Kong researcher and public health expert, said earlier this week.  He said outbreaks in China's largest cities could peak in April or May and gradually slow in June and July.  A laboratory in Australia became the first outside of China to grow the Wuhan coronavirus from a patient sample, it announced Wednesday. Doing so will "provide expert international laboratories with crucial information to help combat the virus," the scientists said.  During a news conference on Wednesday, Mike Catton, director of the Victorian Infectious Diseases Reference Laboratory said "we are proud to have grown the virus in such a short space of time" and added they will "share this with international colleagues" to help with the developments of vaccines and medicines.  Catton added that this successful growth will "help us understand the epidemiology of the outbreak."  UPDATE: This article has been updated to reflect the status of a suspected case of the Wuhan coronavirus in Tibet.
(CNN) Hundreds of Americans who returned to the United States Wednesday from the epicenter of the Wuhan coronavirus outbreak are voluntarily quarantined at the March Air Reserve Base in southern California.  Evacuees aren't required to stay in base housing, but US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention officials said passengers were asked to stay for three days of testing and monitoring, and they are willing. If a passenger demanded to leave before the three-day period had passed, it would be a discussion "up to the highest levels within the US government," officials said during a press conference on Wednesday.  After three days without symptoms or positive tests, passengers are free to stay at the base or return to their homes, where they will be monitored throughout a 14-day incubation period.  Any passenger exhibiting symptoms will be transported to a hospital for further evaluation, the CDC said.  "We try and balance how to protect these people, how to respect their rights, how to be as least restrictive as possible and still be very careful about the evaluation that they go under so that everybody is safe," the CDC's Dr. Chris Braden said during the press conference. "This is a balance and if we can do that without a federal quarantine order that restricts people and takes away their rights, that's what we will do."  Read More
(CNN) Countries are scrambling to evacuate their citizens from Wuhan, the epicenter of the novel coronavirus outbreak in Hubei province, as the number of cases overtake the 2003 SARS outbreak inside mainland China.  Flights have been chartered and various quarantine measures have been put in place, ranging from a special medical center to being placed in a detention center in the Indian Ocean.  It comes as the worldwide total rose to more than 6,000 confirmed cases of the virus -- after a 30% increase in reported infections on mainland China overnight.  Australia  Australian Prime Minister Scott Morrison announced Wednesday the evacuation will be aided by the country's flag carrier Qantas Airways.  There are more than 600 Australian citizens in Hubei, according to CNN affiliate Nine News, and Morrison said there will be a focus on repatriating "the young, especially infants, and the elderly."  "I stress that this will be done on a last in, first out basis," he said. "They would have been shorter-term travelers to that area, they would not have been living there for many years and we are particularly focused on the more vulnerable component."  The returning Australians will be quarantined on Christmas Island -- more than 1,000 miles away from Australia in the Indian Ocean.  Once there, the Australians will be quarantined for as long as 14 days. "But that will be subject to the medical advice we receive," Morrison added.  The decision has drawn uncomfortable comparisons with the plight of refugees living in a controversial detention center for asylum seekers attempting to reach Australia by boat.  There have been repeated allegations of abuse and even torture of those held in Australia's offshore detention facilities.  Morrison said Australian returnees would be quarantined for as long as 14 days -- subject to medical advice.  European Union  Two planes will be sent to Wuhan to help evacuate European Union citizens, Janez Lenarcic, the EU commissioner for crisis management, said in a statement Tuesday.  The first plane left France on Wednesday morning, "while the second one will leave later this week," the statement added. Other flights may follow in the coming days.  Around 250 French citizens will be transported in the first aircraft, while 100 people from other EU countries will take the second plane.  "EU citizens in the region who want to be repatriated to their home countries can request it, no matter their nationality," the statement added.  The worldwide total went up to more than 6,000 confirmed cases.  Countries within the EU, such as France and Germany, have planned their own repatriation procedures.  Germany  German evacuations are planned to start in the next few days, the Germany Foreign Ministry said Wednesday.  France  A plane will be sent Thursday to repatriate French citizens, according to France's health ministry. It is expected to take passengers without symptoms of the virus.  "A second flight carrying French nationals who may be carrying the virus is also being planned," Deputy Transport Minister Jean-Baptiste Djebbari told French television channel CNews on Tuesday.  There are around 800 French citizens in Wuhan.  Italy  Italy said it would begin repatriating its citizens from Wuhan this week.  The flight, set to depart Italy on Thursday, will come with medical personnel.  Spain  Spain's government is working with China and the European Union to repatriate Spanish nationals from the Wuhan area, Foreign Minister Arancha Gonzalez Laya tweeted Tuesday.  "Close coordination is being carried out with the rest of the European partners to expedite the necessary procedures, and also with the Chinese authorities in compliance with the sanitary protocols required for repatriation," Spain's Ministry of Foreign Affairs said a communique published Monday.  India  The Indian government has begun the process of "preparing to evacuate" Indian nationals affected by situation in Hubei Province, a spokesman confirmed Wednesday.  Screening of passengers started at various airports in India, the Ministry of Health tweeted Wednesday  "Screening of passengers started at #Mohali airport, while medical teams in preparedness at Raja Sansi #Amritsar airport," tweeted the Health Ministry  New Zealand  New Zealand will evacuate its citizens in joint cooperation with Australia, its government said Wednesday.  It is unclear whether the New Zealanders will join the repatriated Australians on Christmas Island.  New Zealand Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern said in a statement that "specific details of the evacuation plan, including the medical protocols that will be applied to returning New Zealanders and access arrangements on the ground in China, are being worked through by officials."  Japan  A flight carrying 206 Japanese nationals arrived in Tokyo on Wednesday morning on a chartered flight operated by ANA.  People wearing masks walk through the Ginza shopping district in Tokyo.  Around 440 more Japanese citizens wish to return, and the government is arranging a schedule. Japan's Ministry of Foreign Affairs said the government is preparing to send a second and third chartered flight to Wuhan.  The passengers who return to Tokyo will be quarantined on board and those with any pneumonia-like symptoms will be taken to a special medical center for treatment. Passengers without symptoms will be taken to separate hospitals for further screening.  Japanese citizens who live close to the Huanan Seafood Market -- pinpointed by Chinese authorities as the likely source of the virus -- and highly-populated areas in Wuhan were given priority on the first flight.  South Korea  Four charter flights were sent to Wuhan on Wednesday, where almost 700 South Korean citizens have applied to fly out.  Citizens will bear the cost of the flight, and those who wish to fly will be inspected by a medical team from Seoul before being allowed to board the plane.  Returnees will be quarantined in a government facility.  Turkey  More than two dozen Turkish citizens in Wuhan will be evacuated in the next couple of days, the Turkish ambassador in China, Abdulkadir Emin Onen, told Haberturk news channel on Wednesday.  Two residents walk in an empty Jiangtan park in Wuhan, China.  The 32 citizens are a mix of Wuhan residents, tourists and people there for business, he said, adding they are in good health with "no virus detected," but will be quarantined for some time on their return to Turkey.  It is unclear whether the plane will land in the capital, Ankara, or Istanbul.  United Kingdom  Britain had planned to bring British citizens in Wuhan back to the United Kingdom on Thursday but had to delay the flight, a UK Foreign Office spokeswoman said Wednesday. Around 200 people were due to be on the flight, Britain's Press Association reported.  It was understood the flight was delayed due to Chinese permissions that did not come through.  "We are doing everything we can to get British people in Wuhan safely back to the UK. A number of countries' flights have been unable to take off as planned. We continue working urgently to organize a flight to the UK as soon as possible," the spokeswoman said.  "We remain in close contact with the Chinese authorities and conversations are ongoing at all levels," the spokeswoman added.  British Health Secretary Matt Hancock tweeted Wednesday that anyone returning from Wuhan will be isolated for 14 days "with all neccessary medical attention."  United States  A chartered plane carrying approximately 201 US citizens -- mostly diplomats and their families -- arrived at March Air Reserve Base in southern California on Wednesday, where health officials were screening passengers.  More Americans remain in Wuhan, hoping to be evacuated at a later date. The State Department said it was unable to accommodate everyone on the flight because of space limitations but is working to identify alternative routes for US citizens to depart Wuhan by land.  "The way this plane was put together, the upper level with the crew was completely separated from the lower passengers," Dr. Anne Zink, Alaska's chief medical officer, said in a news conference.  The Boeing 747-4B5(F) was used to help repatriate Americans.  "So air flow, every sort of interaction between the top and bottom were completely isolated and the crew never got off in China; and there was never any interaction with the passengers," Zink explained.  There was no blanket quarantine for the passengers when they arrived in California, though several said they would stay at the base voluntarily, said Dr. Chris Braden of the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.  The plan is to hold the passengers for three days, monitoring them for a fever and other symptoms at least twice daily, Braden said.
(CNN) Health officials will not issue a blanket quarantine for the nearly 200 Americans who landed at a California military base following their evacuation from Wuhan, the epicenter of the deadly coronavirus outbreak in China.  The plan is to monitor passengers at the base for three days, checking them for fever and other symptoms at least twice daily, said Dr. Chris Braden, deputy director of the National Center for Emerging and Zoonotic Infectious Diseases at the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.  If health officials determine they pose low or no risk of infecting others, they can go home but will need to be monitored by local officials for the 14-day incubation period, he said. The patients staying at March Air Reserve Base near Riverside, California, might also choose to remain there for the 14 days.  Should anyone demand to go home within the first 72 hours, an individual quarantine is an option, Braden said.  "If anyone demands to leave right now, that is where all of the partners ... would come together and talk about what needs to be done," said Dr. Nancy Knight, the CDC's director of the division of global health protection, noting that US marshals are on hand to ensure everyone's safety.  Some passengers told Braden they'd stay voluntarily, he said.  "They wanted to know their own status. They wanted to know the status of their children. They wanted to protect their family, They wanted to protect others," he said.  Touching down in California  The plane chartered by the US State Department left Wuhan and touched down late Tuesday night at Ted Stevens Anchorage International Airport in Alaska .  JUST WATCHED The Wuhan coronavirus is spreading Replay More Videos ... MUST WATCH The Wuhan coronavirus is spreading 02:15  After refueling and passenger screenings, it left for the March Air Reserve Base. There, local officials began working with the CDC to thoroughly screen each passenger again following other screenings by American and Chinese health officials in Wuhan.  The CDC cleared all passengers, most of whom are American diplomatic corps or their families, to continue on to California, Alaska officials said.  Passengers were screened in an isolated area of the Anchorage airport's north terminal, which handles international flights, and had no impact on general travel, airport manager Jim Szczesniak said.  The CDC will work with airport officials to clean the terminal, and there are no international flights scheduled at the airport until May, he said.  Passengers applauded when they arrived in the US  Passenger Scott Allis told CNN they received a hot meal in Anchorage, while Darby Siebels said passengers had a chance to charge their phones before getting back on the plane after 1 a.m. (5 a.m. ET).  JUST WATCHED Companies restrict travel to China after outbreak Replay More Videos ... MUST WATCH Companies restrict travel to China after outbreak 01:24  "For many of us directly involved, this has been a moving and uplifting experience," said Dr. Anne Zink, Alaska's chief medical officer. "The whole plane erupted in cheers when the crew said, 'Welcome home to the United States.'"  A battery of screenings  Officials were prepared to take 240 passengers, the plane's capacity, but the flight left with 201 people after some intended passengers failed to get to the airport or through screenings and other processes, Zink said. One passenger had a fever and was prohibited from boarding, health officials said.  JUST WATCHED CNN goes to ground zero of Wuhan coronavirus outbreak in China Replay More Videos ... MUST WATCH CNN goes to ground zero of Wuhan coronavirus outbreak in China 02:45  Included among the passengers are children ranging in age from 1-month-old to their teens, officials said.  Precautions were taken to separate the crew on the plane's upper level from the passengers on the plane's lower level, she said. The crew did not disembark in China.  Priority was given to US citizens at risk  The passengers include US diplomats and their families. The State Department said other US citizens could board on a reimbursable basis if space was available.  While there are about 1,000 Americans living in Wuhan, priority was given to US citizens who are " most at risk for contracting coronavirus " if they stay in the city, the State Department said.  JUST WATCHED Viral hoaxes are spreading lies about the coronavirus Replay More Videos ... MUST WATCH Viral hoaxes are spreading lies about the coronavirus 02:04  The department said it was unable to accommodate everyone due to space limitations, but it is working to identify alternative routes for US citizens to depart Wuhan by land.  The State Department issued a Level 4 advisory for Wuhan, meaning Americans should not travel to the city while the virus has an impact, Vice President Mike Pence said . It ordered personnel working at the US Consulate in Wuhan to depart for the United States.  Other countries including South Korea and Japan are sending charters to evacuate citizens from the epicenter of the outbreak. The European Commission said it was sending two aircraft to evacuate European Union citizens from Wuhan.
A student at Arizona State University has started a petition to cancel classes after someone from the university was confirmed to be infected with the coronavirus.  ASU freshman Taskina Bhuiyan, who is majoring in microbiology, started the petition on Change.org, and it had more than 21,000 signatures as of Wednesday evening.  It is unclear whether the infected person is a student or staff member. The Arizona Department of Health Services (ADHS) identified the person only as a "member of the Arizona State University community who does not live in university housing."  The person recently returned from Wuhan, China, where the virus is believed to have originated.  "As part of our case investigation, individuals who may have been exposed to the patient will be notified by public health and provided with proper follow-up," ADHS communications director Chris Minnick told CNN.  The ADHS said the patient is not severely ill. The patient is being kept in isolation to prevent the illness from spreading, according to the health department.  Keep reading.
Photos: Weird and wonderful planets beyond our solar system This is an artist's illustration of an exoplanet's atmosphere with a white dwarf star visible on the horizon. The starlight of a white dwarf filtered through the atmosphere of an exoplanet that's orbiting it could reveal if the planet has biosignatures. Hide Caption 1 of 62  Photos: Weird and wonderful planets beyond our solar system This is an artist's illustration of the Kepler-88 planetary system, where one giant exoplanet and two smaller planets orbit the Kepler-88 star. The system is more than 1,200 light-years away. Hide Caption 2 of 62  Photos: Weird and wonderful planets beyond our solar system This is an illustration of newly discovered exoplanet Kepler-1649c orbiting around its host red dwarf star. Hide Caption 3 of 62  Photos: Weird and wonderful planets beyond our solar system This artist's illustration shows the night-side view of the exoplanet WASP-76b, where iron rains down from the sky. Hide Caption 4 of 62  Photos: Weird and wonderful planets beyond our solar system This is an artist's concept of a ringed planet passing in front of its host star. It shows how "puffy" a ringed planet may look to us from afar. Hide Caption 5 of 62  Photos: Weird and wonderful planets beyond our solar system The sizes of the 17 new planet candidates, seen here in orange, are compared to colorized representations of Mars, Earth and Neptune. The green planet is KIC-7340288 b, a rocky planet in the habitable zone of its star. Hide Caption 6 of 62  Photos: Weird and wonderful planets beyond our solar system Artist's impression of K2-18b. CREDIT Amanda Smith Hide Caption 7 of 62  Photos: Weird and wonderful planets beyond our solar system This is an artist's impression of a hot Jupiter orbiting close to a star. Hide Caption 8 of 62  Photos: Weird and wonderful planets beyond our solar system This is an artist's illustration a massive planet orbiting a cool, young star. In the case of the newly discovered system, the planet is 10 times more massive than Jupiter, and the orbit of the planet is nearly 600 times that of Earth around the sun. Hide Caption 9 of 62  Photos: Weird and wonderful planets beyond our solar system Welcome to the KELT-9 system. The host star is a hot, rapidly rotating A-type star that is about 2.5 times more massive and almost twice as hot as our sun. The hot star blasts its nearby planet KELT-9b with massive amounts of radiation, leading to a daylight temperature of 7800 degrees Fahrenheit, hotter that most stars and only 2000 degrees cooler than the sun. Hide Caption 10 of 62  Photos: Weird and wonderful planets beyond our solar system This is an artist's rendering of the Proxima Centauri planetary system. The newly discovered super-Earth exoplanet Proxima c, on the right, has an orbit of about 5.2 Earth years around its host star. The system also comprises the smaller Proxima b, on the left, discovered in 2016. Illustration by Lorenzo Santinelli. Hide Caption 11 of 62  Photos: Weird and wonderful planets beyond our solar system This is an artist's concept of GJ180d, the nearest temperate super-Earth to us with the potential to support life. Hide Caption 12 of 62  Photos: Weird and wonderful planets beyond our solar system An illustration of WASP-12b as it spirals in a death dance towards its star. The planet will meet its end in three million years. Hide Caption 13 of 62  Photos: Weird and wonderful planets beyond our solar system TOI 700 d is the first potentially habitable Earth-size planet spotted by NASA's planet-hunting TESS mission. Hide Caption 14 of 62  Photos: Weird and wonderful planets beyond our solar system TOI 1338 b is silhouetted by its two host stars, making it the first such discovery for the TESS mission. TESS only detects transits from the larger star Hide Caption 15 of 62  Photos: Weird and wonderful planets beyond our solar system This artist's illustration shows a wet exoplanet with an oxygen atmosphere. The red sphere is the M-dwarf star the exoplanet orbits. Hide Caption 16 of 62  Photos: Weird and wonderful planets beyond our solar system This artist's illustration shows a dry exoplanet with an oxygen atmosphere. The red sphere is the M-dwarf star the exoplanet orbits. Hide Caption 17 of 62  Photos: Weird and wonderful planets beyond our solar system This artist's illustration of the Kepler 51 system shows newly discovered super-puff exoplanets, which are also called "cotton candy" exoplanets because they're so lightweight. Hide Caption 18 of 62  Photos: Weird and wonderful planets beyond our solar system This artist's concept illustration shows an exoplanet with two moons orbiting within the habitable zone of a red dwarf star. Hide Caption 19 of 62  Photos: Weird and wonderful planets beyond our solar system This is an artist's illustration of two exoplanets colliding in a binary star system. Hide Caption 20 of 62  Photos: Weird and wonderful planets beyond our solar system This is an artist's illustration of a Neptune-type exoplanet in the icy outer reaches of its star system. It could look something like a large, newly discovered gas giant that takes about 20 years to orbit a star 11 light years away from Earth. Hide Caption 21 of 62  Photos: Weird and wonderful planets beyond our solar system This image shows a comparison of red dwarf star GJ 3512 to our solar system, as well as other nearby red-dwarf planetary systems. Hide Caption 22 of 62  Photos: Weird and wonderful planets beyond our solar system This artist's illustration showcases exoplanet K2-18b orbiting its host star. It's currently the only super-Earth exoplanet that has water vapor in its atmosphere and could be within the right temperature to support life. Hide Caption 23 of 62  Photos: Weird and wonderful planets beyond our solar system This is an illustration of an exomoon losing mass as it's being pulled around the gas giant it orbits. Hide Caption 24 of 62  Photos: Weird and wonderful planets beyond our solar system An illustration shows what the orbit of exoplanet HR 5183 b would look like if it was dropped down in our solar system. It would likely swing from the asteroid belt to out past Neptune, the eighth planet in our solar system. Hide Caption 25 of 62  Photos: Weird and wonderful planets beyond our solar system At least two giant planets, aged 20 million years at most, orbit the Beta Pictoris star. A disk of dust and gas surrounding the star can be seen in the background. Hide Caption 26 of 62  Photos: Weird and wonderful planets beyond our solar system This is an artist's interpretation of what super-Earth GJ 357 d might look like. It lies within the habitable zone of its star which is 31 light-years from Earth. Hide Caption 27 of 62  Photos: Weird and wonderful planets beyond our solar system An artist's impression of a circumplanetary disk around PDS 70 c, a gas giant exoplanet in a star system 370 light-years away. Hide Caption 28 of 62  Photos: Weird and wonderful planets beyond our solar system This artist's illustration shows two gas giant exoplanets orbiting the young star PDS 70. These planets are still growing by gathering material from a surrounding disk. In the process, they have gravitationally carved out a large gap in the disk. Hide Caption 29 of 62  Photos: Weird and wonderful planets beyond our solar system An artist's illustration of HD 21749c, the first Earth-size planet found by TESS, as well as its sibling, HD 21749b, a warm mini-Neptune. Hide Caption 30 of 62  Photos: Weird and wonderful planets beyond our solar system A "hot Saturn" passes in front of its host star in this illustration. Astronomers who study stars used "starquakes" to characterize the star, which provided critical information about the planet. Hide Caption 31 of 62  Photos: Weird and wonderful planets beyond our solar system Artist's concept of TESS against background of stars & orbiting planets in the Milky Way. Credit: ESA, M. Kornmesser (ESO), Aaron E. Lepsch (ADNET Systems Inc.), Britt Griswold (Maslow Media Group), NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center & Cornell University Hide Caption 32 of 62  Photos: Weird and wonderful planets beyond our solar system A super-telescope made the first direct observation of an exoplanet using optical interferometry. This method revealed a complex exoplanetary atmosphere with clouds of iron and silicates swirling in a planet-wide storm. The technique presents unique possibilities for characterizing many of the exoplanets known today. Hide Caption 33 of 62  Photos: Weird and wonderful planets beyond our solar system This image shows an artist's impression of the surface of Barnard's star b, a cold Super-Earth discovered orbiting Barnard's star 6 light-years away. Hide Caption 34 of 62  Photos: Weird and wonderful planets beyond our solar system This artist's illustration shows newly discovered exoplanet K2-288Bb, 226 light-years away and half the size of Neptune. It orbits the fainter member of a pair of cool M-type stars every 31.3 days. Hide Caption 35 of 62  Photos: Weird and wonderful planets beyond our solar system This is an artist's impression of the exoplanet HAT-P-11b. The planet has an extended helium atmosphere that's being blown away by the star, an orange dwarf star smaller but more active than our sun. Hide Caption 36 of 62  Photos: Weird and wonderful planets beyond our solar system An artist's illustration of what the super-Earth found around the orange-hued star HD 26965 (also known as 40 Eridani A) might look like. The recently discovered exoplanet is being compared to the fictional planet of Vulcan because Star Trek creator Gene Roddenberry said the star was the ideal candidate to host Vulcan, Mr. Spock's home world. Hide Caption 37 of 62  Photos: Weird and wonderful planets beyond our solar system The TRAPPIST-1 star, an ultra-cool dwarf, has seven Earth-size planets orbiting it. Hide Caption 38 of 62  Photos: Weird and wonderful planets beyond our solar system For the first time, eight planets have been found orbiting another star, tying with our solar system for the most known planets around a single star. The Kepler-90 system is in the constellation Draco, more than 2,500 light-years from Earth. Hide Caption 39 of 62  Photos: Weird and wonderful planets beyond our solar system This artist's illustration shows exoplanet Ross 128 b, with its red dwarf host star in the background. The planet is only 11 light-years from our solar system. It is now the second-closest temperate planet to be detected, after Proxima b. Hide Caption 40 of 62  Photos: Weird and wonderful planets beyond our solar system WASP-121b, 880 light-years away, is considered a hot Jupiter-like planet. It has a greater mass and radius than Jupiter, making it "puffier." If WASP-121b were any closer to its host star, it would be ripped apart by the star's gravity. Hide Caption 41 of 62  Photos: Weird and wonderful planets beyond our solar system NASA's Kepler space telescope team has identified 219 more planet candidates, 10 of which are near-Earth size and in the habitable zone of their stars. Hide Caption 42 of 62  Photos: Weird and wonderful planets beyond our solar system This artist's concept shows OGLE-2016-BLG-1195Lb, a planet orbiting an incredibly faint star 13,000 light-years away from us. It is an "iceball" planet with temperatures reaching minus-400 degrees Fahrenheit. Hide Caption 43 of 62  Photos: Weird and wonderful planets beyond our solar system LHS 1140b is located in the liquid water habitable zone surrounding its host star, a small, faint red star named LHS 1140. The planet weighs about 6.6 times the mass of Earth and is shown passing in front of LHS 1140. Depicted in blue is the atmosphere the planet may have retained. Hide Caption 44 of 62  Photos: Weird and wonderful planets beyond our solar system An artist's concept image of the surface of the exoplanet TRAPPIST-1f. Of the seven exoplanets discovered orbiting the ultracool dwarf star TRAPPIST-1, this one may be the most suitable for life. It is similar in size to Earth, is a little cooler than Earth's temperature and is in the habitable zone of the star, meaning liquid water (and even oceans) could be on the surface. The proximity of the star gives the sky a salmon hue, and the other planets are so close that they appear in the sky, much like our own moon. Hide Caption 45 of 62  Photos: Weird and wonderful planets beyond our solar system Artist's conception of the binary system with three giant planets discovered, where one star hosts two planets and the other hosts the third. The system represents the smallest-separation binary in which both stars host planets that has ever been observed. Hide Caption 46 of 62  Photos: Weird and wonderful planets beyond our solar system This artist's impression shows the planet Proxima b orbiting the red dwarf star Proxima Centauri, the closest star to our solar system. Hide Caption 47 of 62  Photos: Weird and wonderful planets beyond our solar system This artist's impression shows a view of the surface of the planet Proxima b. Hide Caption 48 of 62  Photos: Weird and wonderful planets beyond our solar system An artist's rendering shows Earth-sized exoplanets TRAPPIST-1b and 1c in a rare double transit event as they pass in front of their ultracool red dwarf star, which allowed Hubble to take a peek at at their atmospheres. Hide Caption 49 of 62  Photos: Weird and wonderful planets beyond our solar system Out of a new discovery of 104 exoplanets, astronomers found four similar in size to Earth that are orbiting a dwarf star. Two of them have the potential to support life. The craft depicted in this illustration is the NASA Kepler Space Telescope, which has helped confirm the existence of thousands of exoplanets. Hide Caption 50 of 62  Photos: Weird and wonderful planets beyond our solar system This artist's impression shows a view of the triple-star system HD 131399 from close to the giant planet orbiting in the system. Located about 320 light-years from Earth, the planet is about 16 million years old, making it also one of the youngest exoplanets discovered to date. Hide Caption 51 of 62  Photos: Weird and wonderful planets beyond our solar system An artistic impression of the planet Kepler-1647b, which is nearly identical to Jupiter in both size and mass. The planet is expected to be roughly similar in appearance. But it is much warmer: Kepler-1647b is in the habitable zone. Hide Caption 52 of 62  Photos: Weird and wonderful planets beyond our solar system HD-106906b is a gaseous planet 11 times more massive than Jupiter. The planet is believed to have formed in the center of its solar system, before being sent flying out to the edges of the region by a violent gravitational event. Hide Caption 53 of 62  Photos: Weird and wonderful planets beyond our solar system Kepler-10b orbits at a distance more than 20 times closer to its star than Mercury is to our own sun. Daytime temperatures exceed 1,300 degrees Celsius (2,500 degrees Fahrenheit), which is hotter than lava flows on Earth. Hide Caption 54 of 62  Photos: Weird and wonderful planets beyond our solar system This Jupiter-like planet in the HD-188753 system, 149 light-years from Earth, has three suns. The main star is similar in mass to our own Sun. The system has been compared to Luke Skywalker's home planet Tatooine in "Star Wars." Hide Caption 55 of 62  Photos: Weird and wonderful planets beyond our solar system Kepler-421b is a Uranus-sized transiting exoplanet with the longest known year, as it circles its star once every 704 days. The planet orbits an orange, K-type star that is cooler and dimmer than our Sun and is located about 1,000 light-years from Earth in the constellation Lyra. Hide Caption 56 of 62  Photos: Weird and wonderful planets beyond our solar system Astronomers discovered two planets less than three times the size of Earth orbiting sun-like stars in a crowded stellar cluster approximately 3,000 light-years from Earth in the constellation Cygnus. Hide Caption 57 of 62  Photos: Weird and wonderful planets beyond our solar system This artist's conception shows a hypothetical planet with two moons orbiting in the habitable zone of a red dwarf star. The majority of the sun's closest stellar neighbors are red dwarfs. Hide Caption 58 of 62  Photos: Weird and wonderful planets beyond our solar system Kepler-186f was the first validated Earth-sized planet to be found orbiting a distant star in the habitable zone. This zone a range of distance from a star where liquid water might pool on the planet's surface. Hide Caption 59 of 62  Photos: Weird and wonderful planets beyond our solar system Kepler-69c is a super-Earth-size planet similar to Venus. The planet is found in the habitable zone of a star like our sun, approximately 2,700 light years from Earth in the constellation Cygnus. Hide Caption 60 of 62  Photos: Weird and wonderful planets beyond our solar system The Kepler-444 system formed when the Milky Way was just 2 billion years old. The tightly packed system is home to five planets that range in size, the smallest is comparable to the size of Mercury and the largest to Venus, orbiting their sun in less than 10 days. Hide Caption 61 of 62
China's National Health Commission has announced that as of the end-of Thursday January 30, the total number of confirmed Wuhan coronavirus cases in mainland China had risen to 9,692.  That's a jump of 1,982 from the previous day, with the total figure now far exceeding the number of cases associated with severe respiratory syndrome (SARS) in 2003 -- previously among Asia's worst outbreaks.  The death toll in mainland China has now reached 213, with 42 new deaths occurring in Hubei province -- the epicenter of the outbreak, and one in the northeastern province of Heilongjiang.
Hong Kong (CNN) The United States and other countries issued strict travel restrictions for foreign nationals who traveled to China as the number of deaths from the Wuhan coronavirus outbreak continued rising on Friday.  A day after the World Health Organization (WHO) declared the virus a global health emergency , Chinese authorities reported 45 deaths, all of them in Hubei, the province at the center of the outbreak of which Wuhan is the capital, bringing the total death toll across the country to 258.  As of Friday, there were more than 10,000 coronavirus cases confirmed in China, authorities said, an increase of over 2,000 from the previous day. That surpasses the 2003 severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS) outbreak that began in southern China, which infected 8,098 people worldwide, killing 774.  More than 20 countries and territories outside of mainland China have confirmed cases of the virus -- spanning Asia, Europe, North America and the Middle East -- as the United Kingdom reported its first two cases on Friday.  On Friday, President Donald Trump signed a proclamation suspending the entry of foreign nationals who have traveled in China in the last two weeks and could pose a risk of spreading the virus, Health and Human Services Secretary Alex Azar said.  Foreign nationals who are the immediate family of US citizens or permanent residents are exempt. US citizens returning to the United States who have been in China's Hubei province in the two weeks before their return will be subject to up to 14 days of mandatory quarantine, Azar said.  The decision by the WHO prompted governments to upgrade their own response to the virus, with the US State Department raising its travel advisory for China to it's highest level: Do not travel.  The WHO defines a public health emergency of international concern as "an extraordinary event" that constitutes a "public health risk to other States through the international spread of disease," and "to potentially require a coordinated international response." Previous emergencies have included Ebola, Zika and H1N1.  Ghebreyesus, who met this week with Chinese President Xi Jinping, said the WHO "continues to have confidence in China's capacity to control the outbreak."  "We would have seen many more cases outside China by now -- and probably deaths -- if it were not for the government's efforts," he added.  Much of China goes back to work on Monday, after the Lunar New Year holiday was extended in an attempt to rein in the virus. The fear now -- as tens of millions of people travel across the country and cities return to usual business -- is that new self-sustaining epidemic spots will rear up.  Many schools and universities across the country will remain closed for much of next week.  JUST WATCHED American student in Shanghai: It's like 'Zombieland' Replay More Videos ... MUST WATCH American student in Shanghai: It's like 'Zombieland' 02:40  Evacuation and spread  As Wuhan and much of Hubei remains on lockdown in a bid to contain the virus, many countries have begun extracting their citizens from the city.  A charter plane carrying more than 350 South Koreans landed at Gimpo International Airport near Seoul on Friday, following flights organized by the US and Japan to evacuate their citizens. Multiple other governments, including the UK, Australia, New Zealand and Canada are still arranging flights.  Meanwhile, more cases of the virus have been reported worldwide. Singapore confirmed three additional cases Thursday, bringing the total number of confirmed infections in the city to 13.  Health officials said all 13 cases are in a stable condition and "most are improving." They also advised citizens to "defer all travel to Hubei Province and all non-essential travel to mainland China."  The Singapore government said it will distribute four masks each to 1.3 million households in the city from Saturday. Other Asian territories, particularly Hong Kong, have struggled to maintain supply of masks, with many stores running out following an initial rush by residents to stock up.  More than 130 infections with the virus -- but no deaths -- have been reported outside mainland China.  The UK has confirmed its first two cases of Wuhan coronavirus in the northwest of England, according to a statement by Chris Whitty, the chief medical officer for England.  "We can confirm that two patients in England, who are members of the same family, have tested positive for coronavirus. The patients are receiving specialist NHS (National Health Service) care, and we are using tried and tested infection control procedures to prevent further spread of the virus," he said.  "The NHS is extremely well-prepared and used to managing infections and we are already working rapidly to identify any contacts the patients had, to prevent further spread," he added.  "We have been preparing for UK cases of novel coronavirus and we have robust infection control measures in place to respond immediately. We are continuing to work closely with the World Health Organization and the international community as the outbreak in China develops to ensure we are ready for all eventualities."  Two of China's neighbors have instituted emergency measures to try and stop the virus spreading there. Russia said it was closing its border in the Far East, and limiting rail services from all of China from January 31. Meanwhile, North Korea declared a state of emergency and said it was instituting a "hygienic and anti-epidemic" response.  Work continues on Wuhan Huoshenshan hospital on January 30, 2020 in Wuhan, China. The 1,000-bed hospital is scheduled to open on February 5.  Facing a long quarantine  Much of Hubei has been under effective quarantine for weeks now, with almost every city facing travel restrictions in a province home to nearly 60 million people. Wuhan has been completely locked down, with residents cooped up in their homes and the streets abandoned.  Foreigners being airlifted out of the city are also facing up to two weeks of mandatory or voluntary quarantine once they land in their home countries.  However, this has sparked controversy in some countries, especially in Australia, where a plan to house evacuees in a former detention center for migrants on Christmas Island has generated no small amount of negative publicity .  Public broadcaster ABC spoke to some Australians in Wuhan who said they would rather remain in the city than face two weeks on what has been described by some opposition lawmakers as a "leper camp," even as Canberra defended its decision as the only place capable of quarantining hundreds of people.  At March Air Reserve Base in Southern California, where US evacuees were flown earlier this week, one man said he was willing to remain under quarantine "as long as I need."  Jarred Evans said that the US Centers for Disease Control told evacuees that the initial 72-hour quarantine that was suggested "is really not enough time, but you know, they're not obligated to keep us here."  "You're not obligated to leave (when the 72 hours are up), so they're saying that the best thing for you, your people, your family and the community is to stay as long as possible," Evans said.  After flying out of near-freezing temperatures in Wuhan, Evans said he and the other passengers were spending time outdoors enjoying the sunny, 22 degrees Celsius (72F) weather.  "We're all still taking major precautions. So it's not like we're around here hugging each other and shaking hands and things like that," Evans said. "We're wearing our masks ... But honestly, you know, everyone is enjoying themselves because what we experienced, what we've seen, is very serious, you know, people are dying. So when you see that and think about things like that, try to take as much appreciation of what is in front of you."  What happens next?  Speaking on Friday, China's Foreign Ministry said the country had full "confidence and capability" in winning the fight against the virus.  "Since the outbreak of the novel coronavirus epidemic, the Chinese government has been taking the most comprehensive and rigorous prevention and control measures with a high sense of responsibility for people's health," said ministry spokeswoman Hua Chunying in a statement. "Many of these measures go well beyond the requirements of the International Health Regulations. We have full confidence and capability to win this fight against the epidemic."  China has taken major measures to try and contain the epidemic, locking much of Hubei down, partially closing the border with Hong Kong and extending the Lunar New Year holiday, all of which could have a severe drain on the country's economy, already vulnerable due to the US-China trade war.  With most people due to go back to work on Monday, it remains unclear whether more measures will be announced, and if not, how this will influence the spread of the virus.  Health experts previously estimated that the number of cases could be far higher than currently confirmed. Researchers at Imperial College London have estimated that at least 4,000 people were infected in Wuhan by January 18, almost a week before the lockdown began. Their model suggests a low national figure of 20,000 infections by the end of the month, potentially as high as 100,000.  Researchers in Hong Kong estimate there could be 75,815 people in Wuhan infected with coronavirus as of January 25, according to a paper published Friday in The Lancet.  UPDATE: This story has been updated to reflect the number of confirmed cases of Wuhan coronavirus outside mainland China.
The US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention’s mandatory 14-day quarantine for nearly 200 Americans who returned from Wuhan, China, is the first such order in more than 50 years.  “While we recognize this is an unprecedented action, we are facing an unprecedented public health threat, and this is one of the tools in our toolbox to mitigate the potential impact of this novel virus on the United States,” said Dr. Nancy Messonnier, director of CDC’s National Center for Immunization and Respiratory Diseases, referring to the coronavirus that has sickened thousands in China.  The 195 Americans, many of them diplomats and their families, flew from Wuhan to California on Wednesday. They’ve been staying at March Air Reserve Base since then under a three-day voluntary quarantine.  “We believe that this approach of having a quarantine for the incubation period offers the greatest level of protection for the American public in preventing introduction and spread,” Cetron said. “That is our primary concern.”  CDC officials thanked quarantined individuals for their flexibility. Cetron said most of the passengers were “exuberant and elated to be out of harm’s way” during their journey from Wuhan, and they understand the need for a longer quarantine.  Cetron noted there are cons to quarantine – if they aren’t done properly, if there’s fear and stigma or if people aren’t treated with respect.  “We’re taking every measure possible to ensure these people are treated with dignity and respect,” Cetron said.  One quarantined individual had previously tried to leave the base. CDC officials declined to offer more information about that person.  There are currently six confirmed cases of Wuhan coronavirus in the US – one in Arizona, two in California, two in Illinois and one in Washington.  Some historical context: A quarantine order like this was last used in the 1960s for smallpox evaluation, Dr. Marti Cetron, director of CDC’s Division of Global Migration and Quarantine, said Friday during a telebriefing with reporters.
According to Chinese health authorities, the number of confirmed cases grew by 2,102 on Friday, bringing the total to 11,791 nationwide. An additional 45 people died in Hubei -- the province at the epicenter of the outbreak -- and one person died in the megacity of Chongqing on Friday, as the number of fatalities reached 259.  The pronounced increase in cases and deaths show the virus is not slowing, even after over a week of much of Hubei being under partial quarantine and an extended Lunar New Year holiday. With most of China due to return to work on Monday, the concern will be how far the virus will now spread, and whether the country's economy can bear the type of further quarantines and travel restrictions that may be necessary to rein it in.  Worldwide the total number of cases now stands at 11,940, with 149 confirmed cases outside of China, including seven in the United States, two in the United Kingdom, four in Canada, nine in Australia and 13 in Singapore.  Washington announced Friday that it will impose a 14-day travel ban on all visitors from China, regardless of their nationality. US citizens arriving from Hubei, of which Wuhan is the capital, will have to undergo 14-days mandatory quarantine on arrival, while those traveling any other part of China will face screening and monitoring.  The mandatory quarantine is the first time the US has issued such an order in 50 years. The move came as the seventh case of the virus was confirmed in the US, an adult male in California who recently traveled to Wuhan.  China criticized the move , with Foreign Ministry spokeswoman Hua Chunying saying it went against World Health Organization (WHO) recommendations not to impose travel bans.  "A friend in need is a friend indeed. Many countries have offered China support in various means," she said. "In sharp contrast, certain US officials' words and actions are neither factual nor appropriate."  It may be part of a growing trend, however. The US ban comes after Singapore banned all visitors from mainland China, saying anyone who had been in the country in the past 14 days will not be able to visit or transit through the city state. Taiwan has also suspended visa applications for Chinese nationals, and banned entry to any from Hubei province.  Other countries have seen a wave of ugly xenophobia and racism directed at Chinese travelers and those of Chinese heritage. In a statement last week, health authorities in Toronto warned concerns about the virus and misinformation were creating "unnecessary stigma against members of our community."  JUST WATCHED Coronavirus declared a global health emergency Replay More Videos ... MUST WATCH Coronavirus declared a global health emergency 02:56  How long will it go on?  China has allocated almost $4 billion to the fight against the virus, and sent thousands of doctors, nurses and military medics to Hubei to help out with relief in the epicenter of the outbreak.  Two purpose-built hospitals in Wuhan, constructed in under a week, are due to start accepting patients on Monday and Thursday respectively. They have 2,500 beds between them, and will be focused purely on dealing with confirmed and suspected cases of the coronavirus, providing some relief to Wuhan's stretched health system.  On Friday, the country's National Health Commission (NHC) said it was "confident in and capable of effectively containing the novel coronavirus epidemic, and eventually defeating it," following the WHO's classification of the outbreak as a Public Health Emergency of International Concern (PHEIC).  The Lunar New Year holiday will be extended in Hubei to an "appropriate extent," the Communist Party group in charge of the virus response said Friday. People in Hubei who work elsewhere in the country were also "granted an extended holiday and were asked to stay put," according to state-run news agency Xinhua  It remains unclear, however, how long parts of the country can continue to remain under lockdown, both from the perspective of making sure they are supplied with food and other necessary items, and from an economic point -- both the national finances and people's personal pocketbooks will be taking a massive hit from next week.  Worst of all, this sacrifice could be for nothing, with cases now reported in every province and region of China.  Researchers in Hong Kong on Friday estimated there could be more than 75,000 people in Wuhan alone infected with the virus. They warned that their model suggested that "epidemics are already growing exponentially in multiple major cities of China with a lag time behind the Wuhan outbreak of about 1-2 weeks."  Study author Gabriel Leung, chair of public health medicine at University of Hong Kong, said in a statement that their predicted number could be much higher than confirmed cases because "not everyone who is infected with (the virus) would require or seek medical attention," thus many may go uncounted. It may also be impacted by the delay between when someone gets infected, when they show symptoms, and when a lab is able to confirm.  Leung and his colleagues' findings come as researchers in the US and Germany confirmed previous suspicions that the virus could be spread by people who are not showing symptoms.  "There's no doubt after reading this paper that asymptomatic transmission is occurring," said Dr. Anthony Fauci, director of the US National Institute for Allergy and Infectious Diseases, after the research was published Friday. "This study lays the question to rest."  Foreigners flee  With much of Hubei under effective quarantine for the foreseeable future, countries have begun airlifting their citizens from the stricken province. Two dozens countries, including the US, the UK, Canada, Australia and South Korea, have chartered planes to carry diplomats and citizens out of Wuhan.  Air traffic in the opposite direction is becoming increasingly sparse. More than 15 international carriers, including British Airways, Air Canada and American Airlines, have suspended some or all flights to and from mainland China.  Markets have dropped across the world on news of the virus' spread, and the expected hit to China's economy that it will result in  The economic impact of the virus is still impossible to determine, but one state media outlet and some economists have said that China's growth rate could drop two percentage points this quarter because of the outbreak, which has brought large parts of the country to a standstill. A decline on that scale could mean $62 billion in lost growth.  China can ill afford that kind of hit. Growth last year was already the country's weakest in nearly three decades, as China contended with rising debt and the fallout from its trade war with the US.  Major banks have cut interest rates for small businesses and individuals in the worst-hit areas. And the Bank of China said it would allow people in Wuhan and the rest of Hubei province to delay their loan payments for several months if they lose their source of income because of the disruption.  Both tourism and China's film industry are taking a major hit already, with box office receipts at almost nothing since the outbreak. The spread of the coronavirus also threatens to cause job losses and push consumer prices higher, compounding economic woes that already exist.
(CNN) The novel coronavirus has been declared a public health emergency in the United States, Health and Human Services Secretary Alex Azar said in a White House briefing on Friday.  Once the declaration goes into effect at 5 p.m. ET Sunday, US citizens returning to the United States who have been in China's Hubei province in the two weeks before their return will be subject to up to 14 days of mandatory quarantine, Azar said.  US citizens returning from the rest of mainland China in the two weeks prior will face a health screening at a select number of ports of entry, he said. Those citizens also face up to two weeks of monitored self-quarantine to ensure they pose no health risk.  President Donald Trump has signed a proclamation suspending the entry of foreign nationals who have traveled in China in the last two weeks, Azar said, and could pose a risk of spreading the coronavirus. Foreign nationals who are the immediate family of US citizens or permanent residents are exempt.  "These prudent, targeted and temporary actions will decrease the pressure on public health officials screening incoming travelers, expedite the processing of US citizens and permanent residents returning from China, and ensure resources are focused on the health and safety of the American people," Azar said.  "I want to stress: the risk of infection for Americans remains low," he added. "And with these and our previous actions we're working to keep the risk low."  Azar's announcement came as the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention announced the seventh confirmed coronavirus case in the US. The seventh patient is an adult male in Santa Clara County in northern California, the third confirmed case in the state.  The man recently traveled to Wuhan, according to health officials. Upon returning to Northern California on January 24, the man self-isolated and did not leave home except to seek medical care, said Dr. Sara Cody, director of Santa Clara County's health department. He was not sick enough to be hospitalized.  The health department is reaching out to everyone the man may have had contact with to determine if they may have been exposed to the virus.  The outbreak has so far killed at least 258 people and infected more than 10,000 others in China, most of them in the Hubei province. There are at least 140 confirmed cases outside of mainland China.  14-day quarantine ordered for evacuated Americans  Earlier Thursday the CDC ordered a federal 14-day quarantine for the 195 Americans on an Air Force base in California recently evacuated from Wuhan, China, the epicenter of the coronavirus outbreak  It's the first such order in more than 50 years.  "While we recognize this is an unprecedented action, we are facing an unprecedented public health threat, and this is one of the tools in our toolbox to mitigate the potential impact of this novel virus on the United States," said Dr. Nancy Messonnier, director of CDC's National Center for Immunization and Respiratory Diseases.  The group of 195 Americans, many of them diplomats and their families, arrived by plane Wednesday at March Air Reserve Base in Riverside County, California, and were staying at the base under a three-day voluntary quarantine.  US health officials previously said they wouldn't issue a blanket quarantine for the evacuees, as some agreed to stay at the base voluntarily longer than 72 hours.  Then Thursday, one of the passengers tried to leave the base and was ordered to stay there in quarantine for a 14-day incubation period "or until otherwise cleared," Riverside County Public Health said in a statement.  A longtime CDC adviser told CNN Friday morning the agency should consider extending the three-day quarantine because other countries are doing the same for citizens returning from Wuhan. Those include France, South Korea and Australia.  The CDC adviser pointed to a report published Thursday night in the New England Journal of Medicine showing that infected people can transmit the virus before they develop symptoms.  According to the study, there were five instances of asymptomatic transmission of the Wuhan virus in one cluster. A woman in Shanghai was infected by one of her parents, who had no symptoms. That woman flew to Germany and while she was asymptomatic transmitted the virus to two colleagues. One of those colleagues, while healthy, transmitted the virus to two more coworkers.  JUST WATCHED Coronavirus declared a global health emergency Replay More Videos ... MUST WATCH Coronavirus declared a global health emergency 02:56  The last time such a quarantine order was issued was in the 1960s for smallpox evaluation, Dr. Martin Cetron, director of CDC's Division of Global Migration and Quarantine, told reporters Friday.  "We believe that this approach of having a quarantine for the incubation period offers the greatest level of protection for the American public in preventing introduction and spread," Cetron said. "That is our primary concern."  'Is this a nightmare?'  Jarred Evans, one of the 195 passengers from Wuhan, told CNN Thursday he "will stay as long as I need" at the military base.  The passengers are wearing protective masks and are spending some time outdoors.  "We're all still taking major precautions. So, it's not like we're around here hugging each other and shaking hands and things like that," Evans said.  Evans spent more than a week holed up in his apartment in Wuhan as coronavirus raced through Wuhan before he landed in the US on the chartered flight. During that time, he said, residents sent panicked messages, warning others to take precaution.  "It hit fast and ... it just was very hectic for, like, three days straight," he said. "I got the news from my Chinese friends saying, 'Hey, stay inside. Wear a mask. Don't go outside, stock up on some food because this is going to get serious.' And as you can see, it's very serious."  "When you're there and there's no transportation, no trains, no subways, no planes, the military is blocking off each and every aspect of the road. No Ubers, nothing. Mom and pop stores are closed. You think to yourself, like, is this real? Is this a movie? Is this a nightmare?" he said.
New York (CNN Business) Bitcoin is once again having a moment.  The cryptocurrency has soared as fears about the coronavirus outbreak send shock waves throughout global stock markets  The price of oneis now hovering around $9,300. Bitcoin is up nearly 10% this week and has gained 30% since the end of 2019. It's the best start to the year for bitcoin since 2012.  Worries about the rapid spread of the coronavirus is one factor boosting bitcoin, an asset that often has gone up when investors are nervous. But it isn't the only factor helping to push bitcoin higher.  "The recent bitcoin rally can be attributed to ongoing economic uncertainties," said Shaun Djie, chief operating officer of digital token company Digix in comments e-mailed to CNN Business.  Djie cited lingering worries about US-China trade relations, Brexit concerns and political tension between Japan and South Korea as factors that have boosted bitcoin prices. But the coronavirus is clearly the biggest catalyst as of late.  "The rise in bitcoin price correlates to the ongoing outbreak," Djie said.  In that sense, bitcoin's latest spike is similar to gold's stellar run this year. The yellow metal has also surged this month and is now trading at a seven-year high.  "Is this peak bullishness for the stock market? Gold and bitcoin are up as investors don't seem convinced about last year's stock rally," said Marija Veitmane, senior multi-asset strategist with State Street in an interview with CNN Business.  Veitmane added that bitcoin, as well as gold, is benefiting from the fact that interest rates are low (or in some cases, negative) following cuts by the Federal Reserve and many other central banks last year.  That has led to a decline in the US dollar versus other currencies over the past few months.  Weaker dollar is good for bitcoin  Bitcoin, gold and other cryptocurrencies and precious metals have historically done well when investors bet that the value of big government-backed currencies will fall.  "There is a new consensus building about dollar weakness," Veitmane said. "Bitcoin and gold may continue to do well as safe haven investments."  Djie agreed. "Gold and bitcoin have become prominent alternatives for retail investors looking to safeguard their wealth."  Investors considering bitcoin as a long-term investment should probably think of bitcoin much like gold. It could be a small part of a portfolio but not something investors should go overboard with, especially given the volatility of the cryptocurrency.  After all, bitcoin prices are still more than 50% below the all-time high of nearly $20,000 that they hit in December 2017 -- even though they've nearly tripled from a recent low of about $3,200 in December 2018.  Big Tech and Wall Street embracing crypto  Square SQ Facebook FB Bitcoin investing has become more mainstream thanks to cryptocurrency initiatives by big tech companies likeand  "The backing from Square and Facebook are definitely very significant to the overall crypto industry as it validates distributed technologies and the overall digital assets and cryptocurrency space," Djie said. "The embrace of crypto by these companies can allow mainstream users to enjoy the versatility and agility of the technology."  Chicago Mercantile Exchange CME The rise of futures trading for bitcoin on themay also help validate bitcoin with larger mutual funds, hedge funds and pensions.  U.S. Global Investors GROW "Among the biggest contributors to the rally, as I see it, is the hope that 2020 could finally see institutional investors move into the digital field en masse, prompted by growing client demand and more attractive ways to get exposure than direct ownership of coins," said Frank Holmes, CEO and chief investment officer of, in a recent blog post  But Holmes conceded that the Securities and Exchange Commission could provide the biggest boost for bitcoin if it ever approves a crypto-backed exchange-traded fund. The SEC has rejected numerous proposals so far.  "It's no exaggeration to say that a bitcoin ETF is highly anticipated," Holmes wrote.
Erin Clark/The Boston Globe/Getty Images  The eighth case of coronavirus confirmed in the US is a student at University of Massachusetts Boston, public health officials in Massachusetts said during a call with reporters today. The man had recently returned from Wuhan, China, the epicenter of the coronavirus outbreak.  The case poses no increased risk to other students on the university’s campus, said Dr. Jennifer Lo, medical director of the Boston Public Health Commission.  “He was very appropriate in seeking medical attention. He did not participate in any university activities from the time he arrived in the United States to his home,” Lo said.  She added that the student, a man in his 20s, is currently “doing quite well” and is being quarantined at his home, which is not in a dorm on campus. He is being monitored by public health nurses who are calling him regularly.  “We won’t release him from isolation until we are satisfied it’s safe to do so,” said Dr. Larry Madoff, medical director of the Massachusetts Department of Public Health’s Bureau of Infectious Disease and Laboratory Sciences.  “He returned to Boston directly from China through Logan Airport. He returned on the 28th of January, recognized quickly that he was ill and sought medical attention. He had only been ill for a brief period of time when he arrived,” Madoff said. “Active screening had not yet begun at Logan at that time.”  The patient had a runny nose when he arrived in Boston, health officials said, and has been in isolation since he sought medical care on Jan. 29. Madoff said he could count the patient’s close contacts “on our fingers,” and contacts are household members and medical personnel who treated the man.  All public health officials on the call emphasized that the overall risk to residents in Massachusetts remains low.
Hong Kong (CNN Business) Chinese stocks recorded their worst day in years as investors finally got a chance to react to the worsening coronavirus outbreak .  Theplummeted 7.7% and the Shenzhen Component Index fell nearly 8.5% on their first day of trading after an extended Lunar New Year holiday. They had been closed since January 24.  The losses wiped out a combined $445 billion in market value.  China's currency also fell. The yuan sank 1.6% in onshore trading, dropping below seven to one US dollar in its first day back from the holiday break. The yuan also weakened below the seven mark offshore, where it moves more freely and has been trading since last week.  While global markets have had several days to weigh the rapid spread of the coronavirus, this is the first chance that mainland China has had to react in more than a week. Before the holiday, the number of cases numbered roughly 800 — now, there are more than 17,000.  Markets were originally due to reopen last Friday, but the Chinese government extended the holiday as it worked to control the outbreak.  Pumping money into the market  Authorities knew Monday's shock was likely inevitable. The People's Bank of China said Sunday that it would inject 1.2 trillion yuan ($173 billion) into the Chinese markets by buying short term bonds to shore up banks' ability to lend money. The measure will help maintain "reasonably ample liquidity" in the banking system and keep currency markets stable, the central bank said.  The net amount of liquidity being injected into the markets is much lower. According to Reuters calculations using central bank data, more than 1 trillion yuan worth of other short-term bond agreements will mature Monday. That brings the net amount of cash flooding into the markets down to 150 billion yuan ($22 billion).  The central bank will also keep in contact with financial institutions and markets to determine what other policy responses may be necessary, according to Pan Gongsheng, deputy governor of the central bank.  Protecting China's financial markets and economy is a top priority for the government, which is also bracing for a potentially severe hit to first quarter economic growth. Economists have said that China's growth rate could drop two percentage points this quarter — a decline that could mean $62 billion in lost growth.  Along with Monday's liquidity kick, top financial and economic regulators have announced dozens of other measures to stabilize the situation.  For example, the National Development and Reform Commission — the country's top economic planning agency — said Monday the government would "go to all lengths" to make sure that people have what they need to live, including food and other necessities. It also encouraged companies "that are key to control and prevent the virus" or are "of vital importance to the national economy" to resume production as soon as they can.  And the People's Bank of China said Saturday that it would provide money at low interest rates to commercial banks so that those banks could offer cheap loans to companies that make clinical masks, virus testing kits and other types of medical supplies. The central government will also subsidize those special loans.  The country's stock exchange regulators have also said they would allow companies to delay 2019 annual reports and 2020 quarterly earnings reports if they are affected by the disruption.  Other markets react  Markets elsewhere in Asia were mostly lower Monday, too — though their losses were not nearly as dramatic as in China.  Nikkei 225 N225 Kospi KOSPI closed down a fraction of a percent. In Japan, where 20 cases of the virus have been confirmed, thefell 1%. In South Korea, which has 15 confirmed cases, the benchmarkclosed down a fraction of a percent.  Hang Seng Index HSI Hong Kong's, meanwhile, closed up 0.2% after moving between small gains and losses. The index lost more than 6% last week after investors returned from the Lunar New Year holiday. Unlike in mainland China, Hong Kong markets reopened last Wednesday.  Dow INDU S&P 500 SPX Nasdaq Composite COMP higher during Asian trading hours. In the United States, stock futures were actually higher overnight.andfutures were all roughly 0.5% to 0.8%higher during Asian trading hours.
Canadian officials have fielded 325 requests for departure assistance from Hubei Province in China due to the coronavirus, Global Affairs Canada said Sunday in a statement.  Canada is attempting to charter a plane to take Canadians from Wuhan, China, back to Canada, the statement said. Hubei is the epicenter of the outbreak  There are currently 543 Canadians in Hubei who have registered with the voluntary Registration of Canadians Abroad service. There are currently 15,219 Canadians in China (including Hong Kong) who have registered with the voluntary service.  Since registration is voluntary, this number is not a complete picture of Canadians in the region or in China, the statement said.  Only Canadian citizens who have entered China with a Canadian passport will be allowed to board the plane back to Canada, Global Affairs Canada said. Canadian citizens will need to have a valid Canadian passport and a valid Chinese visa to board the plane.  Canadians who appear to have symptoms will not be able to board, according to Global Affairs Canada.
Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak Medical staff wearing protective suits ride down an escalator at Moscow's Sheremetyevo International Airport on Wednesday, March 18. Hide Caption 1 of 140  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak Hasidic Jewish men take part in a "social distancing" minyan in New York on Tuesday, March 17. Hide Caption 2 of 140  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak A patient in a biocontainment unit is carried on a stretcher in Rome on March 17. Hide Caption 3 of 140  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak A pedestrian walks a dog through a quiet street in New York on March 17. Hide Caption 4 of 140  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak People gather to collect free face masks in New Delhi on March 17. Hide Caption 5 of 140  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak Dermot Hickey, left, and Phillip Vega ask a pedestrian in New York to take their picture on a thinly trafficked Fifth Avenue on March 17. Many streets across the world are much more bare as people distance themselves from others. In the United States, the White House has advised people not to gather in groups of more than 10. Hide Caption 6 of 140  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak Students at the Attarkiah Islamic School wear face masks during a ceremony in Thailand's southern province of Narathiwat on March 17. Hide Caption 7 of 140  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak People wait outside a Woolworths store in Sunbury, Australia on March 17. Australian supermarket chains announced special shopping hours for the elderly and people with disabilities so that they can shop in less crowded aisles. Hide Caption 8 of 140  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak A member of Spain's Military Emergencies Unit carries out a general disinfection at the Malaga airport on Monday, March 16. Hide Caption 9 of 140  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak Displaced families near Atme, Syria, attend a workshop aimed at spreading awareness about the coronavirus. Hide Caption 10 of 140  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak French President Emmanuel Macron is seen on a screen in Paris as he announces new coronavirus containment measures on March 16. France has been put on lockdown, and all nonessential outings are outlawed and can draw a fine of up to €135 ($148). Macron also promised to support French businesses by guaranteeing €300 billion worth of loans and suspending rent and utility bills owed by small companies. Hide Caption 11 of 140  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak A police officer checks the temperatures of bus passengers at a checkpoint in Manila, Philippines, on March 16. Hide Caption 12 of 140  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak Flowers are stored prior to their destruction at a flower auction in Aalsmeer, Netherlands, on March 16. Lower demand due to the coronavirus outbreak is threatening the Dutch horticultural sector, forcing the destruction of products. Hide Caption 13 of 140  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak Two nuns greet neighbors from their balcony in Turin, Italy, on Sunday, March 15. Hide Caption 14 of 140  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak Pope Francis, inside the Church of San Marcello in Rome's city center, prays at a famous crucifix that believers claim helped to save Romans from the plague in 1522. Hide Caption 15 of 140  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak Passengers wait for their flights at Marrakesh Airport in Morocco on March 15. Hide Caption 16 of 140  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak US Vice President Mike Pence takes a question during a White House briefing about the coronavirus on March 15. Hide Caption 17 of 140  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak A Sea World employee sprays disinfectant in Jakarta, Indonesia, on Saturday, March 14. Hide Caption 18 of 140  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak People wait in line to go through customs at Dallas/Fort Worth International Airport on March 14. Travelers returning from Europe say they were being made to wait for hours at US airports, often in close quarters, as personnel screened them for the coronavirus. Hide Caption 19 of 140  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak Hundreds of people lined up to enter a Costco in Novato, California, on March 14. Many people have been stocking up on food, toilet paper and other items. As a response to panic buying, retailers in the United States and Canada have started limiting the number of toilet paper that customers can buy in one trip. Hide Caption 20 of 140  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak A member of the White House physician's office takes a media member's temperature in the White House briefing room on March 14. It was ahead of a news conference with President Donald Trump and Vice President Mike Pence. Hide Caption 21 of 140  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak Reporters in Arlington, Virginia, sit approximately 4 feet apart during a briefing by Marine Corps Gen. Kenneth F. McKenzie on Friday, March 13. Hide Caption 22 of 140  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak People walk past a closed Broadway theater on March 13 after New York canceled all gatherings over 500 people. Hide Caption 23 of 140  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak Body temperatures are scanned as people enter the Buddhist temple Wat Pho in Bangkok, Thailand, on March 13. Hide Caption 24 of 140  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak A Costco customer stands by two shopping carts in Richmond, California, on March 13. Hide Caption 25 of 140  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak A teacher works in an empty classroom at the Pompeu Fabra University in Barcelona, Spain. Hide Caption 26 of 140  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak A woman looks at an empty bread aisle in Antwerp, Belgium, on March 13. Hide Caption 27 of 140  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak Employees of the Greek Parliament wear plastic gloves ahead of the swearing-in ceremony for Greek President Katerina Sakellaropoulou. Hide Caption 28 of 140  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak A motorcyclist drives through disinfectant sprayed in Jammu, India, on March 13. Hide Caption 29 of 140  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak Workers prepare to construct an additional building on a hospital on the outskirts of Moscow. Hide Caption 30 of 140  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak Paul Boyer, head equipment manager of the NHL's Detroit Red Wings, wheels out equipment bags in Washington on Thursday, March 12. The NHL is among the sports leagues that have suspended their seasons. Hide Caption 31 of 140  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak Students leave Glacier Peak High School in Snohomish, Washington, on March 12. Beginning the following day, schools in the Snohomish school district planned to be closed through April 24. Hide Caption 32 of 140  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak An Uber Eats delivery biker stands at a deserted Piazza di Spagna in Rome. Hide Caption 33 of 140  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak People at a railway station in Seoul, South Korea, watch a live broadcast of US President Donald Trump on March 12. Trump announced that, in an effort to slow the spread of the coronavirus, he would sharply restrict travel from more than two dozen European countries. Hide Caption 34 of 140  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak Workers in protective suits disinfect Istanbul's Dolmabahce Palace on March 11. Hide Caption 35 of 140  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak A person wearing a face mask walks outside of a shopping mall in Beijing on March 11. Hide Caption 36 of 140  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak Police officers restrain the relative of an inmate outside the Sant'Anna jail in Modena, Italy, on March 9. Riots broke out in several Italian jails after visits were suspended to curb the spread of the coronavirus. Hide Caption 37 of 140  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak Medical staff in Wuhan, China, celebrate after all coronavirus patients were discharged from a temporary hospital on March 9. Hide Caption 38 of 140  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak Traders work on the floor of the New York Stock Exchange on March 9. Stocks plummeted as coronavirus worries and an oil price race to the bottom weighed on global financial markets. Hide Caption 39 of 140  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak Rescuers search for victims at the site of a collapsed hotel in Quanzhou, China, on March 8. The hotel was being used as a coronavirus quarantine center. Hide Caption 40 of 140  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak The Grand Princess cruise ship, carrying at least 21 people who tested positive for coronavirus, is seen off the coast of San Francisco on March 8. The ship was being held at sea. Hide Caption 41 of 140  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak Sumo wrestlers attend a tournament in Osaka, Japan, that was being held behind closed doors because of the coronavirus outbreak. Hide Caption 42 of 140  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak A couple rides a bicycle at a park in Seoul, South Korea, on March 7. Hide Caption 43 of 140  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak A volunteer from Blue Sky Rescue uses fumigation equipment to disinfect a residential compound in Beijing on March 5. Hide Caption 44 of 140  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak Airmen from the California National Guard drop coronavirus testing kits down to the Grand Princess cruise ship off the coast of California on March 5. Hide Caption 45 of 140  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak Municipal workers are seen at the Kaaba, inside Mecca's Grand Mosque. Saudi Arabia emptied Islam's holiest site for sterilization over coronavirus fears, an unprecedented move after the kingdom suspended the year-round Umrah pilgrimage. Hide Caption 46 of 140  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak Passengers react as a worker wearing a protective suit disinfects the departure area of a railway station in Hefei, China, on March 4. Hide Caption 47 of 140  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak Teachers at the Nagoya International School in Japan conduct an online class for students staying at home as a precaution against the spread of coronavirus. Hide Caption 48 of 140  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak Soldiers spray disinfectant throughout a shopping street in Seoul. Hide Caption 49 of 140  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak A Muslim worshipper attends a mass prayer against coronavirus in Dakar, Senegal, on March 4. It was after cases were confirmed in the country. Hide Caption 50 of 140  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak People wear face masks in New York's Times Square on March 3. New York reported its first case of coronavirus two days earlier. Hide Caption 51 of 140  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak A security guard stands on the Shibuya Sky observation deck in Tokyo on March 3. Hide Caption 52 of 140  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak US President Donald Trump, flanked by Vice President Mike Pence, left, and Health and Human Services Secretary Alex Azar, speaks during a meeting with pharmaceutical executives and the White House coronavirus task force on March 2. Throughout the meeting, Trump was hyperfocused on pressing industry leaders in the room for a timeline for a coronavirus vaccine and treatment. But experts at the table -- from the administration and the pharmaceutical industry -- repeatedly emphasized that a vaccine can't be rushed to market before it's been declared safe for the public. Hide Caption 53 of 140  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak Medical staff stand outside a hospital in Daegu, South Korea, on March 1. Hide Caption 54 of 140  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak Healthcare workers transfer a patient at the Life Care Center in Kirkland, Washington, on March 1. The long-term care facility is linked to confirmed coronavirus cases. Hide Caption 55 of 140  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak British Prime Minister Boris Johnson visits a London laboratory of the Public Health England National Infection Service. Hide Caption 56 of 140  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak Tomoyuki Sugano, a professional baseball player on the Yomiuri Giants, throws a pitch in an empty Tokyo Dome during a preseason game on February 29. Fans have been barred from preseason games to prevent the spread of the coronavirus. Hide Caption 57 of 140  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak Commuters wearing masks make their way to work during morning rush hour at the Shinagawa train station in Tokyo on February 28. Hide Caption 58 of 140  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak Medical staff transport a coronavirus patient within the Red Cross hospital in Wuhan on February 28. Hide Caption 59 of 140  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak Inter Milan plays Ludogorets in an empty soccer stadium in Milan, Italy, on February 27. The match was ordered to be played behind closed doors as Italian authorities continue to grapple with the coronavirus outbreak. Hide Caption 60 of 140  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak A bank clerk disinfects banknotes in China's Sichuan province on February 26. Hide Caption 61 of 140  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak A child wearing a protective face mask rides on a scooter in an empty area in Beijing. Hide Caption 62 of 140  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak A Catholic devotee wears a face mask as he is sprinkled with ash during Ash Wednesday services in Paranaque, Philippines, on February 26. Hide Caption 63 of 140  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak People disinfect Qom's Masumeh shrine in Tehran, Iran, on February 25. Hide Caption 64 of 140  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak A worker in Daegu stacks plastic buckets containing medical waste from coronavirus patients on February 24. Hide Caption 65 of 140  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak Paramedics carry a stretcher off an ambulance in Hong Kong on February 23. Hide Caption 66 of 140  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak People attend a professional soccer match in Kobe, Japan, on February 23. To help stop the spread of the novel coronavirus, the soccer club Vissel Kobe told fans not to sing, chant or wave flags in the season opener against Yokohama FC. Hide Caption 67 of 140  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak A team of volunteers disinfects a pedestrian bridge in Bangkok, Thailand. Hide Caption 68 of 140  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak A man rides his bike in Beijing on February 23. Hide Caption 69 of 140  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak Hospital personnel in Codogno, Italy, carry new beds inside the hospital on February 21. The hospital is hosting some people who have been diagnosed with the novel coronavirus. Hide Caption 70 of 140  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak Doctors look at a CT scan of a lung at a hospital in Xiaogan, China, on February 20. Hide Caption 71 of 140  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak A sales clerk wears a mask as she waits for customers at a hat shop in Beijing on February 18. Small companies that help drive China's economy are worried about how much damage the coronavirus outbreak will cause to business. Hide Caption 72 of 140  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak Buses carrying American passengers arrive at the Haneda Airport in Tokyo on February 17. The passengers were leaving the quarantined Diamond Princess cruise ship to be repatriated to the United States. Hide Caption 73 of 140  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak A medical worker rests at the isolation ward of the Red Cross hospital in Wuhan on February 16. Hide Caption 74 of 140  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak Authorities watch as the Westerdam cruise ship approaches a port in Sihanoukville, Cambodia, on February 13. Despite having no confirmed cases of coronavirus on board, the Westerdam was refused port by four other Asian countries before being allowed to dock in Cambodia. Hide Caption 75 of 140  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak A worker has his temperature checked on a shuttered commercial street in Beijing on February 12. Hide Caption 76 of 140  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak Beds are made in the Wuhan Sports Center, which has been converted into a temporary hospital. Hide Caption 77 of 140  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak A child rides a scooter past a police officer wearing protective gear outside the Hong Mei House in Hong Kong on February 11. More than 100 people evacuated the housing block after four residents in two different apartments tested positive for the coronavirus. Hide Caption 78 of 140  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak Relatives of quarantined passengers wave at the Diamond Princess cruise ship as it leaves a port in Yokohama, Japan, to dump wastewater and generate potable water. Dozens of people on the ship were infected with coronavirus. Hide Caption 79 of 140  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak The Deneway branch of the County Oak Medical Centre is closed amid coronavirus fears in Brighton, England, on February 11. Several locations in and around Brighton were quarantined after a man linked to several coronavirus cases in the United Kingdom came into contact with health-care workers and members of the public. Hide Caption 80 of 140  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak A police officer, left, wears protective gear as he guards a cordon at the Hong Mei House in Hong Kong on February 11. Hide Caption 81 of 140  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak A worker wears a protective suit as he waits to screen people entering an office building in Beijing on February 10. China's workforce is slowly coming back to work after the coronavirus outbreak forced many parts of the country to extend the Lunar New Year holiday by more than a week. Hide Caption 82 of 140  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak Chinese President Xi Jinping has his temperature checked during an appearance in Beijing on February 10. Hide Caption 83 of 140  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak Photojournalists wearing face masks take photos of a bus carrying passengers after they disembarked from the World Dream cruise ship in Hong Kong on February 9. More than 5,300 people were quarantined on two cruise ships off Hong Kong and Japan. Hide Caption 84 of 140  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak People participating in a Lunar New Year Parade in New York City hold signs reading, "Wuhan stay strong!" on February 9. Hide Caption 85 of 140  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak A shopper walks past empty shelves at a grocery store in Hong Kong on February 9. China's Ministry of Commerce encouraged supermarkets and grocery stores to resume operations as the country's voluntary or mandatory quarantines began to take an economic toll. Hide Caption 86 of 140  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak A worker wearing a protective suit uses a machine to disinfect a business establishment in Shanghai, China, on February 9. Hide Caption 87 of 140  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak Workers in protective gear walk near the Diamond Princess cruise ship docked in Yokohama on February 7. Hide Caption 88 of 140  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak People in Hong Kong attend a vigil February 7 for whistleblower doctor Li Wenliang. Li, 34, died in Wuhan after contracting the virus while treating a patient. Hide Caption 89 of 140  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak A woman grieves while paying tribute to Li at Li's hospital in Wuhan on February 7. Hide Caption 90 of 140  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak The Anthem of the Seas cruise ship is seen docked at the Cape Liberty Cruise Port in Bayonne, New Jersey, on February 7. Passengers were to be screened for coronavirus as a precaution, an official with the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention told CNN. Hide Caption 91 of 140  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak A light installation is displayed by striking members of the Hospital Authority Employees Alliance and other activists at the Hospital Authority building in Hong Kong on February 7. Hide Caption 92 of 140  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak Passengers are seen on the deck of the Diamond Princess cruise ship, docked at the Yokohama Port on February 7. Hide Caption 93 of 140  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak Flight attendants wearing face masks make their way through Don Mueang Airport in Bangkok on February 7. Hide Caption 94 of 140  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak Workers check sterile medical gloves at a latex-product manufacturer in Nanjing, China, on February 6. Hide Caption 95 of 140  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak A woman wears a protective mask as she shops in a Beijing market on February 6. Hide Caption 96 of 140  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak This aerial photo shows the Leishenshan Hospital that is being built in Wuhan to handle coronavirus patients. Hide Caption 97 of 140  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak A passenger shows a note from the World Dream cruise ship docked at the Kai Tak cruise terminal in Hong Kong on February 5. Hide Caption 98 of 140  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak A mask is seen on a statue in Beijing on February 5. Hide Caption 99 of 140  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak An ambulance stops at a traffic light in front of the Grand Lisboa Hotel in Macao. The virus turned China's gambling mecca into a ghost town. Hide Caption 100 of 140  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak A dog in Beijing wears a makeshift mask constructed from a paper cup. Hide Caption 101 of 140  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak Striking hospital workers in Hong Kong demand the closure of the border with mainland China on February 4. Hide Caption 102 of 140  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak The Diamond Princess cruise ship sits anchored in quarantine off the port of Yokohama on February 4. It arrived a day earlier with passengers feeling ill. Hide Caption 103 of 140  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak A medical worker wearing protective gear waits to take the temperature of people entering Princess Margaret Hospital in Hong Kong on February 4. Hide Caption 104 of 140  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak Medical workers in protective suits help transfer patients to a newly completed field hospital in Wuhan. Hide Caption 105 of 140  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak People wearing protective overalls talk outside a Wuhan hotel housing people in isolation on February 3. Hide Caption 106 of 140  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak A man stands in front of TV screens broadcasting a speech by Hong Kong Chief Executive Carrie Lam on February 3. Lam said the city would shut almost all border-control points to the mainland. Hide Caption 107 of 140  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak A colleague sprays disinfectant on a doctor in Wuhan on February 3. Hide Caption 108 of 140  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak Commuters in Tokyo walk past an electric board displaying dismal stock prices on February 3, the first business day after the Chinese New Year. Asia's markets recorded their worst day in years as investors finally got a chance to react to the worsening coronavirus outbreak. Hide Caption 109 of 140  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak Medical workers move a coronavirus patient into an isolation ward at the Second People's Hospital in Fuyang, China, on February 1. Hide Caption 110 of 140  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak Children wear plastic bottles as makeshift masks while waiting to check in to a flight at the Beijing Capital Airport on January 30. Hide Caption 111 of 140  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak Passengers in Hong Kong wear protective masks as they wait to board a train at Lo Wu Station, near the mainland border, on January 30. Hide Caption 112 of 140  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak A volunteer wearing protective clothing disinfects a street in Qingdao, China, on January 29. Hide Caption 113 of 140  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak Nanning residents line up to buy face masks from a medical appliance store on January 29. Hide Caption 114 of 140  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak Lyu Jun, left, a member of a medical team leaving for Wuhan, says goodbye to a loved one in Urumqi, China, on January 28. Hide Caption 115 of 140  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak A charter flight from Wuhan arrives at an airport in Anchorage, Alaska, on January 28. The US government chartered the plane to bring home US citizens and diplomats from the American consulate in Wuhan. Hide Caption 116 of 140  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak South Korean President Moon Jae-in wears a mask to inspect the National Medical Center in Seoul on January 28. Hide Caption 117 of 140  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak Hong Kong Chief Executive Carrie Lam, center, attends a news conference in Hong Kong on January 28. Lam said China will stop individual travelers to Hong Kong while closing some border checkpoints and restricting flights and train services from the mainland. Hide Caption 118 of 140  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak Workers at an airport in Novosibirsk, Russia, check the temperatures of passengers who arrived from Beijing on January 28. Hide Caption 119 of 140  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak Alex Azar, the US Secretary of Health and Human Services, speaks during a news conference about the American public-health response. Hide Caption 120 of 140  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak Two residents walk in an empty park in Wuhan on January 27. The city remained on lockdown for a fourth day. Hide Caption 121 of 140  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak A person wears a protective mask, goggles and coat as he stands in a nearly empty street in Beijing on January 26. Hide Caption 122 of 140  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak Medical staff members bring a patient to the Wuhan Red Cross hospital on January 25. Hide Caption 123 of 140  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak People wear protective masks as they walk under Lunar New Year decorations in Beijing on January 25. Hide Caption 124 of 140  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak Construction workers in Wuhan begin to work on a special hospital to deal with the outbreak on January 24. Hide Caption 125 of 140  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak Dr. Allison Arwady, commissioner of the Chicago Department of Public Health, speaks to reporters on January 24 about a patient in Chicago who had been diagnosed with the coronavirus. The patient was the second in the United States to be diagnosed with the illness. Hide Caption 126 of 140  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak A couple kisses goodbye as they travel for the Lunar New Year holiday in Beijing on January 24. Hide Caption 127 of 140  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak Workers manufacture protective face masks at a factory in China's Hubei Province on January 23. Hide Caption 128 of 140  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak Shoppers wear masks in a Wuhan market on January 23. Hide Caption 129 of 140  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak Passengers are checked by a thermography device at an airport in Osaka, Japan, on January 23. Hide Caption 130 of 140  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak People wear masks while shopping for vegetables in Wuhan on January 23. Hide Caption 131 of 140  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak A militia member checks the body temperature of a driver in Wuhan on January 23. Hide Caption 132 of 140  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak Passengers wear masks as they arrive at the Ninoy Aquino International Airport in Manila, Philippines, on January 23. Hide Caption 133 of 140  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak A customer holds boxes of particulate respirators at a pharmacy in Hong Kong on January 23. Hide Caption 134 of 140  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak Passengers wear masks at the high-speed train station in Hong Kong on January 23. Hide Caption 135 of 140  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak A woman rides an electric bicycle in Wuhan on January 22. Hide Caption 136 of 140  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak People in Guangzhou, China, wear protective masks on January 22. Hide Caption 137 of 140  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak People go through a checkpoint in Guangzhou on January 22. Hide Caption 138 of 140  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak Medical staff of Wuhan's Union Hospital attend a gathering on January 22. Hide Caption 139 of 140
The first US patient to have a confirmed case of Wuhan coronavirus, a man in his 30s, has been discharged from the  Providence Regional Medical Center in Everett, Washington. Olivia Vanni/The Herald/AP  Providence Regional Medical Center in Everett, Washington, the hospital said Monday in a statement.  “The patient remains in isolation at home and is being monitored by the Snohomish Health District, in coordination with his care team at Providence,” the statement said. “For the privacy of the patient, we will not be disclosing the exact date of discharge or any additional details regarding his discharge process.”  The patient issued the following statement: “I am at home and continuing to get better. I ask that the media please respect my privacy and my desire not to be in the public eye.  "I would like to thank the doctors, nurses, and entire team at Providence who cared for me. I appreciate all of the concern expressed by members of the public, and I look forward to returning to my normal life," the patient said.  There are now at least 11 confirmed cases of the novel coronavirus in the United States. Six cases have been confirmed in California, one in Massachusetts, one in Washington state, one in Arizona and two in Illinois. There have been two instances of person-to-person transmission – one in Illinois and one in California.
Hong Kong (CNN) In a matter of weeks, the number of Wuhan coronavirus deaths in mainland China has overtaken the 2003 severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS) epidemic in the country, as Beijing injected billions of dollars into an economy hit by effective shutdowns to major cities.  Since its outbreak in December, more than 360 people have died of the disease in China, the country's health authorities said Monday. The total number of cases in mainland China stood at 17,205 as of Sunday evening, an increase of over 2,800 on the previous day, or almost 20%.  The 2003 outbreak of SARS -- another coronavirus strand -- infected 5,327 people in mainland China, with 349 deaths. There were 8,098 confirmed cases of SARS worldwide from November 2002 to July 2003, with 774 deaths globally.  The first death from the virus outside China was confirmed over the weekend . Philippine health officials said that a 44-year-old Chinese man died Saturday after flying into the country from Wuhan.  So far, more than 180 cases have been reported outside of China -- the majority of them with a direct link to the country -- across more than 25 countries and territories worldwide. Many countries have begun closing their borders to visitors from China, with major airlines canceling flights to and from the country.  Hong Kong leader Carrie Lam on Monday announced new border closures over the Wuhan virus, amid intense public pressure to stop anyone crossing into the city from mainland China. Lam said further measures were being taken "to ensure the control of the boundary control points to reduce people movement across the border," but fell short of a complete sealing off of the city.  Germany confirmed its 10th case on Sunday, and there were also new cases reported in South Korea, Vietnam, Malaysia, Macao and Hong Kong. The United States, Australia and New Zealand have all announced that they will not allow foreign nationals who have traveled from or transited through China to enter. Nationals from those countries will face mandatory quarantine on arrival.  The G7 nations will hold a joint telephone conference to discuss how to deal with the coronavirus outbreak, German Health Minister Jens Spahn announced after talking with his American counterpart Alex Azar on Sunday.  Economic pain  In China, Monday is supposed to be the first day back at work after an extended Lunar New Year holiday ended on February 2.  However much of the country will not be returning, with multiple local authorities extending the break in an attempt to avoid further spread of the virus. Hubei, the central Chinese province of which Wuhan is the capital, will lengthen its holiday by an "appropriate extent," authorities said Saturday , while Beijing, Shanghai, Chongqing and the manufacturing provinces of Guangdong and Zhejiang will also reportedly remain on holiday until at least next week.  With much of China's economic heartland still closed, concerns are growing over the impact to the Chinese economy. The Shanghai and Shenzhen stock markets -- which have been closed since January 24 -- plunged by around 10% on opening Monday.  The People's Bank of China said Sunday it would inject 1.2 trillion yuan ($173 billion) into the Chinese markets in order to ensure "reasonably ample liquidity" in the banking system and keep currency markets stable.  The net amount of liquidity being injected into the markets will be much lower, however. According to Reuters calculations using central bank data, more than 1 trillion yuan worth of other short-term bond sales will mature Monday. That brings the net amount of cash flooding into the markets down to 150 billion yuan ($21.4 billion).  State news agency Xinhua on Monday published a defiant commentary headlined "Chinese economy resilient enough to counter virus shock."  "The epidemic will eventually come to an end, just like the winter will fade away. The negative implications of the virus on the Chinese economy will be short-lived, and the economic fundamentals are solid enough to withstand its blow," Xinhua said. "Doomsayers take this chance to hype again the China-collapse theory. But seasoned observers disagree."  It quoted a former chief economist at the Asian Development Bank saying that while the economic impact in the first quarter will likely be big, perhaps driving nationwide annual growth down a percentage point, "it will be substantially offset by above-the-trend growth in the rest of the year if the epidemic can be contained soon."  Fight to control the virus  In Wuhan itself, the epicenter of the virus outbreak where most of the deaths have been reported, there was a glimmer of hope Monday, as the first of two purpose-built hospitals opened for business.  The hospitals , built in about a week by thousands of workers on round-the-clock shifts and based on a similar plan used during the 2003 SARS outbreak, will be run by People's Liberation Army medical personnel.  They will add thousands of extra beds to Wuhan's extremely strained medical system. Thousands of health workers, including PLA medics, have also been dispatched to help out in ordinary hospitals in the city and other parts of Hubei.  But while Wuhan should be seeing some additional capacity Monday, Hong Kong will be seeing the opposite. Health care workers in the semi-autonomous Chinese city began a five-day strike on Monday over what they see as the failure of the city's government to fully shut the border with China. They are demanding a full border closure and greater support from the government.  In announcing the new border closures, Lam said further measures were being taken "to ensure the control of the boundary control points to reduce people movement across the border," but fell short of completely sealing off the city.  Lam said the main land borders at Lo Wu and Lok Ma Chau would shut as of midnight tonight, as would the Hong Kong-Macau Ferry Terminal.  That will leave all but three border crossings between Hong Kong and mainland China closed. Those which remain open are the city's international airport, the Shenzhen Bay border and the Hong Kong-Zhuhai-Macau bridge.  There is widespread fear in Hong Kong -- where 15 coronavirus cases have been confirmed so far -- of a repeat of SARS, which infected more than 1,700 people and killed 286 in 2003.  Most front line medical workers will not strike, their unions said, in order to continue serving the public, but backroom and support staff will walk out.  Studying infection  Many countries have begun evacuating their citizens out of the worst hit areas of Hubei, while other nations, in addition to closing their borders to all visitors from China, are ordering mandatory quarantines of nationals returning home.  Major airlines -- including British Airways, American Airlines, Air Canada and Lufthansa -- have canceled or slashed routes to China for the foreseeable future.  Much of the concern is driven by the lack of a confirmed cure or treatment protocol for the virus, which appears to be far more contagious -- though not as deadly -- as SARS. About 10% of SARS cases resulted in death, while the toll from Wuhan coronavirus cases stands at about 2%.  On Sunday, doctors in Thailand said they had successfully treated one Wuhan coronavirus patient with a combination of antiviral drugs.  Dr. Kriangsak Atipornwanich, a doctor at Rajavithi Hospital in Bangkok, said at a Ministry of Health news conference that he had treated a 71-year-old woman patient from China with a combination of drugs used in HIV and flu treatments. He said the patient had previously been treated only with anti-HIV drugs.  Officials at the news conference said the latest lab test showed there was no trace of the virus in the patient's respiratory system.  Hospitals in Beijing have previously reported using HIV drugs to treat coronavirus patients, though it is unclear if they have been successful.  With some apparent good news came another worrying development, however. Scientists in China discovered over the weekend that fecal samples from patients infected with the Wuhan coronavirus tested positive for the pathogen.  This means it is highly possible the virus can exist in and spread through contaminated fecal matter. Previously it had been thought the virus mainly spread through droplets emitted when a person coughs or sneezes, or through other direct contact.
Hong Kong (CNN Business) China Eastern has become the first major Chinese carrier to suspend flights to and from the United States because of the escalating Wuhan coronavirus outbreak.  The virus has killed 361 people and sickened more than 17,000 in China so far, with nearly 180 cases confirmed in countries such as the United States , Germany and Japan. One man has died in the Philippines.  Due to "the recent public health incident," China Eastern is canceling flights from Shanghai (PVG) to Los Angeles and New York (JFK) from February 2 through February 10, according to a notice circulated to travel agents and seen by CNN Business. Flights to the major US hubs were unavailable to book on China Eastern's website until March 29, however.  China Eastern CEA did not respond to a request for comment.  China Eastern is also canceling flights from Shanghai (PVG) to San Francisco on February 6 and February 9, to Chicago on February 8 and to Honolulu from February 3 until March 27, according to the notice.  Read More
The US Food and Drug Administration said Tuesday it has issued an emergency use authorization to allow qualified labs to use the Wuhan coronavirus test developed by the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Previously, the CDC was the only lab in the United States able to test for the novel coronavirus.  The diagnostic is authorized to be used for patients who meet CDC criteria for testing, and by qualified labs designated by the CDC or certified to perform high-complexity tests.  The test can detect Wuhan coronavirus from nasal or oral swabs.  As of Monday, the CDC had 260 patients under investigation for the virus -- 11 had tested positive, 167 negative and 82 were still pending.  There are 11 confirmed cases of the novel coronavirus in the United States. Six cases have been confirmed in California, one in Massachusetts, one in Washington state, one in Arizona and two in Illinois.  Negative results do not preclude infection with the virus, the FDA noted in a press release, adding that negative results must be combined with clinical observations, patient history and epidemiological information.  "Since this outbreak first emerged, we've been working closely with our partners across the US government and around the globe to expedite the development and availability of critical medical products to help end this outbreak as quickly as possible. This continues to be an evolving situation and the ability to distribute this diagnostic test to qualified labs is a critical step forward in protecting the public health," FDA Commissioner Dr. Stephen Hahn said in a statement.  The US Department of Health and Human Services on Friday declared the novel coronavirus to be a public health emergency in the United States.
London (CNN Business) The arteries of global trade are clogging up.  Shipping companies that carry goods from China to the rest of the world say they are reducing the number of seaborne vessels, as measures to stop the spread of the coronavirus crimp demand for their services and threaten to disrupt global supply chains.  About 80% of world goods trade by volume is carried by sea and China is home to seven of the world's 10 busiest container ports, according to the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development. Nearby Singapore and South Korea each have a mega port too.  "A closure of the world's manufacturing hub impacts container shipping at large, as it is a vital facilitator of the intra-Asian and global supply chains," said Peter Sand, chief shipping analyst at BIMCO, an international shipping association. "This will affect many industries and limit demand for containerized goods transport," Sand told CNN Business.  Everything from cars and machinery to apparel and other consumer staples are shipped in containers, and disruption to the industry could reverberate far beyond China as the country seeks to contain the coronavirus outbreak by keeping factories shut and workers at home.  Read More
(CNN) Nearly two decades after he was treated, former severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS) patient Alex Lam is still haunted by his experience.  "(It is) painful hearing the news again. SARS is coming back, the deadly virus is coming back," he said. SARS , of course, has not returned, but a new type of deadly virus from the same family is sweeping China, opening old wounds for some.  In 2003, SARS infected more than 8,000 people, and killed 774. Asia was hardest hit, with Hong Kong recording almost 300 deaths. Lam was treated in an isolation ward for three weeks, and considered one of the lucky ones because he was discharged with no further complications.  "I was put in a big room with many other patients," he recalled. "I heard some coughing at night, crying, and that's really sad."  The novel coronavirus , which has now spread to at least 27 territories outside mainland China, is already bigger in numbers -- at least 28,000 people have been infected worldwide and more than 560 have died. The World Health Organization (WHO) has declared the outbreak a public health emergency of international concern , prompting countries to take unprecedented measures.  John Nicholls, clinical professor of pathology at the University of Hong Kong (HKU), said the SARS outbreak was brought to an end in July 2003 by good hygiene practices -- such as frequent hand-washing -- and environmental factors such as high temperature and humidity in the summer months.  "That will be the same for this one," he said. "My feeling is that this is just going to be like SARS and the world is going to get basically a very bad cold for about five months."  People wearing face masks as a preventative measure following a coronavirus outbreak which began in the Chinese city of Wuhan, line up to purchase face masks in Hong Kong on February 5, 2020.  Containment  ordered a To stop the virus spreading further, China hasordered a lockdown on the movement of millions of people, which has seen flights, trains and buses canceled in all major cities of Hubei province, where the coronavirus was first reported. School in Hong Kong and Macao -- semi-autonomous Chinese cities that operate their own education systems -- is suspended until at least March  Some countries, such as South Korea and the Philippines, have closed their borders to visitors arriving from mainland China. Others have also issued travel warnings and evacuated citizens in Wuhan.  Despite the drastic measures, some virology experts believe containing the current outbreak might prove to be more difficult than it was to stem SARS.  John Nicholls, clinical professor of pathology at the University of Hong Kong with CNN's Kristie Lu Stout.  Nicholls said one problem could be that the new virus appeared to have greater transmissibility than SARS, due the possibility that cases can be transmitted by asymptomatic patients.  The WHO, however, has said that "the main driver of transmission ... is symptomatic cases." The organization said that it was "aware of possible transmission" from asymptomatic individuals in a few instances but believed this to be rare and not a major player in the spread of the virus.  Meanwhile, Gilead Sciences, a biopharmaceutical firm with an experimental drug called remdesivir that is used to treat the Ebola virus, is working with Chinese health authorities to see if the medication can combat the symptoms of coronavirus.  Understanding the virus  In January, Nicholls and his team became the first scientists outside mainland China to reproduce the virus in a laboratory. They have since been studying it to understand how the coronavirus interacts with human tissue around the body, and evaluate the test that diagnoses patients.  Malik Peiris, a public health virologist at HKU who advises the WHO, said one optimistic sign was that the novel coronavirus appeared to have a lower fatality rate than SARS. On Tuesday, China's National Health Commission said the death rate was 2.1% nationwide, while SARS had a global ratio of 9.6% , according to the WHO.  Malik Peiris, a public health virologist at the University of Hong Kong and WHO adviser.  "The case fatality rate doesn't count the milder cases that don't come to medical attention -- and there does seem to be quite a number of those," Peiris said. "Hopefully, the severity of the disease is much lower than what we believe or what is apparent at the moment, and so the overall outcome may not be as dire as what some people think at this point in time."  Other medical scholars have given different predictions on how long the outbreak may last.  Zhong Nanshan, one of China's leading respiratory experts and a hero of the 2003 fight against SARS, said he expected the virus to peak as quickly as the coming weekend  Gabriel Leung, HKU's chair professor of public health medicine, was less optimistic and estimated the number of cases to peak around mid-April or mid-May.  The new normal?  Another scenario is that the new coronavirus could become a common global illness, like influenza. That outcome would not be without precedent. H1N1 -- a strain of flu responsible for the 2009 flu pandemic has now become a seasonal virus.  "The common cold is caused by two different types of coronaviruses," Peiris said.  For Lam, the former SARS patient, that scenario would be a failure. He is now the head of Hong Kong SARS Mutual Help Association -- a group of SARS survivors which is calling on the Hong Kong government to take tougher measures to end the outbreak.  "We hope that the government can do something more drastic ... because most parts of China are considered high risk," he said.  Lam also called for unity.  "To fight against contagious disease, we must stand together. We must not panic," he added. "We need to think positive, because one day, the disease will go away."
A Korean Air flight carrying over 200 passengers from Seoul, South Korea (ICN) to McCarran International Airport in Las Vegas was diverted to Los Angeles' LAX airport after being notified of three US citizens onboard that had been to China within the past 14 days, Korean Air spokesperson Jill Chung told CNN.  The three people are being screened at LAX right now and the plane is headed to Las Vegas with the rest of the passengers, Chung said.  Federal Aviation Administration also confirmed the flight was diverted saying, “Korean Airlines Flight 005, a Boeing 777 flying from Seoul to McCarran International Airport in Las Vegas, diverted to LAX and landed without incident around 2:30 p.m.”
Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak Mary Faye Cochran sings "You Are My Sunshine" to her son Stacey Smith from her senior-living facility in Smyrna, Georgia, on Sunday, May 10. It was Mother's Day in the United States. Hide Caption 1 of 275  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak Pope Francis delivers a blessing from the window of his studio overlooking an empty St. Peter's Square on May 10. Hide Caption 2 of 275  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak The San Isidro cemetery in Mexico City, which was temporarily closed to the public to limit the spread of Covid-19, is seen in this aerial photo from May 10. Hide Caption 3 of 275  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak Mary Washington speaks through a window to her daughter Courtney Crosby and grandchild Sydney Crosby during a Mother's Day celebration at her senior-living facility in Smyrna. Hide Caption 4 of 275  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak A Briarcliff High School student participates in a parade of graduating seniors through Briarcliff Manor, New York, on Saturday, May 9. Hide Caption 5 of 275  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak People wear face masks while watching a Victory Day military parade in Minsk, Belarus, on May 9. The parade marked the 75th anniversary of the Allied victory over Nazi Germany in World War II. Hide Caption 6 of 275  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak A man rides past social-distancing markers in front of a shop in Brussels, Belgium, on May 9. Hide Caption 7 of 275  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak A man pauses as he places the casket of a relative into a van at a busy New York funeral home on May 9. Hide Caption 8 of 275  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak Health-care workers wait for citizens to arrive at the Anna International Airport in Chennai, India, on May 9. People were arriving in Chennai from Dubai, United Arab Emirates. Hide Caption 9 of 275  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak A man wearing a face mask cycles through Chinatown in Yokohama, Japan, on Friday, May 8. Prime Minister Shinzo Abe announced that Japan will extend its state of emergency until the end of May. Hide Caption 10 of 275  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak American citizens who were stranded in Syria due to the pandemic arrive at the Lebanese border on their way to the Beirut airport, where they would be leaving for the United States. Hide Caption 11 of 275  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak During a protest in Washington on Thursday, May 7, members of National Nurses United stand among empty shoes that they say represent nurses who have died from Covid-19. Hide Caption 12 of 275  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak A worker helps disinfect a subway train in New York on Wednesday, May 6. The subway syatem was shut down for a deep-cleaning. Hide Caption 13 of 275  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak High school students study in a classroom in Wuhan, China, as they returned to school on May 6. Hide Caption 14 of 275  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak A nursery is disinfected in Cannes, France, on May 6. Nurseries in France were to gradually reopen on May 11. Hide Caption 15 of 275  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak Refrigerated trucks are seen at a morgue that opened in New York to assist overwhelmed funeral homes. Hide Caption 16 of 275  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak Migrant workers in New Delhi walk toward the Sarai Kale Khan Bus Terminus on May 3 after learning that the government was preparing to send migrant workers back to their home states during the lockdown. In March, Prime Minister Narendra Modi urged all states to seal their borders to stop the coronavirus from being imported into rural areas. Hide Caption 17 of 275  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak People exercise on a seafront promenade in Barcelona, Spain, on May 2. Spaniards filled the country's streets to work out for the first time after seven weeks of confinement in their homes. Hide Caption 18 of 275  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak Michigan state police prevent protesters from entering the chamber of the Michigan House of Representatives on April 30. The protesters were unhappy with the state's stay-at-home order. Gov. Gretchen Whitmer recently extended the order through May 15, though restrictions were relaxed so some businesses could reopen. Hide Caption 19 of 275  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak This aerial photo shows surfers accessing Sydney's Tamarama Beach on April 29. Several Sydney beaches reopened for exercise only. Hide Caption 20 of 275  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak US Vice President Mike Pence visits Dennis Nelson, a patient who survived the coronavirus and was going to give blood, during a tour of the Mayo Clinic in Rochester, Minnesota, on April 28. Pence chose not to wear a face mask during the tour despite the facility's policy that's been in place since April 13. Pence told reporters that he wasn't wearing a mask because he's often tested for coronavirus. Hide Caption 21 of 275  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak A barber wears protective equipment as he cuts a customer's hair in Lausanne, Switzerland, on April 27. Hide Caption 22 of 275  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak After recovering from the coronavirus, British Prime Minister Boris Johnson returned to work on April 27. Hide Caption 23 of 275  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak Health workers at a coronavirus testing center in New Delhi attend to a colleague who fainted due to exhaustion on April 27. Hide Caption 24 of 275  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak Families walk along a boulevard in Barcelona, Spain, on April 26. The government now allows children to go out once a day, for one hour, within about half a mile of their homes, with one adult who lives with them. Up to three kids can go with each adult. Hide Caption 25 of 275  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak A muezzin, the person at a mosque who calls Muslims to daily prayers, reads the Quran at a mosque in Gaza City after Ramadan began on April 24. Hide Caption 26 of 275  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak Pitrik van der Lubbe waves from a boom lift to his 88-year-old father, Henk, at his father's nursing home in Gouda, Netherlands, on April 24. Pitrik had not seen his father in more than four weeks. Hide Caption 27 of 275  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak Protesters shout slogans against Lebanese Central Bank governor Riad Salamé as they block Hamra Street in Beirut, Lebanon, on April 23. Anti-government protesters have been demonstrating in Beirut as they continue to endure one of its worst-ever economic crises. Hide Caption 28 of 275  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak A boy plays hopscotch at his home in A Coruna, Spain, on April 23. Hide Caption 29 of 275  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak A dentist wears protective equipment while treating a patient in Den Bosch, Netherlands, on April 22. Hide Caption 30 of 275  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak Biology teachers prepare to hold an exam at a secondary school in Berlin on April 22. Hide Caption 31 of 275  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak A volunteer in Yangon, Myanmar, spreads calcium oxide on a road to help prevent the spread of the coronavirus on April 22. Hide Caption 32 of 275  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak Migrants wave from balconies at a hotel in Kranidi, Greece, on April 21. The shelter, which hosts 470 asylum seekers, was placed in isolation after a pregnant resident tested positive for the novel coronavirus. Hide Caption 33 of 275  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak A man disinfects a ceiling lamp at the Čobanija Mosque in Sarajevo, Bosnia and Herzegovina, on April 21. Hide Caption 34 of 275  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak A nurse holds a newborn baby, wearing a face shield as a protective measure, at a maternity facility in Jakarta, Indonesia, on April 21. Hide Caption 35 of 275  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak Health workers at Madrid's La Paz Hospital hold a minute of silence to remember Joaquin Diaz, the hospital's chief of surgery who died because of the coronavirus. Hide Caption 36 of 275  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak A woman applauds from the balcony of her Paris home to show support for health care workers on April 20. Hide Caption 37 of 275  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak A health care worker stands in a Denver street on April 19 to counterprotest the hundreds of people who were demanding that stay-at-home orders be lifted. Hide Caption 38 of 275  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak Mayor's office workers wear protective suits as they conduct a census in a Bogota, Colombia, neighborhood on April 19. They were trying to find out how many families needed to be provided with food. Hide Caption 39 of 275  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak The class of 2020 tosses hats into the air at the Air Force Academy graduation in Colorado Springs, Colorado. Hide Caption 40 of 275  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak A woman sticks her tongue out of a torn mask at a Reopen Maryland rally outside the State House in Annapolis, Maryland, on April 18. Residents in multiple states have been protesting stay-at-home orders. Hide Caption 41 of 275  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak Newly married Tyler and Caryn Suiters embrace following their marriage ceremony in Arlington, Virginia, on April 18. The Rev. Andrew Merrow and his wife, Cameron, were the only other attendees at the ceremony, which was held at St. Mary's Episcopal Church. Hide Caption 42 of 275  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak Abed Khankan cuts a customer's hair outdoors in Malmo, Sweden, on April 17. Hide Caption 43 of 275  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak Two women walk to rent a small paddle boat by the Vltava River in Prague, Czech Republic, on April 17. Hide Caption 44 of 275  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak Cars sit at a newly opened drive-in cinema in Dortmund, Germany, on April 17. It's in front of a former blast furnace. Hide Caption 45 of 275  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak Funeral workers in Manaus, Brazil, prepare the grave of a woman who is suspected to have died from the coronavirus. Hide Caption 46 of 275  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak A member of the Don Bosco Foundation delivers food from the Fraternitas Project, which serves vulnerable families in Seville, Spain, on April 16. Hide Caption 47 of 275  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak Police officers try on personal protective equipment in Amritsar, India, on April 16. Hide Caption 48 of 275  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak Workers in Nairobi, Kenya, fumigate the streets and the stalls of the City Park Market on April 15. Hide Caption 49 of 275  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak Novice Buddhist monks wear face shields at the Molilokayaram Educational Institute in Bangkok, Thailand, on April 15. Hide Caption 50 of 275  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak A woman sits on a bench at an empty metro station in Prague, Czech Republic, on April 15. Hide Caption 51 of 275  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak Health workers in Barcelona, Spain, acknowledge people who were showing their support from their balconies and windows. Hide Caption 52 of 275  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak South Korean election officials sort out parliamentary ballots at a gymnasium in Seoul on April 15. Hide Caption 53 of 275  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak Workers from the garment sector in Dhaka, Bangladesh, block a road during a protest demanding payment of unpaid wages. Hide Caption 54 of 275  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak A woman meets with her son in a "Quarantainer," a container devised to allow people to visit each other without risking the spread of coronavirus, at a care center in Utrecht, Netherlands, on April 14. Hide Caption 55 of 275  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak Firefighters transfer a patient from an ambulance in Montpelier, France, on April 14. Hide Caption 56 of 275  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak A cemetery worker pauses while digging graves at the San Vicente cemetery in Cordoba, Argentina, on April 14. Hide Caption 57 of 275  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak Workers produce protective face masks at a new factory near Tehran, Iran, on April 14. Hide Caption 58 of 275  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak Protesters stand outside the Statehouse Atrium in Columbus, Ohio, on April 13, to voice their opposition to stay-at-home orders. About 100 protesters assembled outside the building during Gov. Mike DeWine's weekday update on the state's response to the pandemic. Hide Caption 59 of 275  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak Medical workers in Istanbul clap for 107-year-old Havahan Karadeniz as she is discharged from the hospital on April 13. She had just recovered from the coronavirus. Hide Caption 60 of 275  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak People in Seoul, South Korea, listen to a speech from Hwang Kyo-ahn, who is campaigning for the upcoming parliamentary elections. Hide Caption 61 of 275  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak A flower shop employee destroys unsold flowers in St. Petersburg, Russia, on April 13. Hide Caption 62 of 275  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak A police officer requests that people return to return to their homes during a gathering that marked the Bisket Jatra festival in Bhaktapur, Nepal. Hide Caption 63 of 275  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak A doctor in a protective chamber tests a patient for coronavirus at a walk-in kiosk in Chennai, India, on April 13. Hide Caption 64 of 275  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak Musicians play their instruments for a retirement home in Karben, Germany, on April 13. Hide Caption 65 of 275  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak A woman covers herself with plastic as heavy rain falls outside a New York hospital on April 13. Hide Caption 66 of 275  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak People in Jerusalem attend the funeral of Eliyahu Bakshi-Doron, Israel's former chief rabbi who died from coronavirus complications. Hide Caption 67 of 275  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak In Rio de Janeiro, the Christ the Redeemer statue was illuminated to make Christ look like a doctor on April 12. Hide Caption 68 of 275  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak Pedro Opeka, founder of the Akamasoa Association, conducts the traditional Easter Mass in a granite quarry while maintaining social distancing in Antananarivo, Madagascar, on April 12. Hide Caption 69 of 275  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak Bodies are stored in a vacant room at Sinai-Grace Hospital in Detroit. Two sources told CNN that at least one room, which is typically used for studies on sleeping habits, was used to store bodies because the morgue was full and morgue staff did not work at night. Hide Caption 70 of 275  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak A couple stands in a park along the Yangtze River in Wuhan, China. Hide Caption 71 of 275  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak Priest-in-charge Angie Smith uses her phone to broadcast an Easter service from a churchyard in Hartley Wintney, England, on April 12. Hide Caption 72 of 275  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak Children wave to a person dressed as the Easter Bunny during a neighborhood parade in Haverford, Pennsylvania, on April 10. Hide Caption 73 of 275  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak Health workers in Leganes, Spain, cry during a memorial for a co-worker who died because of the coronavirus. Hide Caption 74 of 275  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak Volunteers spray disinfectant in a favela in Rio de Janeiro on April 10. Hide Caption 75 of 275  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak Bodies are buried on New York's Hart Island on April 9. New York City officials say that Hart Island, which for decades has been used as the final resting place for people who died unclaimed, will also be used for unclaimed coronavirus victims. Hide Caption 76 of 275  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak A health care worker holds the hand of a coronavirus patient being moved at a hospital near Barcelona, Spain, on April 9. Hide Caption 77 of 275  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak Service boats spray water in London to show support for health care workers on April 9. Hide Caption 78 of 275  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak Employees of Hyundai Card, a credit card company, sit behind protective screens as they eat in an office cafeteria in Seoul, South Korea, on April 9. Hide Caption 79 of 275  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak People wait in their cars for the San Antonio Food Bank to begin food distribution on April 9. Hide Caption 80 of 275  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak A worker disinfects a carved cross at the Salt Cathedral in Zipaquira, Colombia, on April 8. Hide Caption 81 of 275  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak A cake shop employee in Athens, Greece, prepares chocolate Easter bunnies with face masks on April 8. Hide Caption 82 of 275  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak Californians Sarah and Aaron Sanders, along with their children, use video conferencing to celebrate a Passover Seder with other family members on April 8. Hide Caption 83 of 275  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak A medical staff member from China's Jilin province, center, cries while hugging nurses from Wuhan on April 8. Wuhan was reopening its borders after 76 days. Hide Caption 84 of 275  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak Cars in Wuhan line up to leave at a highway toll station. Hide Caption 85 of 275  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak Rabbi Yaakov Kotlarsky places Passover Seder to-go packages into a car trunk in Arlington Heights, Illinois, on April 7. Hide Caption 86 of 275  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak A woman in London shows her support for British Prime Minister Boris Johnson on April 7. Johnson was hospitalized after his coronavirus symptoms "worsened," according to his office. Hide Caption 87 of 275  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak A voter checks in to cast a ballot in Kenosha, Wisconsin, on April 7. The state was going through with its presidential primary despite the pandemic. Hide Caption 88 of 275  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak A man is sprayed with disinfectant prior to going to a market in Tirana, Albania, on Monday, April 6. Hide Caption 89 of 275  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak Izzie, left, and Tippi wear ventilated dog masks in Philadelphia on April 6. Hide Caption 90 of 275  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak People wait in line to bury loved ones at a cemetery in Guayaquil, Ecuador, on April 6. In some parts of the overwhelmed city, bodies have been left on the streets. Hide Caption 91 of 275  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak Police detain a doctor in Quetta, Pakistan, who was among dozens of health care workers protesting a lack of personal protective equipment on April 6. Hide Caption 92 of 275  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak A Catholic priest sprinkles holy water on devotees during Palm Sunday celebrations in Quezon City, Philippines, on Sunday, April 5. Hide Caption 93 of 275  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak People shine lights from their balcony during a nationwide candlelight vigil in Bangalore, India, on April 5. Hide Caption 94 of 275  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak A woman in Glasgow, Scotland, watches Britain's Queen Elizabeth II give a television address regarding the coronavirus pandemic. Hide Caption 95 of 275  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak Paramilitary members unload provisions in Kampala, Uganda, on Saturday, April 4. It was the first day of government food distribution for people affected by the nation's lockdown. Hide Caption 96 of 275  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak A police officer wearing a coronavirus-themed outfit walks in a market in Chennai, India, to raise awareness about social distancing. Hide Caption 97 of 275  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak A woman in Moscow cooks while watching Russian President Vladimir Putin address the nation over the coronavirus pandemic. Hide Caption 98 of 275  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak The hashtag "stayhome" is projected onto the Matterhorn mountain that straddles Switzerland and Italy on April 1. The mountain was illuminated by Swiss artist Gerry Hofstetter, who is transforming buildings, monuments and landscapes all over the world to raise awareness during the pandemic. Hide Caption 99 of 275  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak Volunteers load food bags on a truck to deliver them to low-income families in Panama City, Panama, on April 1. Hide Caption 100 of 275  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak Designer Friederike Jorzig adjusts a mannequin wearing a wedding dress and a face mask at her store in Berlin on March 31. Hide Caption 101 of 275  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak People pray next to the grave of musician Robson de Souza Lopes after his burial in Manaus, Brazil, on March 31. According to authorities at the Amazonas Health Secretary, the 43-year-old died after being diagnosed with the novel coronavirus. Hide Caption 102 of 275  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak Chris Lyndberg hands out a free lunch to a truck driver at a rest area along Interstate 10 in Sacaton, Arizona, on March 31. The Arizona Trucking Association was giving away 500 Dilly's Deli lunches to show its appreciation for truck drivers who have been delivering medical supplies, food and other necessities during the coronavirus pandemic. Hide Caption 103 of 275  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak The USNS Comfort, a Navy hospital ship, reaches New York City on March 30. Another hospital ship is in Los Angeles. Both will take some of the pressure off medical facilities that are strained because of the coronavirus pandemic. Hide Caption 104 of 275  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak An emergency field hospital is constructed in New York's Central Park on March 30. Hide Caption 105 of 275  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak Farmers deliver vegetables to a customer in Saint-Georges-sur-Cher, France, on March 29. Hide Caption 106 of 275  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak People listen from their homes as priests conduct Sunday mass from a church roof in Rome on March 29. Hide Caption 107 of 275  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak Gyorgy David Jablonovszky and his bride, Timea, are joined by close relatives during their wedding ceremony in Miskolc, Hungary, on March 28. Because of the coronavirus, engaged couples across the globe have had to rethink their walks down the aisle. Hide Caption 108 of 275  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak A worker fixes partitions at a quarantine center in Guwahati, India, on March 28. Hide Caption 109 of 275  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak Devices used in diagnosing the coronavirus are inspected in Cheongju, South Korea, on March 27. The devices were being prepared for testing kits at the bio-diagnostic company SD Biosensor. Hide Caption 110 of 275  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak A student does homework in Bratislava, Slovakia, on March 27. Schools have been shut down across the world, and many children have been receiving their lessons online. Hide Caption 111 of 275  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak A National Guard truck sprays disinfectant in Caracas, Venezuela, on March 27. Hide Caption 112 of 275  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak People wearing face masks walk near the USNS Mercy after the Navy hospital ship arrived in the Los Angeles area to assist local hospitals dealing with the coronavirus pandemic. Hide Caption 113 of 275  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak Pope Francis prays in an empty St. Peter's Square on March 27. Hide Caption 114 of 275  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak Coffins carrying coronavirus victims are stored in a warehouse in Ponte San Pietro, Italy, on March 26. They would be transported to another area for cremation. Hide Caption 115 of 275  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak Members of Iran's Revolutionary Guard prepare to take part in disinfecting the city of Tehran on March 25. Hide Caption 116 of 275  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak Lydia Hassebroek attends a ballet class from her home in New York on March 25. Hide Caption 117 of 275  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak People visit the Beijing Zoo on March 25 after it reopened its outdoor exhibits to the public. Hide Caption 118 of 275  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak The Olympic flame is displayed in Iwaki, Japan, on March 25, a day after the 2020 Tokyo Games were postponed. Hide Caption 119 of 275  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak A woman suspected of having coronavirus is helped from her home by emergency medical technicians Robert Sabia, left, and Mike Pareja, in Paterson, New Jersey, on March 24. Hide Caption 120 of 275  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak People practice social distancing as they wait for takeout food at a shopping mall in Bangkok, Thailand, on March 24. Hide Caption 121 of 275  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak Authorities are seen in Madrid, where an ice rink has been converted into a makeshift morgue to cope with the coronavirus fallout. Hide Caption 122 of 275  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak A tourist wears a face mask while visiting the Badaling section of the Great Wall of China on March 24. The section reopened to visitors after being closed for two months. Hide Caption 123 of 275  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak People arrive at the South Municipal Cemetery in Madrid to attend the burial of a man who died from the coronavirus. Hide Caption 124 of 275  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak Passengers arrive at Hong Kong International Airport on March 23. Hide Caption 125 of 275  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak Giuseppe Corbari holds Sunday Mass in front of photographs sent in by his congregation members in Giussano, Italy, on March 22. Many religious services are being streamed online so that people can worship while still maintaining their distance from others. Hide Caption 126 of 275  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak People clap from balconies to show their appreciation for health care workers in Mumbai, India. Hide Caption 127 of 275  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak A woman attends a Sunday service at the Nairobi Baptist Church in Nairobi, Kenya, on March 22. The service was streamed live on the internet. Hide Caption 128 of 275  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak A Syrian Red Crescent member sprays disinfectant along an alley of the historic Hamidiyah market in Damascus, Syria. Hide Caption 129 of 275  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak People are seen on California's Huntington Beach on March 21. Crowds descended on California beaches, hiking trails and parks over the weekend in open defiance of a state order to shelter in place and avoid close contact with others. Hide Caption 130 of 275  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak A funeral service is held without family members in Bergamo, Italy, on March 21. Hide Caption 131 of 275  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak A member of the Syrian Violet relief group disinfects tents at a camp for displaced people in Kafr Jalis, Syria, on March 21. Hide Caption 132 of 275  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak A doctor examines Juan Vasquez inside a testing tent at St. Barnabas Hospital in New York on March 20. Hide Caption 133 of 275  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak A Mass in Rio de Janeiro honors coronavirus victims around the world on March 18. Brazil's Christ the Redeemer statue was lit up with flags and messages of hope in solidarity with countries affected by the pandemic. Hide Caption 134 of 275  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak Medical staff wearing protective suits ride down an escalator at Moscow's Sheremetyevo International Airport on March 18. Hide Caption 135 of 275  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak Hasidic Jewish men take part in a "social distancing" minyan in New York on March 17. Hide Caption 136 of 275  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak A patient in a biocontainment unit is carried on a stretcher in Rome on March 17. Hide Caption 137 of 275  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak A pedestrian walks a dog through a quiet street in New York on March 17. Hide Caption 138 of 275  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak People gather to collect free face masks in New Delhi on March 17. Hide Caption 139 of 275  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak Dermot Hickey, left, and Phillip Vega ask a pedestrian in New York to take their picture on a thinly trafficked Fifth Avenue on March 17. Many streets across the world are much more bare as people distance themselves from others. In the United States, the White House advised people not to gather in groups of more than 10. Hide Caption 140 of 275  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak Students at the Attarkiah Islamic School wear face masks during a ceremony in Thailand's southern province of Narathiwat on March 17. Hide Caption 141 of 275  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak People wait outside a Woolworths store in Sunbury, Australia on March 17. Australian supermarket chains announced special shopping hours for the elderly and people with disabilities so that they can shop in less crowded aisles. Hide Caption 142 of 275  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak A member of Spain's Military Emergencies Unit carries out a general disinfection at the Malaga airport on March 16. Hide Caption 143 of 275  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak Displaced families near Atme, Syria, attend a workshop aimed at spreading awareness about the coronavirus. Hide Caption 144 of 275  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak French President Emmanuel Macron is seen on a screen in Paris as he announces new coronavirus containment measures on March 16. France has been put on lockdown, and all nonessential outings are outlawed and can draw a fine of up to €135 ($148). Macron also promised to support French businesses by guaranteeing €300 billion worth of loans and suspending rent and utility bills owed by small companies. Hide Caption 145 of 275  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak A police officer checks the temperatures of bus passengers at a checkpoint in Manila, Philippines, on March 16. Hide Caption 146 of 275  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak Flowers are stored prior to their destruction at a flower auction in Aalsmeer, Netherlands, on March 16. Lower demand due to the coronavirus outbreak is threatening the Dutch horticultural sector, forcing the destruction of products. Hide Caption 147 of 275  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak Body temperatures are scanned as people enter the Buddhist temple Wat Pho in Bangkok, Thailand, on March 13. Hide Caption 148 of 275  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak Two nuns greet neighbors from their balcony in Turin, Italy, on Sunday, March 15. Hide Caption 149 of 275  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak Pope Francis, inside the Church of San Marcello in Rome's city center, prays at a famous crucifix that believers claim helped to save Romans from the plague in 1522. Hide Caption 150 of 275  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak Passengers wait for their flights at Marrakesh Airport in Morocco on March 15. Hide Caption 151 of 275  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak US Vice President Mike Pence takes a question during a White House briefing about the coronavirus on March 15. Hide Caption 152 of 275  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak A Sea World employee sprays disinfectant in Jakarta, Indonesia, on Saturday, March 14. Hide Caption 153 of 275  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak People wait in line to go through customs at Dallas/Fort Worth International Airport on March 14. Travelers returning from Europe say they were being made to wait for hours at US airports, often in close quarters, as personnel screened them for the coronavirus. Hide Caption 154 of 275  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak Hundreds of people lined up to enter a Costco in Novato, California, on March 14. Many people have been stocking up on food, toilet paper and other items. As a response to panic buying, retailers in the United States and Canada have started limiting the number of toilet paper that customers can buy in one trip. Hide Caption 155 of 275  Photos: The novel coronavirus outbreak A member of the White House physician's office takes a media member's temperature in the White House briefing room on March 14. It was ahead of a news conference with President Donald Trump and Vice President Mike Pence. Hide Caption 156 of 275  Photos: The novel coronav
Wuhan doctor Li Wenliang. From Li Wenliang  Li Wenliang, the Chinese whistleblower doctor who was reprimanded by Wuhan Police after warning the public of a potential "SARS-like" disease in December 2019, died of coronavirus in Wuhan in the early hours of Friday morning (local time), according to a statement from Wuhan Central Hospital.  “Our hospital's ophthalmologist Li Wenliang was unfortunately infected with coronavirus during his work in the fight against the coronavirus epidemic,” the statement read. “He died at 2:58 a.m. on Feb 7 after attempts to resuscitate were unsuccessful.”  The statement came after hours of confusion over Li’s status.  Earlier on Thursday, several state media outlets reported Li’s death, following Chinese social media erupting into profound grief and anger. A short time later, Wuhan Central Hospital released a statement saying Li was still alive and in critical condition, adding that they were “making attempts to resuscitate him.” State media subsequently deleted their previous tweets.  About Li: After he alerted colleagues in December, Li was questioned by local health authorities and was later summoned by Wuhan police to sign a reprimand letter in which he was accused of "spreading rumors online" and "severely disrupting social order."  Li was one of several medics targeted by police for trying to blow the whistle on the deadly virus in the early weeks of the outbreak, which has sickened more than 28,000 people and killed more than 560. He later contracted the virus himself.  Li was hospitalized on Jan. 12 and tested positive for the coronavirus on Feb. 1.  CNN gives an update from Beijing:
Hong Kong/London (CNN Business) For decades, China was the promised land for American, European and Japanese carmakers. Now, the coronavirus outbreak threatens to prolong a slump in vehicle sales , derail production in the country and snarl global auto supply chains .  andare among the global carmakers who have invested heavily in China, forming partnerships with local companies and building vast factories. China makes more cars than any other country, and is also the world's biggest market.  When car plants across China shut last month for the Lunar New Year holiday, the industry was already under huge pressure : sales had been falling for two years due to the loss of tax incentives for electric cars and the slowing economy , and officials were expecting an unprecedented third year of stagnation.  Many of those plants have since been ordered to remain shut at least until next week as the Chinese government scrambles to contain the virus that first appeared in Wuhan, a major autos hub, before sweeping across the country, infecting thousands of people and killing hundreds. Automakers are bracing for even longer shutdowns and a deeper recession in global sales.  Sales and production to suffer  Close to 60 million people are still living under lockdown in China, with three cities reporting over a thousand confirmed coronavirus cases each. Meanwhile, the virus continues to spread, keeping huge numbers of potential shoppers at home until the outbreak peaks.  "We assume consumers will tend to avoid purchasing cars in dealer shops until then to reduce contagion risk," analysts at S&P Global Ratings said in a report published Wednesday.  An assembly line at the Dongfeng Honda plant in Wuhan, China.  The extended factory closures are expected to make it much more difficult for the industry to emerge from its recession. According to S&P Global Ratings, the outbreak will force carmakers in China to slash production by about 15% in the first quarter.  Nissan NSANF PSA Group PUGOY The auto industry is particularly exposed because the virus originated in one of China's "motor cities." General Motors,, Renault, Honda and Peugeot owner all have large factories in Wuhan , which has been on lockdown since late January.  Wuhan and the rest of Hubei province account for 9% of total Chinese auto production, according to S&P Global Ratings. PSA Group told CNN Business this week that its Wuhan plant would remain closed until at least February 14, though a spokesperson added that its European operations have not yet been affected by any parts or logistical disruptions.  Other carmakers are also trying to assess the fallout from the outbreak and keep it to a minimum.  "It's a very fluid situation," GM CEO Mary Barra told investors Wednesday during an earnings presentation. She said the company is working with its Chinese partners and local health authorities to make sure the supply chain is not disrupted.  The situation varies depending on the plant and its supply of parts ... so we cannot definitively say whether we will restart plant operations from February 17." Toyota spokesperson  Germany's Daimler and Volkswagen have said they expect to resume some vehicle production in China on Monday, though both firms added that they continue to monitor the situation and will adjust plans as needed.  Volkswagen is most exposed to potential damage. The world's largest automaker has 24 plants making cars or parts in China, accounting for 40% of its production.  On Wednesday, Volkswagen said that its supply chain "is on track to be fully functional in time for the start of production," and that planned deliveries to customers haven't changed.  Toyota, which makes 15% of its cars in China but is less exposed than Japanese rival Honda, is also worried. The world's second biggest carmaker had been hoping to restart production on February 10, but it has been forced to keep its 12 joint venture plants in China — four making cars and eight making parts or components — closed for another week at least.  "The situation varies depending on the plant and its supply of parts. Also, there are additional considerations that must be given to the guidelines from local and region governments, including things like logistics, so we cannot definitively say whether we will restart plant operations from February 17," a Toyota spokesperson said.  The situation could get worse before it gets better. S&P Global Ratings researchers said the Chinese government could extend factory shutdowns in order to limit contagion risk, affecting as much as half of China's car and auto parts production. Car plants in cities such as Shanghai and Tianjin — many hundreds of miles away from Wuhan — could be out of commission for an "extended" period, they warned.  The risks beyond China  The longer the crisis drags on, the greater the chance that global auto supply chains will be damaged.  German engineering firm Bosch, which is the world's largest auto component manufacturer, has dozens of plants in China including two in Wuhan. Other parts suppliers including Schaeffler, ZF Friedrichshafen, Faurecia and Valeo have significant operations in the country, according to S&P Global Ratings.  A spokesperson for Bosch said Thursday that its plants in China remain closed on government orders, but production is expected to resume at many locations "within the next few days." The spokesperson said it was still too early to assess the impact to the company.  Tesla TSLA China is also the global manufacturing base for electric motors, transmissions, and other components for electric cars., which sources parts from multiple companies in China, has already said that production will be delayed at its new factory in Shanghai.  Hyundai HYMTF Crunch time has arrived for one major carmaker.suspended production this week at its plants in South Korea because the coronavirus disrupted its supply of parts.  Korea's car sector sources 29% of its parts from China, according to Simon MacAdam, global economist at Capital Economics. He said that Hyundai's decision underscores how valuable China is to major manufacturing supply chains around the world.  "Even industries that appear to have low exposure to Chinese suppliers will almost certainly contain firms that are heavily reliant on inputs from China," MacAdam wrote Wednesday in a research note. "It only takes bottlenecks in the production of one low-value, but crucial, component to bring higher-value, downstream production to a halt.  — Laura He, Sherisse Pham, Chris Isidore and Enjoji Kaori contributed to this report.
Seoul, South Korea (CNN) It's now about two months since a deadly novel coronavirus was found in the Chinese city of Wuhan, and nearly every country and territory in East Asia has confirmed a case.  One of the world's poorest countries has, according to its public statements, managed to avoid the virus despite the fact that in neighboring mainland China, it has killed more than 600 people and infected more than 31,000.  More than 300 people have tested positive for the virus in over 25 places around the world -- including the other two countries that share a land border with North Korea, Russia and South Korea.  In fact, every country and territory within a 1,500-mile radius of North Korea, except for sparsely populated Mongolia, has confirmed a case.  It's unclear how North Korea has been able to avoid the virus. Pyongyang has either been very lucky, isn't saying something or is reaping one of the few benefits of being a so-called "hermit nation."  The country has not publicly acknowledged any confirmed coronavirus patients, but Nam Sung-wook, a professor at Korea University who previously served as the head of a think tank operated by South Korea's National Intelligence Service (NIS), said it's very possible someone inside North Korea -- a country of 25 million people -- has been infected.  Researchers are still trying to determine how the virus spreads, but it is not believed to be airborne. It's also unclear if the virus can spread via feces or if infected patients without symptoms can pass it on to others.  But Nam suspects a Chinese patient could have infected someone from North Korea across their shared border.  "We know that the Chinese regions close to the North Korean border, such as Dandong and Shenyang, have confirmed patients. About 90% of North Korean trade is with China and we know so many people, trucks and trains passed through the border between the two nations before North Korea installed recent regulations" to stop the virus from getting into the country, Nam told CNN.  Despite not publicly acknowledging any confirmed or even suspected cases, North Korea has been uncharacteristically transparent regarding its efforts to combat the virus. It appears the country is taking the epidemic very seriously, according to reports in state-run news service KCNA.  Quarantine staff in protective gear are pictured at Pyongyang International Airport on Saturday.  North Korea has closed its borders to all foreign tourists, most of whom are Chinese, as a precautionary measure, according to one travel agency that runs tours inside the country. Pyongyang did the same during the Ebola outbreak of 2014.  On January 30, state news agency KCNA reported that authorities had declared a "state emergency," and that anti-epidemic headquarters were being established around the country. On Monday, KCNA said all people who entered the country after January 13 were put under "medical supervision."  KCNA also reported North Korean health officials had set up a "nationwide test sample transport system" and had the ability to promptly diagnose suspicious cases.  However, several experts who spoke to CNN were skeptical Pyongyang's purported testing ability. And given the country's intense secrecy it's unlikely the world will ever know if any of the measures North Korea has taken will actually work.  Medical workers screen the temperatures of foreign nationals using thermal imaging devices in the diplomatic area of Pyongyang on Monday.  North Korea is considered one of the world's most reclusive and secretive states, and information about everything from its top leadership under leader Kim Jong Un to daily life outside the capital of Pyongyang is notoriously hard to come by.  While most countries announce senior government appointments, like a new foreign minister, North Korea often does not -- and experts are often required to sleuth through state media and external sources for clues.  The country's healthcare sector, historically, is no different. North Korea has never formally acknowledged how many died during its devastating 1990s famine. Experts estimate as many as 2 million people may have been killed, and those who fled the country at the time shared horrific stories of death and survival  "North Korea has such a limited supply of basic medicine that public health officials need to focus on preventative medicine. They would be ill-equipped to deal with any kind of epidemic," said Jean Lee, the director off the Hyundai Motor-Korea Foundation Center for Korean History at the Washington-based Woodrow Wilson Center.  Doctors who have defected in recent years often speak of poor working conditions and shortages of everything from medicine to basic healthcare supplies.  Choi Jung-hun, a former physician in North Korea who fled the country in 2011, said when he was helping to combat a measles outbreak in 2006 to 2007, North Korea did not have the resources to operate round-the-clock quarantine and isolation facilities.  He recalled that after identifying suspicious cases, manuals for doctors said patients were supposed to be transferred to a hospital or a quarantine facility for monitoring.  "The problem in North Korea is that manuals are not followed. When there wasn't enough food provided for the people at hospitals and quarantine facilities, people escaped to look for food," Choi said.  JUST WATCHED How close are China and North Korea? Replay More Videos ... MUST WATCH How close are China and North Korea? 02:08  A health crisis, but a political opportunity  Lee, who previously worked for The Associated Press and opened the newswire's bureau in Pyongyang, also said the epidemic may serve multiple political purposes for the Kim regime, including giving him time to plan his next steps in nuclear negotiations with the United States, which have been on the rocks for months.  "We're seeing the North Koreans use coronavirus as an opportunity to retreat into self-imposed isolation at a time of political uncertainty," said Lee. "Kim Jong Un needed to buy some time to recalibrate his internal and external strategy and messaging on nuclear negotiations."  The virus also gives Pyongyang a new excuse to further tighten its borders and justify the draconian social restrictions most North Korean people live under, Lee said. North Koreans can be severely punished for criticizing the Kim family and the ruling regime. Most cannot access the internet or any information from the outside world that has not been approved by state censors.  The majority of North Koreans also do not enjoy freedom of movement and are required to receive government permission to travel to other provinces. Very few are permitted to travel abroad.  North Koreans ride boats in Yalu River, the border river shared with China, in Qingcheng, North Korea as seen from across the border on April 29, 2019, in Dandong, China.  For those that can move, transport is very difficult. North Korea is not completely connected by roads, and most of the public relies on a highly dysfunctional and derelict railway system. Short journeys of a few hundred miles can take hours or even days.  Clamping down on its borders could have an unintended economic effect. North Korea's economy is heavily reliant on trade with China, as most other countries will not trade with Pyongyang due to international sanctions.  Closing the border could shut the country off from its economic lifeline, said Evans Revere, a former assistant secretary of state for East Asia and the Pacific and current senior adviser at the Albright Stonebridge Group.  "The need to seal off the borders will have a devastating economic effect on North Korea. Because of international sanctions, US pressure, and the absence of any significant aid coming in from the ROK (South Korea), North Korea has become even more dependent on China," Revere said in an email. "With the border shut down, Pyongyang is probably panicking right now."  But those travel restrictions and challenges also provide something of a benefit from a public health standpoint.  "North Korea has the best control system in the world," said Choi, the doctor who defected.  "North Korea probably is best at limiting social contacts and regional traveling because they've been practicing that for 70 years. The difference now is making the regulations even tighter. So this system will be helpful for them to prevent any virus from spreading wider."  A previous version of this story misstated Nam Sung-wook's previous job. This has been corrected.
(CNN) Shifting to a plant-based diet. Nominees battling for an Oscar. A legal dispute involving AR-15s. Grab a cup of coffee and settle in. Here's what you might have missed during a busy news week.  Every country and territory within a 1,500-mile radius of North Korea, excluding Mongolia, has confirmed a case of the coronavirus. How does North Korea avoid it  The Oscars are this Sunday, and nine films are battling to take home an award for best picture. CNN's Brian Lowry breaks down the candidates most likely to win and what the victory would say about the present state of the movie business.  More and more people are shifting to vegan diets. With the change of fast food and grocery options, vegan choices are becoming more accessible. Here are some tips to follow if you want to adopt this plant-based diet.
None of the evacuees from China who arrived at San Antonio’s Lackland Air Force Base are sick, according to an official with the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.  The passengers were men, women and children and had either been living in, or traveled to, Hubei province. They were escorted off the plane, at which time medical professionals took their temperatures. Some of the passengers were then loaded back onto the plane and will continue on to Omaha, Nebraska. Fewer than 100 of the passengers will be kept at the air force base.  All the evacuees will be under federal quarantined for 14 days from the time the plane left China.  “It may seem surprising to some that we are taking such aggressive measures,” CDC's Capt. Jennifer McQuiston said at a news conference Friday.  McQuiston added that the goal of the CDC is to protect the health of US citizens.
London (CNN Business) Nearly two decades have passed since a coronavirus known as SARS emerged in China, killing hundreds of people and sparking panic that sent a chill through the global economy. The virus now rampaging across China could be much more damaging .  China has become an indispensable part of global business since the 2003 SARS outbreak. It's grown into the world's factory, churning out products such as the iPhone and driving demand for commodities like oil and copper. The country also boasts hundreds of millions of wealthy consumers who spend big on luxury products tourism and cars . China's economy accounted for roughly 4% of world GDP in 2003; it now makes up 16% of global output.  SARS sickened 8,098 people and killed 774 before it was contained. The new coronavirus, which originated in the central Chinese city of Wuhan, has already killed more than 900 people and infected over 40,000 across at least 25countries and territories. Chinese officials have locked down Wuhan and several other cities, but the virus continues to spread.  "The outbreak has the potential to cause severe economic and market dislocation. But the scale of the impact will ultimately be determined by how the virus spreads and evolves, which is almost impossible to predict, as well as how governments respond," said Neil Shearing, group chief economist at Capital Economics.  Compounding the risk is the fact that the world outside China has also changed since 2003.  Globalization has encouraged companies to build supply chains that cut across national borders, making economies much more interconnected. The major central banks have used up much of the ammunition they would typically deploy to fight economic downturns since the 2008 financial crisis, and global debt levels have never been higher. Rising nationalism may make it harder to coordinate a worldwide response, if that's required.  A resident wears a protective mask while riding a scooter on February 5, 2020, in Wuhan.  The virus is snarling supply chains and disrupting companies.  Volkswagen VLKAF Toyota TM Daimler DDAIF General Motors GM Renault RNLSY Honda HMC Hyundai HYMTF Car plants across China have been ordered to remain closed following the Lunar New Year holiday, preventing global automakersandfrom resuming operations in the world's largest car market. According to S&P Global Ratings, the outbreak will force carmakers in China to slash production by about 15% in the first quarter. Toyota said on Friday it would keep its factories shut at least until February 17.  Burberry BBRYF Luxury goods makers, which rely on Chinese consumers who spend big at home and while on vacation, have also been hit. British brandhas closed 24 of its 64 stores in mainland China, and its chief executive warned Friday that the virus is causing a "material negative effect on luxury demand." Dozens of global airlines have curtailed flights to and from China.  Qualcomm QCOM Hyundai HYMTF Fiat Chrysler FCAU Even more troubling is the threat to global supply chains., the world's biggest maker of smartphone chips, warned that the outbreak was causing "significant" uncertainty around demand for smartphones, and the supplies needed to produce them. Already, auto parts shortages have forcedto close plants in South Korea and causedto make contingency plans to avoid the same result at one of its plants in Europe.  Economists say the current level of disruption is manageable. If the number of new coronavirus cases begins to slow, and China's factories reopen soon, the result will be a fleeting hit to the Chinese economy in the first quarter and a dent in global growth. If the virus continues to spread, however, the economic damage will increase rapidly.  An employee works on an assembly line at Dongfeng Honda in Wuhan.  Allianz ALIZF Mohamed El-Erian, chief economic adviser to, told CNN Business that he was most worried about the potential cascading economic effects.  "They first paralyze the region of the virus outbreak," he said. "Then they gradually spread domestically, undermining internal trade, consumption, production and the movement of people. If the virus is still not contained, the process spreads further, including regionally and internationally by disrupting trade, supply chains and travel."  Epidemic risk  Economists have a hard time working out the potential costs of epidemics because of their unique characteristics.  Yet diseases can be far more damaging than natural disasters such as hurricanes or a tsunami, or other unpredictable events known as "black swans." According to a study by the World Bank, a severe pandemic could cause economic losses equal to nearly 5% of global GDP, or more than $3 trillion. Losses from a weaker flu pandemic, such as the 2009 H1N1 virus, can still wipe 0.5% off global GDP.  "A severe pandemic would resemble a global war in its sudden, profound, and widespread impact," the World Bank assessed in a report on pandemics from 2013. (The Wuhan coronavirus has not been declared a pandemic by the World Health Organization.)  The virus is not the driving factor behind those losses, however. Instead, it's the way consumers, businesses and governments respond to an outbreak that matters most.  People are more likely to stay home during an outbreak to avoid getting sick, preventing them from traveling, shopping and working. Doing so limits demand for consumer goods and energy. Decisions by companies and governments to close shops and idle factories, meanwhile, curtail production.  "This is continuing to grow in scope and magnitude. It could end being really, really big, and really, really serious. We can't project that now," said William Reinsch, a senior adviser at the Center for Strategic and International Studies who spent 15 years as president of the National Foreign Trade Council.  According to Shearing, past epidemics show that China's economy is likely to take a significant hit in the first quarter. But that will quickly fade from memory if the virus is contained.  "As long as factory closures don't lead to job losses, by this time next year the level of GDP is unlikely to be very different from what it would have been without the virus," he said.  What can be done?  China's government has moved quickly to counter the economic fallout from the coronavirus and the measures taken to contain it.  The People's Bank of China cut a key interest rate this week and injected huge amounts of cash into markets in order to help take the pressure off banks and borrowers. Officials have also announced new tax breaks and subsidies designed to help consumers.  Yet China is also more vulnerable to a crisis than it was 17 years ago when SARS broke out.  "It has much higher debt, trade tensions with a major trading partner and its growth has been steadily slowing down for a number of years, which gives a weak starting point to face such a crisis," said Raphie Hayat, a senior economist at Dutch bank Rabobank.  Analysts at Capital Economics expect the government to announce additional measures in the coming days. If the virus keeps spreading, they believe that Beijing will have to abandon its long-running efforts to get its debt under control and pump money directly into the economy.  Chinese President Xi Jinping attends a meeting in Beijing.  Central banks in neighboring countries including Sri Lanka, Malaysia, Thailand and the Philippines have cut interest rates in recent weeks. South Korea and Taiwan could be next.  But the big powers of the financial world are exhausted from a decade fighting anemic growth since the global financial crisis. The European Central Bank introduced negative interest rates in 2014 and hasn't been able to increase them since, while the Bank of Japan is in a similar position. The US Federal Reserve already cut interest rates three times last year; Chair Jerome Powell has said he's carefully monitoring the situation.  Meanwhile, debt levels have soared in the United States, Japan and key European countries including Italy, limiting the scope for a big fiscal stimulus if the world economy goes into another tailspin. Global debt, including borrowing by households, governments and companies, has jumped to more than three times the size of the global economy, the highest ratio on record, according to the Institute of International Finance.  Also critical is whether governments are able to coordinate their response to the outbreak, ideally with help from multinational institutions. This is especially true because, according to the World Bank, preparedness for a potential pandemic is low. But coordination may prove difficult in a increasingly fractured world where nationalism is often prized over cooperation.  "It's quite clear that multinational institutions are under more pressure, and have less teeth on day to day issues than 10 years ago," Shearing said. "But the optimist in me would like to think that in the face of a global pandemic, global institutions are still in a position to respond."  Correction: An earlier version of this story misidentified Raphie Hayat's employer.
An American couple was planning to finally pick up their adopted daughter in China this weekend. Now, the process is on hold due to novel coronavirus.  After two years of paperwork, Ivy and Noah Cleveland had a room, a crib and clothes ready to welcome 3-year-old Ruby into their Georgia home. But their adoption agency canceled the trip that would have finalized Ruby’s adoption.  “This was the first time in my life that I truly wept to the point of being sick in my body,” Ivy Cleveland told CNN. "I just laid over her bed, over her crib that I had prepared for her and look up at the pictures in the wall, and her clothes in her closet, understanding that this is not happening right now.”  Last month, the State Department issued the highest-level warning not to travel to China due to the coronavirus outbreak and recommended that US citizens defer travel for adoption purposes.  “We strongly recommend that U.S. citizens defer travel to China for adoption purposes and that prospective adoptive parents contact their adoption service providers to discuss future plans,” the department said on January 31.  The Clevelands are unsure when they will able travel to China, but said they are not ready to give up their adoption process.  “I know this is just a part of our story, it’s part of Ruby’s story and how incredible will it be to tell her ‘look what we did to fight for you,’” Noah Cleveland said.
In the span of about two hours, six more people were reported to have died from coronavirus.  China’s National Health Commission confirmed Sunday evening that the death toll in China is now 908. The global death toll is 910, with one death in Hong Kong and one in the Philippines.  The global number of confirmed coronavirus cases is more than 40,000, with the vast majority in mainland China.
New York (CNN Business) The human cost of China's coronavirus outbreak is tragic, mounting and already readily apparent. The cost to businesses around the world could also become severe in the coming weeks.  Manufacturers around the world have come to depend on parts from China to keep their own supply chains going. Experts fear that factories across the globe could ground to a halt if many of the plants across China remain closed this coming week.  Auto plants could be among the first to feel the impact. That's because of the massive size of the Chinese auto parts industry and the fact that you can't build a car with only 99% of its parts.  "It only takes one missing part to stop a line," said Mike Dunne, a consultant to the auto industry in Asia and the former head of GM's operations in Indonesia.  He said there have been many examples in the past where problems like a fire or natural disaster shutting a single supplier plant can affect auto plants around the world. This could be far worse depending on how widespread the shutdown of plants due to the virus becomes.  Read More
Hong Kong (CNN) Millions of people across China are heading back to work after the Lunar New Year break turned into an extended quarantine due to the Wuhan coronavirus .  Many will be working from their homes, however, with strict quarantine guidelines in place in many cities and most businesses urging people to work remotely if possible to reduce the chances of transmission.  Some semblance of normality may have returned, but the outbreak shows no signs of slowing, with the number of confirmed cases now at over 40,000 worldwide and the death toll at 910.  That means the coronavirus has officially killed more people than the SARS pandemic of 2003, previously one of the worst medical crises in recent Chinese history.  A total of 3,281 patients infected with the coronavirus have since been discharged from hospital as of Sunday, Chinese health authorities said  The vast majority of the deaths have been in mainland China, leaving the country in something of a bizarre situation where some areas of it will be returning to something approaching business as usual, even as other regions face increasingly draconian restrictions on their movement and behavior in a desperate attempt to contain the virus.  A team of doctors and researchers from the World Health Organization left for China on Sunday to assist with the outbreak, led by Bruce Aylward, who the organization's Director-General Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus described as a "veteran of past public health emergencies." Aylward led the WHO's response to Ebola, as well as initiatives for immunization, communicable diseases control and polio eradication.  Even as the epicenter of the outbreak remains in Hubei, the province of which Wuhan is the capital and accounts for almost 30,000 of the total confirmed cases, the epidemic has spread worldwide, affecting more than two dozen countries.  The largest outbreak outside of mainland China is on board the Diamond Princess cruise ship docked in the Japanese city of Yokohama. On Monday, an additional 65 cases were confirmed aboard, bringing the total number of cases on the ship to 135 -- nearly doubling the previous total of 70 confirmed cases Sunday.  Japan has 160 total cases, including those aboard the cruise ship. Beyond Japan, Singapore has reported 40 cases, Hong Kong has 38 infections and one death, Thailand has confirmed 32 cases, and South Korea 27.  Cruise ship lockdown  Cruise liners have emerged as a major battleground in the attempt to halt the spread of the virus.  As well as the ship in Yokohama, two vessels in the US and Hong Kong had also been under quarantine, with passengers and crew tested for the virus.  Royal Caribbean's Anthem of the Seas cruise ship, which has been docked in Bayonne, New Jersey, since returning on Friday, will be able to set sail Monday, however, after four passengers who were taken to hospital for further evaluation showed no signs of the virus.  All 3,600 people on board the World Dream ship in Hong Kong will also be able to disembark Monday, after five days under quarantine. Health authorities said that everyone on board had tested negative.  Passengers on board the Princess Cruises liner in Yokohama have not been so lucky. So far at least 135 passengers tested positive for the coronavirus, amid signs of a full blown outbreak on board, one of the largest outside of mainland China. Information from Princess Cruises and a CNN tally put the number of infected Americans on the ship at 24.  Those cruise passengers have been under strict quarantine for over a week now, confined to their cabins as medical personnel conduct tests on the 3,700 people on board.  Princess Cruises said it will offer a full refund to all passengers on board. The company's president, Jan Swartz, thanked passengers for their "perseverance and understanding."  "All monies paid to Princess Cruises including your cruise fare, round trip Princess Air, pre- or post-Cruise Plus hotels, transfers, prepaid shore excursions, gratuities and other items, and taxes, fees and port expenses will be refunded to the original form of payment," Swartz wrote.  Swartz said the company will "refund reasonable independent expenses," along with air travel, transfers or pre/post-cruise hotels. Each guest also will receive a 100% future cruise credit equal to the fare passengers paid for the quarantined voyage, Swartz wrote. That credit has to be applied by February 28, 2021.  "It is our sincere hope that the refund and credit will help ease at least a small bit of the stress you may be feeling right now," Swartz wrote in a letter to passengers.  Citizen journalist missing  There was outrage in China on Friday as news emerged of the death of Li Wenliang . A doctor in Wuhan, Li had attempted to warn friends of a new virus spreading, but was detained by police in the city for "rumormongering." He was later hailed as a whistleblower by both the public and state media, but was soon hospitalized with the virus.  Following Li's death, Chinese authorities struggled to control the narrative, especially as the censors appeared to be trying to massage the timing of the announcement , deleting posts announcing his passing. Hundreds of thousands of posted demands for free speech online, in a rare challenge to the authorities, who deleted posts left and right.  History appeared to be repeating itself over the weekend, as it emerged that citizen journalist Chen Qiushi had been missing for several days . Chen, who had been carrying out critical reporting from inside of Wuhan, went missing on Thursday evening, just as hundreds of thousands of people in China began demanding freedom of speech online.  Friends and family later found out from the police that he had been forced into quarantine. By Sunday, Chen's disappearance had started to gain traction on Weibo, China's Twitter-like platform, with many pleading for his release.  "Hope the government can treat Chen Qiushi in a fair and just way," one user wrote on Sunday morning. "We can no longer afford a second Li Wenliang!"  Tight censorship and control of the narrative in the early days of the outbreak has been blamed for aiding the spread of the virus from Wuhan to the rest of the country. Officials in the city downplayed the severity of the virus in public even as evidence was available that it was spreading from person-to-person.  Draconian controls  While some Chinese cities will be attempting to get back to normal -- or at least to business, with staff working from home -- others are introducing yet more stringent controls.  In a joint statement Saturday, China's National Health Commission, Supreme Court and Ministry of Public Security announced seven "medical-related crimes" that would be severely punished during the epidemic.  They include attacking medical personnel, refusing medical checks and damaging or destroying property at medical facilities.  According to the statement, anyone who violates new virus control regulations will be quickly prosecuted and could face arrest, jail or even the death penalty.  Many cities and provinces have introduced mandatory self-quarantine policies for anyone returning from elsewhere in the country. Transport in and out of Hubei also remains severely disrupted.  As the virus continues to spread, Wuhan announced Saturday its second rapidly constructed new hospital was ready to welcome patients.  Built from scratch to hold victims of the coronavirus, the Leishenshan hospital can hold up to 1,500 patients and will have 32 wards, Chinese state broadcaster CCTV said.  CCTV said that the first team of medical staff arrived at the hospital on Saturday.  The National Health Commission also announced at a news conference on Saturday that it had chosen a temporary official name for the virus -- Novel Coronavirus Pneumonia, or NCP.  The graphic in this story has been updated to reflect the latest information.
The Hubei health authority reported that 103 more people died of the coronavirus in Hubei province on Monday, raising the death toll in the epidemic's epicenter to 974.  This brings the total number of deaths in mainland China to at least 1,011. Globally, a total of 1,013 people have died, including one death in Hong Kong and one in the Philippines.  Hubei authorities confirmed an additional 2,097 cases of the virus in Hubei on Monday, which brings the total number of cases in the region to 31,728.  More than 25,000 patients have been hospitalized in Hubei, including 1,298 who are in critical condition, according to the health authority. More than two thousand patients have been cured and discharged.  The global number of confirmed coronavirus cases now exceeds 42,500. The vast majority of cases remains in mainland China.  China’s National Health Commission is expected to release numbers for all of China’s provinces later.
Pudsey, England (CNN Business) More than 5,000 miles away from Wuhan, a small UK company is preparing to take a potential hit from the coronavirus.  Daletech, a manufacturer of industrial electronics, relies on parts that are made in China, and its executives are worried that factory closures caused by the coronavirus outbreak will prevent the arrival of vital components.  Based in the English town of Pudsey, Daletech relies on components from China that it buys from UK suppliers. Its 14 workers then turn out circuit boards and other electronics that are used in industrial products such as welding machines.  Daletech had planned for factories in China to be closed for the Lunar New Year holiday, but it was caught off guard by the outbreak of a coronavirus that has killed over 900 people , infected more than 40,000 and prevented many manufacturing plants in the country from reopening.  Tracey Dawson, the managing director of Daletech, told CNN Business the company has already missed one expected parts shipment. She's now counting on a second shipment that's due to arrive in just seven days.  Read More
(CNN) The Chinese table tennis team has taken up Qatar's offer of a training base to avoid returning home in the wake of the coronavirus outbreak.  The squad of nearly 30 flew to Doha at the conclusion of the German Open and have settled into the Aspire Academy Arena ahead of the Qatar Open, which gets under way on March 3.  The Qatar Table Tennis Association (QTTA) has provided meals, accommodation, 15 practice tables and 2,000 balls.  "We are always thinking of how we can help our brothers and sisters out." This is what the #TableTennis family is all about 🙌🏓🙌    Find out more how ITTF & @QTableTennis helped Team China 🇨🇳 train in Qatar 🇶🇦 👉 https://t.co/SiDKuChMyp pic.twitter.com/ZXts0RuB52 — ITTF World (@ittfworld) February 11, 2020  The coronavirus death toll has surpassed 1,000 in mainland China, with 2,478 new cases identified Monday.  Read More
A Chinese worker wears a protective mask as he disinfects outside common areas at an office building on Sunday, February 10, 2020 in Beijing, China. Kevin Frayer/Getty Images  The Hubei health authority in China reported that 94 more people died of the coronavirus in Hubei province today, raising the death toll in the epicenter since the beginning of the outbreak to 1,068.  This brings the total number of deaths in mainland China to at least 1,105.  The global death toll is at least 1,107, with one death in Hong Kong and one death in the Philippines.  By the numbers: Hubei authorities confirmed an additional 1,638 cases of the virus in Hubei today, which brings the total number of cases in the epicenter of the outbreak to 33,366. The global number of confirmed coronavirus cases is now at least 44,138, with the vast majority of cases in mainland China.  China’s National Health Commission is expected to release numbers for all of China’s provinces later.
Hong Kong (CNN) China expects around 160 million employees to return to their workplaces in the next week, as the country seeks to minimize the economic impact of the novel coronavirus .  Next Tuesday marks the official end of the Lunar New Year period, an auspicious occasion on the Chinese calendar, that this year has been marred by the viral illness that has claimed more than 1,110 lives in mainland China.  The huge mobilization of people comes despite prior warnings for citizens to avoid large crowds. In a news briefing Tuesday, Chinese officials said action would be taken to reduce the risk of transmission.  These include limiting the carrying capacity of long-distance coaches, enhancing the sterilization of public transport, and carrying out temperature checks on passengers, said Xu Yahua, Director of Transport Services Department.  Deaths at the center of the outbreak, in Hubei province, appeared to have peaked Wednesday, though concern was growing over the situation on a cruise ship docked in Japan, where a quarantine officer himself became the latest case.  An additional 1,638 confirmed cases were reported in Hubei, central China, as of Wednesday morning. That is a lower increase than the previous day, suggesting that the spread of the virus may be leveling off in the central province.  A large question mark hangs over those figures, however. There remains uncertainty surrounding the efficiency of virus testing methods, as well as the length of the incubation period. Hospitals in Wuhan and elsewhere in Hubei are overwhelmed and struggling to cope, making it possible that some people with the virus may have been unable to see a doctor for diagnosis.  Chinese scientists have estimated that the outbreak could peak in mid-February, though previous estimations have had to be adjusted.  Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, director-general of the World Health Organization, warned Tuesday that the coronavirus is "a very grave threat." He added later that while the outbreak remains "very much an emergency" for China, there is a "realistic chance" of stopping it.  "We have to invest in preparedness," Tedros said, adding that richer countries should help invest in countries with a weaker health system. He warned the virus could "create havoc" if it reaches a country whose health system is not capable of handling such an epidemic.  A team of experts from the WHO arrived in China this week , where they are assisting the authorities with containment and treatment measures. The organization also gave the virus its official name Tuesday: Covid-19.  Cruise ship misery  The largest outbreak outside of mainland China remains in Yokohama, a Japanese port south of Tokyo where a cruise ship has been under tight quarantine for a week now.  Japanese Health Minister Katsunobu Kato said an additional 40 virus cases had been confirmed on board the Diamond Princess as of Wednesday, bringing the total number on board to 175.  One of those new cases, Kato said, was a "quarantine officer," who had come aboard the ship to help with testing passengers. He did not provide any further information on the officer; CNN is seeking further clarification.  In a statement, operator Princess Cruises said "we are following guidance from the Japan Ministry of Health on plans for disembarkation protocols to provide medical care for these new cases."  Another cruise ship, the MS Westerdam, remains at sea, with more than 2,000 people on board. The vessel has been denied entry by at least four different ports over fears of the virus -- though no cases have been confirmed on board so far.  The ship had originally departed Singapore on January 16 and called into ports in Thailand, Cambodia, Vietnam and Hong Kong, according to marine trackers. In Hong Kong, the ship disembarked 1,254 guests and took on an additional 768 before departing, cruise company Holland America said.  Westerdam planned to make stops in the Philippines, Taiwan, Japan, South Korea, and finally China but revised the ship's final destination from Shanghai to Yokohama following a warning by the US CDC on January 28, according to the company. The Philippines and Taiwan announced closure of their ports to cruise ships due to the fear of coronavirus, and Japanese authorities announced they would deny the ship entry -- leaving it in a "holding pattern" in the sea.  The cruise liner later announced plans to dock in Laem Chabang, Thailand to allow its passengers to disembark. However, the country's government said Tuesday that while Thailand will assist the ship, it will not allow passengers to leave.  "There are a lot of people on board, more than 2,000 people. We have to be careful, not allowing the situation to turn into stage 3 of disease spreading (in Thailand)," Prime Minister Gen. Prayut Chan-o-cha said.  JUST WATCHED China struggles to return to work after the coronavirus lockdown Replay More Videos ... MUST WATCH China struggles to return to work after the coronavirus lockdown 02:26  Economic woes  The novel coronavirus has already had an impact on the world's second biggest economy. The outbreak coincided with China's most important holiday period, when many families traditionally spent money on food, gifts, and entertainment.  Instead, lockdowns in large cities forced businesses to temporarily close down.  Worker shortages, transport disruption, a lack of medical supplies and heavy-handed local officials are all making life difficult, the Chinese government said Tuesday.  "We have also noticed difficulties in fully resuming work," Cong Liang, a senior official at China's National Development and Reform Commission told reporters in Beijing, listing several factors including supply chain disruption, local government restrictions and a shortage of facial masks.  Senior officials in Beijing were speaking to reporters a day after an extended public holiday ended for much of the country, leading some businesses to try to reopen their doors. Others, though, remain closed, and local governments have issued mixed -- and in some cases muddled -- guidance about what companies should be doing.  Beijing reported five new cases Monday, bringing the number of infections in the capital to 342, authorities said Tuesday.  Also speaking Tuesday, US Federal Reserve chairman Jerome Powell warned that the outbreak and its knock-on effects could hurt the global economy.  "We are closely monitoring the emergence of the coronavirus, which could lead to disruptions in China that spill over to the rest of the global economy," Powell said in a report to Congress.  On Monday, Chinese President Xi Jinping called for greater efforts to minimize the impact of the epidemic on the country's economy, adding that any negative effects would be "short-lived."  JUST WATCHED Hong Kong building cleared due to potential coronavirus outbreak Replay More Videos ... MUST WATCH Hong Kong building cleared due to potential coronavirus outbreak 01:38  Evacuees released  With much of Wuhan remaining locked down, countries have continued to evacuate their citizens from the virus epicenter.  Both South Korea and Canada sent extra flights this week, with Seoul saying it would endeavor to allow Chinese family members of its citizens to board the plane -- previously Chinese nationals have not been allowed on evacuation flights.  A Canadian plane carrying 185 passengers arrived in Vancouver early Tuesday. Its final destination is Trenton, Ontario, where the repatriated Canadians and their family members will be quarantined at an armed forces base for 14 days.  In the US, the first planeload of Americans who left Wuhan have completed their two-week quarantine and are being released.  There were no cases of coronavirus identified in the group, which arrived at the base in Riverside County on January 29. The 195 individuals completed their final health check Tuesday morning.  "I want to make one thing absolutely crystal clear: these folks do not have novel coronavirus," Riverside County health officer Dr. Cameron Kaiser said.  Twenty-four patients will remain on the base Tuesday because they could not make travel arrangements, Jose Arballo Jr., a spokesperson for the Riverside County Department of Public Health, told CNN.  "Some have already left the base, others are departing soon," Arballo said the the news conference.
Hong Kong (CNN) When the World Health Organization declared the outbreak of the novel coronavirus a public health emergency of international concern, it did so over fears that smaller or less-developed countries would struggle to contain the virus .  The flu-like respiratory illness is highly contagious and the outbreak has overwhelmed hospitals in the Chinese city of Wuhan, where it was first identified. Chinese authorities have shut down entire cities, suspended public transport and closed schools, businesses and factories in an effort to contain it.  "Our greatest concern is the potential for the virus to spread to countries with weaker health systems and which are ill-prepared to deal with it," said WHO director general Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, when he announced the decision on January 30.  Since then, the number of confirmed cases reported in mainland China has more than quadrupled to more than 44,653. As of Wednesday morning, more than 1,100 people had died from the virus, while 4,740 patients had recovered and been discharged from hospital.  The virus has spread across Asia and into Europe and the United States, with more than 500confirmed cases in over two dozen countries and territories, with just two deaths outside mainland China.  While the majority of cases outside of mainland China have so far been connected to travelers from China, or those who have have recently been there, a small but growing number of patients have caught the virus locally.  That's worrying, because if self-sustaining outbreaks start occurring in nations with poor healthcare systems, the impact could be devastating.  "It's an enormous concern," said Jeremy Konyndyk, senior policy fellow at the Center for Global Development.  "We still don't have a clear picture of how likely that is, but given transmissions dynamics in China and the speed with which cases have emerged in other countries, global spread seems highly plausible."  If China is struggling, how will other nations cope?  far higher than many low-income nations. China is ranked 51st out of 195 countries globally for its outbreak readiness, according to the Global Health Security Index . That's not on par with the wealthiest countries in the world, butfar higher than many low-income nations.  Authorities in China have suspended public transport and sealed off entire cities at the epicenter of the outbreak, effectively putting 60 million people on lockdown. They've built two new hospitals in less than two weeks, and dispatched thousands of medical workers to Wuhan.  Yet despite these unprecedented efforts , the country is struggling to keep the rapidly expanding outbreak under control.  People have spoken of sick family members turned away from hospitals, delays in testing and wards packed with feverish patients and limited screening or quarantine.  "If China is struggling to contain this, weaker countries will have an even harder time. And that suggests that the kind of transmission we're seeing in China might soon be mirrored elsewhere," said Konyndyk.  Where are the biggest concerns?  JUST WATCHED US citizen and 8-year-old daughter flee coronavirus epicenter Replay More Videos ... MUST WATCH US citizen and 8-year-old daughter flee coronavirus epicenter 02:37  Countries close to China in Southeast and East Asia have borne the brunt of the infections outside of the mainland, with Japan, South Korea, Vietnam and Thailand seeing local transmissions.  Some of those nations with coronavirus infections and their neighbors are among the poorest and most disaster-prone countries in the world.  Experts have raised fears that the health care infrastructure in these countries could crumble under the weight of an outbreak, and severely damage their economies , cause mass displacement and lead to other non-virus deaths.  Natural disasters in the Philippines already cause millions of dollars in damage and displace thousands each year.  Powerful typhoons and a series of earthquakes battered the country in 2019, and this year a volcanic eruption in southern Luzon Island is still posing a threat to nearby residents. A dengue epidemic last summer killed more than 1,000 people and infected more than 250,000, demonstrating the strain on its health service.  To date, one person has died in the Philippines from coronavirus -- the first death outside mainland China -- and three people have been confirmed to have contracted the virus.  Students wearing protective face masks have their temperatures taken while entering their college campus in Manila.  The Asia-Pacific region is home to 60% of the world's population -- many of those countries are low or middle-income nations that are quickly industrializing.  According to the Global Preparedness Monitoring Board's 2019 report "A World At Risk," rapid urbanization can hasten the spread of disease during an outbreak.  Population booms and the migration of millions of people from rural areas to overcrowded cities with underdeveloped infrastructure and a lack of sanitation could further aggravate the spread of viruses.  India, with its population of 1.3 billion people, is one of the most rapidly developing countries in the world. By 2050, a United Nations report predicts India will have an additional 416 million urban residents. There have been three confirmed coronavirus cases in India, all three are students who had traveled from Wuhan.  While millions of people have lifted themselves out of poverty in India over the past 20 years, millions of others have been left behind.  Densely-packed city slums where thousands of people live in close proximity to one another in often sub-standard conditions could make it difficult to control a virulent viral outbreak.  Smaller, sparsely populated nations in the Pacific Ocean are also extremely vulnerable to an outbreak, though coronavirus has not been confirmed on any of these territories.  Samoa is still reeling from a measles epidemic that infected 5,707 people and killed 83, many of them children. The Samoan government declared a state of emergency in December and shut schools and government services while launching a mass vaccination campaign.  Samoan Prime Minister Tuilaepa Sailele Malielegaoi said recently that "another infectious disease outbreak will have catastrophic effects on the whole of Samoa."  Some countries have not yet reported any cases, including Indonesia, a nation of 264 million, which typically receives large numbers of Chinese tourists. Likewise, no confirmed cases have been reported in Myanmar, which borders China, India, Bangladesh, Thailand and Laos.  An outbreak in Myanmar, for example, could strain a country that's still grappling with the legacy of decades of brutal military rule, where one in four people live in poverty, and infectious diseases such as tuberculosis are among the leading causes of death.  Frontline workers risk their lives  JUST WATCHED Coronavirus whistleblower doctor being treated for virus Replay More Videos ... MUST WATCH Coronavirus whistleblower doctor being treated for virus 02:56  One of the biggest concerns of a global spread would be the threat of contagion to frontline health workers, said Konyndyk from the Center for Global Development.  "Infection prevention procedures in the developing world tend to be poorly managed and weakly resourced," he said.  During the Ebola outbreaks in West Africa in 2014 and the Democratic Republic of Congo in 2019, health workers were between 21 and 32 times more likely to be infected than people in the general population, according to a report by the WHO  "Health worker infections are a huge blow, because beyond adding to case counts, they degrade the health system's capacity to fight the outbreak and they undermine the health system's work on a range of other health risks as well," Konyndyk said.  Community distrust of medical workers in some places could be disastrous, potentially leading more deaths and further spreading the virus.  When Ebola struck last year in the DRC, fear, rumors and mistrust of public health authorities and politicians meant people stayed home instead of going for treatment. Despite millions of dollars in funding and an effective experimental vaccine, Ebola spread to new provinces and re-infected areas thought to be rid of the virus.  "Spread of this novel coronavirus to such an area would easily overwhelm their testing and treatment capabilities without international assistance," said Courtney Kansler, Senior Health Intelligence Analyst with WorldAware.  "Venezuela is another good example, where there is a near-complete lack of basic medical services and healthcare infrastructure nationwide," she said.  Currently there is no evidence of confirmed coronavirus cases on the African continent or in South America.  World not ready for a pandemic  Medical staff are seen at a makeshift hospital converted from an exhibition center in Wuhan.  The WHO has appealed for a coordinated international response to help stop the outbreak from spreading, and for wealthier countries to support those with weaker health systems.  But as more countries shut their borders to travelers from China, there are concerns the restrictions will hinder sharing of public health data, or disrupt supply chains.  The WHO has not declared a pandemic -- which is essentially when there's a sustained spread of the disease in numerous countries.  But while there have been big advances in transparency, data sharing, and research tools, "the world remains meaningfully unready for a dangerous pandemic," said Konyndyk.  "Our existing medical and public health systems would be overwhelmed rapidly and there is no clear plan-B scenario for what countries should do once that happens," he said.
The Hubei health authority reported that 242 more people died from the coronavirus in Hubei province on Wednesday, raising the death toll in the epicenter since the beginning of the outbreak to 1,310.  This brings the total number of deaths in mainland China to at least 1,355. The global death toll is at least 1,357, with one death in Hong Kong and another in the Philippines.  Hubei authorities confirmed an additional 14,840 cases of the virus in Hubei on Wednesday, which brings the total number of cases in the epicenter of the outbreak to 48,206. The 14,840 figure includes both test confirmed cases and clinically diagnosed cases.  The government explained they are now adding "clinically diagnosed cases" in the tally of cases to make it easier for these patients to receive treatment early.  There have been 33,693 patients hospitalized in Hubei, including 1,437 who are in critical condition, according to the health authority, adding that 3,441 patients have recovered and been discharged.  By the numbers: The global number of confirmed coronavirus cases has now exceeded 60,015 with the vast majority of cases in mainland China.  China’s National Health Commission is expected to release numbers for all of China’s provinces later.
Japanese Prime Minister Shinzo Abe will approve a series of emergency measures to combat the coronavirus in a cabinet meeting on Friday, according to the prime minister’s office.  The government will earmark 15.3 billion yen (approximately $140 million) for emergency measures, including ones to bolster testing and medical treatment capacity, to double mask production to more than 600 million a month, and credits for small and medium-sized businesses hurt by the outbreak, according to the prime minister’s office.  The prime minister will also approve a measure calling for 1,800 beds to be readied for patients and for virus research results to be shared internationally.
A woman who had been held hostage by a gunman is helped from the scene of a mass shooting Sunday, February 9, in Thailand's Nakhon Ratchasima province. A soldier killed at least 29 people and injured dozens more during a rampage that started at a military base and ended at a shopping mall. The gunman was killed by police, officials said. Rungroj Yongrit/EPA-EFE/Shutterstock  US Sen. Bernie Sanders laughs as he speaks to supporters at a primary-night rally in Manchester, New Hampshire, on Tuesday, February 11. Sanders won the state's Democratic primary, just as he did four years ago. Matt Rourke/AP  Couples wear face masks as they attend a mass wedding ceremony in Gapyeong, South Korea, on Friday, February 7. The deadly novel coronavirus is spreading through Asia and across the world. Heo Ran/Reuters  Dog handler Crystal Murray-Klas sits with Siba, the standard poodle that won Best in Show at the Westminster Kennel Club Dog Show on Tuesday, February 11. Stephanie Keith/Getty Images  "Parasite" director Bong Joon Ho reacts as Jane Fonda hands him the Academy Award for best picture on Sunday, February 9. It is the first non-English film to win the award. "Parasite" also won Oscars for best director, best international feature film and best original screenplay. See the best photos from the 2020 Academy Awards Chris Pizzello/Invision/AP  Democratic presidential candidate Pete Buttigieg arrives at his primary-night rally in Nashua, New Hampshire, on Tuesday, February 11. He finished the primary in second place, just behind US Sen. Bernie Sanders. Jim Bourg/Reuters  US President Donald Trump speaks to reporters at the White House on Friday, February 7. A federal appeals court had just dismissed a lawsuit by congressional Democrats alleging that Trump had violated the emoluments clause of the Constitution by refusing to allow lawmakers to review and approve his financial interests. The ruling is a major triumph for the President, who's intensely sought to keep his business affairs in private. "It was another phony case and we won it 3 to nothing," Trump told reporters. Jabin Botsford/The Washington Post/Getty Images  Samsung unveils its Galaxy Z Flip, a foldable smartphone, at a launch event in San Francisco on Tuesday, February 11. Bloomberg/Getty Images  Coco Rocha models a Christian Siriano look at a New York Fashion Week event on Thursday, February 6. John Minchillo/AP  Coronavirus evacuees toss their masks after their 14-day quarantine ended in Riverside, California, on Tuesday, February 11. The Americans arrived on the State Department's first evacuation flight out of Wuhan, China — the center of the coronavirus outbreak. Riverside University Health Department/Reuters  Democratic presidential candidate Andrew Yang takes a photo with an audience member as he arrives at an "Our Rights, Our Courts" forum in Concord, New Hampshire, on Saturday, February 8. Yang dropped out of the race after the New Hampshire primary. Andrew Harnik/AP  Passengers are seen Wednesday, February 12, on the Diamond Princess cruise ship, which has been quarantined in Yokohama, Japan. Dozens of people on the ship are infected with the novel coronavirus. Behrouz Mehri/AFP/Getty Images  Members of the Kurdish Peshmerga Special Forces demonstrate their skills during their graduation ceremony in Iraq's Soran district on Wednesday, February 12. Azad Lashkari/Reuters  A model presents a creation from the Marc Jacobs collection during New York Fashion Week on Wednesday, February 12. Idris Solomon/Reuters  Melania Trump, the first lady of the United States, sits in the White House Oval Office as her husband speaks with Ecuadorian President Lenin Moreno, not pictured, on Wednesday, February 12. Jim Lo Scalzo/EPA-EFE/Shutterstock  From left, presidential candidates Pete Buttigieg, Elizabeth Warren, Joe Biden and Bernie Sanders take part in a Democratic debate in Manchester, New Hampshire, on Friday, February 7. Brian Snyder/Reuters  A plane flies in front of a full moon in this photo taken from London's Richmond Park on Saturday, February 8. This month's full moon is commonly called a snow moon. Aaron Chown/AP  Coralie Stepanian marks a Republican write-in vote for Democratic presidential candidate Michael Bloomberg during a midnight vote in Dixville Notch, New Hampshire, on Tuesday, February 11. Dixville Notch is one the first places to declare primary results because voters cast ballots so early. Paul Hayes/Caledonian-Record/AP  Buddhist monks take their places before Makha Bucha prayers Saturday, February 8, at the Wat Dhammakaya Temple in Bangkok, Thailand. Lillian/Suwanrumpha/AFP/Getty Images  A pug waits on the sidelines of the Westminster Dog Show on Monday, February 10. Stephanie Keith/Getty Images  College baseball players from Kennesaw State University roll a giant snowball after practice was canceled Saturday, February 8, in Kennesaw, Georgia. Georgia and other Southern states were seeing their first snow of the season. John Amis/AP  People comfort the mother of Ratchanon Karnchanamethee, a 13-year-old boy who was among those killed in a mass shooting, at his funeral in Korat, Thailand, on Monday, February 10. Lauren DeCicca/Getty Images  Actor Tom Hanks does pushups with an Army soldier he met on the Oscars red carpet on Sunday, February 9. Kelsey McNeal/Getty Images  A worker cleans the floor of the Wuhan Sports Center, which has been converted into a temporary hospital to deal with coronavirus patients in Wuhan, China, on Wednesday, February 12. Chine Nouvelle/SIPA/Shutterstock  US Sen. Amy Klobuchar, a Democratic presidential candidate, speaks at a "Get Out the Vote" event in Hanover, New Hampshire, on Saturday, February 8. Klobuchar finished third in the New Hampshire primary. Drew Angerer/Getty Images  Men try to control the flow of floodwater outside a property in Appleby-in-Westmorland, England, on Sunday, February 9. Storm Ciara lashed the United Kingdom with heavy rain and winds of up to 80 mph. Owen Humphreys/AP  Brad Pitt waits for his Oscar to be engraved on Sunday, February 9. He won best supporting actor for his role in "Once Upon a Time in Hollywood." See all the winners Eric Gaillard/Reuters
US President Donald Trump speaks to National border Patrol Council members in the South Court Auditorium of the Eisenhower Executive Office Building at the White House on Feb. 14 in Washington, DC. Brendan Smialowski / AFP via Getty Images  President Trump on Friday repeated the theory that the novel coronavirus will die out as temperatures rise in the spring, but scientists insist it’s just too soon to say for sure.  Infectious disease experts studying the virus say it may have a seasonal variation, or it may not. Several tell CNN it’s too early to tell, and nobody knows enough about the novel coronavirus to make assessments about its behavior.  “There’s a theory that in April, when it gets warm, historically, that has been able to kill the virus. So, we don’t know yet. We’re not sure yet. But that’s around the corner, so that will be a great thing in China and other places,” Trump said at a Border Patrol event at the White House.  CDC Director Dr. Robert Redfield told CNN in an interview, which aired Thursday, that the coronavirus may or may not be around past this year and it may or may not follow a seasonal variation — insisting only time will tell.  "We don't know a lot about this virus," he said. "This virus is probably with us beyond this season, beyond this year, and I think eventually the virus will find a foothold and we will get community-based transmission."  Trump also estimated that there were “around 12” confirmed cases of novel coronavirus in the US. As of Friday, 15 individuals tested by the CDC tested positive for the coronavirus.
Hong Kong (CNN) If it weren't for the novel coronavirus outbreak, Xu Mingxi would have been in class at a prestigious New York university this week.  Instead, the 22-year-old has spent the past three weeks confined to his family's apartment in Wuhan, the Chinese city at the center of the outbreak, which is currently on lockdown to prevent the virus spreading.  But even if Xu could leave home, the United States -- where he's studied for the past four-and-a-half years -- won't let him in.  Over 1,000 kilometers (620 miles) away in Beijing, Alex -- who asked not to use her real name for fear of online retribution -- is in a similar situation. She's spent the past two weeks at home with her mom and grandpa, being delivered groceries by community leaders. She's worried she won't be able to fly to Sydney to study later this month and may have to delay her law degree by a semester.  As novel coronavirus spreads, over 60 countries have imposed travel restrictions on Chinese citizens, hoping to limit their exposure to the virus that has killed more than 1,600 people, almost allin mainland China,and infected over 68,000 worldwide. Both Australia and the US have put temporary bans on foreign nationals who visited China in the 14 days prior to their arrival.  That has locked Xu and Alex out of their studies -- and they are by no means alone.  In 2017, an estimated 900,000 Chinese tertiary students studied abroad. Around half of those went to either the United States or Australia , contributing billions of dollars to their economies -- money that those countries now stand to lose.  travel ban hit on January 31, shortly before many universities were due to resume. But when Australia imposed its restrictions at the start of February, authorities estimated that It is not clear how many of the 360,000 Chinese students studying in the US were outside the country when the UStravel ban hit on January 31, shortly before many universities were due to resume.But when Australia imposed its restrictions at the start of February, authorities estimated that 56% of Chinese students -- about 106,680 people -- were still abroad. Term was due to begin in late February or early March.  "For Australia, it couldn't have come at a worse time. It's exactly the time of the year in which people are coming from China to Australia," said Andrew Norton, a professor in the practice of higher education policy at the Australian National University. The virus outbreak coincided with the Lunar New Year -- the most important holiday in the Chinese calendar, when many students go home to see their family.  A city on lockdown  At first, it was just a normal holiday period for Xu, catching up with friends in Wuhan and eating food. The coronavirus outbreak didn't seem like a huge issue.  Timeline  How events unfolded December 8: The first patient of Wuhan coronavirus developed symptoms December 31: The first cases reported to the World Health Organization January 1: The market in Wuhan where the outbreak is believed to have started shuts down for disinfection January 8: Chinese scientists identify the pathogen as a new strain of coronavirus January 23: Authorities put Wuhan into partial lockdown January 31: US announces it will deny entry to foreign nationals who have traveled in China in the last 14 days February 1: Australia bans all travellers entering from mainland China    Source: CNN reporting    Xu wore a mask and avoided the area around the seafood market linked to the outbreak, which is only a few kilometers from his house.  Then on January 23, the night before he was set to fly back to New York, Wuhan authorities announced they were locking down the city . There was still time to leave, but Xu decided not to go -- he thought he would be safer inside Wuhan, and that the lockdown wouldn't last long.  On January 27, his graduate program in interactive telecommunications at New York University (NYU) restarted. On January 31, the US government announced it wouldn't let any foreign nationals flying from mainland China into the country.  Xu was told he could take classes remotely, but to him it wasn't worth paying $62,000 per year in course fees for distance learning. He decided to take a break this semester. That will delay his graduation by six months.  The situation in Australia  The University of Sydney , where Alex studies, is making allowances for Chinese students.  Those affected by coronavirus travel bans can study remotely, start their semester a few weeks late, or defer their degree. Alex will defer this semester if she hasn't been able to fly back by mid-March.  She pays about $45,000 Australian dollars ($30,280) each year -- more than local students, who are eligible for reduced fees.  has When Australia imposed its travel ban on February 1, it was effective immediately. While the WHOhas advised against such measures , Australian Prime Minister Scott Morrison said: "Our medical advice is it's in the interest of Australians to do so."  At the time, there were 80 Chinese people in transit -- including 47 students.  Australian Border Force commissioner Michael Outram told the ABC that 18 decided to go back to China, while the others were put into self-isolation for 14 days. "This was a very difficult situation for the students, of course, we recognize that," Outram said. "They were caught between, you know, an epidemic in China and coming to Australia and having issues raised with their visas."  A man walks on an empty street in Wuhan, China, on February 13, 2020.  David, a 24-year-old studying engineering at the University of Sydney, who has been in self-imposed quarantine at his home in southern Guangdong province for weeks, said the Australian government's actions made him feel "completely neglected."  "I'm a taxpayer, I do my part in society, I've donated blood," said David, who asked not to use his real name for fear that his comments could hurt his chance of getting an Australian visa. "After all the things I've done, you still consider me not part of your society."  The logistical problems created by the virus are not short-term issues.  Universities will need to work out how to accommodate the backlog of students like Xu and Alex who have been delayed, as well as students who would have taken those courses anyway -- and some universities just won't have capacity, Norton said.  Protesters hold placards during a rally against an inbound travel ban on foreign travellers from China in Sydney on February 7, 2020.  What this means for the universities  If thousands of students are forced to forgo this semester, universities in Australia and the United States stand to lose billions of dollars.  In Australia, 23.3% of universities' total revenue came from international students in 2017 -- and Chinese students made up over 38% of all international enrollments in 2018. In total, international education contributed 37.6 billion Australian dollars ($25 billion) to the Australian economy in the 2018-2019 financial year.  In the US, Chinese students contributed $14.9 billion to the US economy in 2018, according to government data.  Norton, the professor of higher education policy at the Australian National University, believes that most Chinese students in Australia will need to delay their study by at least a trimester or semester. That means that, in the short term, universities in Australia face an estimated 2 to 3 billion Australian dollar cash flow hit from students who can't make it to class, he said.  "The government realizes this will have huge economic costs that effect them as well as the universities and tourism providers," he said.  In the US, there had already been weakening demand from Chinese students partly due to tensions on American campuses amid the ongoing trade war , said Rahul Choudaha, a US-based analyst of international student trends and a visiting scholar at the Center for Studies in Higher Education at UC Berkeley.  "It's kind of a very unexpected, unwanted, undesirable speed bump," he said.  It's also an issue facing universities outside of the United States and Australia. South Korea, for instance, has around 70,000 Chinese students at its universities. The new semester kicks off in March, but already many universities have opted to delay the start of semester by two weeks, to accommodate students living in cities on lockdown.  A man wears a protective mask as he walks in Wuhan on February 13, 2020.  Anger at Chinese people  The coronavirus crisis struck at a time when hostile debates over Chinese Communist Party influence on Australian and US campuses were already complicating life for Chinese students overseas.  Chinese students have been accused of stealing American secrets to diminish US influence, especially as the trade war between China and American rages. In Australia, politicians have raised concern over whether the Chinese influence on campus is limiting free speech  For Chinese people in Australia and the US, that public debate has sometimes been alienating  Now, the coronavirus outbreak has prompted more anti-Chinese sentiment  While stuck at home, Alex has been taken by the different reactions to the outbreak on China's heavily controlled internet and the internet beyond the so-called Great Firewall. In China, there are messages of support for Wuhan, but internationally she's seen anger directed at Chinese people.  "It's waves and waves of hate," she said, pointing to online commentators who argued that Chinese people deserved the outbreak because they eat bat -- something that has not been linked to the outbreak. "I felt misunderstood, I felt abandoned. I felt I don't matter."  Alex says that on her social media feeds the situation has been turned into a Chinese versus Australian dichotomy, when really, it's about the virus versus people.  She's afraid that when she gets back to Australia, she could be the target of racial abuse. People who look Chinese are "paying the price just because other people are scared," she said.  Economic hit  Already, experts are predicting that the economic hit of the coronavirus could be much more significant than the SARS epidemic in 2003.  If China's economy is struggling, Chinese parents may have less money to spend on educating their children overseas.  David believes that the perceived animosity toward Chinese students in Australia may result in students opting to go elsewhere. When parents are looking at which country to send their children, they don't just look at the quality of education -- but also at how welcoming and stable a society is, he says.  As the quality of China's own universities continues to improve, staying at home could also become a more attractive proposition, said Choudah, the higher education analyst.  A few days ago, a fellow Chinese national asked Alex whether she would recommend studying law in Australia. Alex answered honestly: she's torn.  Studying abroad can be a positive experience, she said, but it also carries the risk of racial abuse, especially now that people of Asian origin are viewed with suspicion as the virus spreads.
There were 100 more deaths due to the coronavirus in China's Hubei province Sunday, the health authorities there said. That raises the death toll at the center of the outbreak to 1,696.  The global death toll now stands at 1,770, with the vast majority of those deaths in mainland China.  More than 1,900 additional cases of the virus were confirmed Sunday, Hubei authorities said, bringing the total number of cases in the center of the outbreak to 58,182.  The global tally: There have been more than 71,204 cases of the virus recorded worldwide, with the vast majority in mainland China.  China’s National Health Commission is expected to release numbers for all of China’s provinces later.
Hong Kong's Department of Health announced that it will prosecute two people suspected of violating compulsory quarantine requirements.  In a statement released on Monday, the Department of Health said that since the compulsory quarantine began on February 8, four Hong Kong residents under quarantine have attempted to leave Hong Kong in breach of the requirements.  The Department of Health added that following investigations, the department applied to serve summons to two of the people involved. The other two people are still under investigation.  According to quarantine regulation, all travelers who have been in mainland China within 14 days preceding their arrival in Hong Kong must be subject to a 14-day quarantine.  If convicted of violating the quarantine regulation, the two Hong Kong residents face a maximum fine of $3,220 and up to six months in prison.
A staff member registers a resident's body temperature during a health screening campaign at Qingheju Community in Qingshan District of Wuhan, China, on Tuesday, February 18. Cheng Min/Xinhua/Sipa USA  German researchers called symptom-based screening to detect the novel coronavirus “ineffective” in a new analysis published Tuesday in the New England Journal of Medicine.  The researchers assessed the screening process for 126 people evacuated to Germany from Wuhan, China.  All 126 travelers, mostly German nationals, left Wuhan on February 1 and were screened for symptoms and clinical signs of infection before they were evacuated. Despite requiring travelers to undergo a multiple screenings once in Germany, two travelers were ultimately positive for the novel coronavirus. According to the researchers, “a symptom-based screening process was ineffective in detecting” the virus.  During the evacuation flight from Germany, 10 passengers were isolated: two because of contact with a confirmed coronavirus patient; six exhibited symptoms; and two passengers who had accompanied one of the six symptomatic travelers. Upon arrival, all 10 of these passengers were transferred to University Hospital Frankfurt and all tested negative for coronavirus.  The remaining 116 passengers underwent another medical assessment and one passenger had an elevated temperature and cough. This patient ultimately tested negative for coronavirus.  Of the remaining 115 patients, 114 consented to a throat swab to test for coronavirus. Of those 114 travelers, two tested positive for coronavirus. These two patients were isolated at a hospital. One patient had a faint rash and sore throat. According to the researchers, the two isolated patients were “well” and had no fever in the seven days after hospitalization. Aside from the ineffectiveness of the screening process, the authors found that the virus could potentially be spread by those who exhibited mild symptoms: “Shedding of potentially infectious virus may occur in persons who have no fever and no signs or only minor signs of infection.”  Over 73,000 people around the world have been infected with the coronavirus, most of those cases in mainland China. There have been more than 1,800 deaths, including five people outside of mainland China.
As millions of Chinese people jam onto trains and planes, headed to their hometowns and overseas for the Lunar New Year in the world?셲 biggest annual mass migration, fears are growing that a new respiratory coronavirus could spread. Chinese health authorities said Wednesday morning that the number of people killed by the outbreak had increased to nine and the number of cases had reached 440 since illnesses from coronavirus were reported in December. All the deaths occurred in Hubei province, whose capital, Wuhan, is the epicenter of the outbreak, officials said. Li Bin, deputy director of the National Health Commission, told reporters that Japan and South Korea had confirmed one case each and Thailand three. The U.S. and Taiwan also confirmed one case each on Tuesday. The outbreak began at a seafood and live animal market in Wuhan that sold bats, cats, marmots and other wild animals in addition to fish, according to public health officials. Most early patients were linked to the market, where the virus is believed to have jumped from animals to humans. The confirmation of cases in other parts of China and beyond raised the specter of an outbreak on the scale of the SARS virus, which killed nearly 800 people and sickened about 8,000 in 2003, mostly in Asia. In South Korea, a 35-year-old woman from Wuhan tested positive for the virus, called 2019-nCoV, one day after arriving at Seoul?셲 Incheon International Airport. With China?셲 expanding wealth, air travel by its citizens has become increasingly common. Some use the time off from work around the New Year holiday to go abroad, forgoing the more traditional pilgrimage home. Airports around the world are on alert. Travelers from Wuhan arriving at Los Angeles International Airport, San Francisco International Airport and New York?셲 John F. Kennedy International Airport are being screened, including filling out questionnaires and having their temperatures taken, said the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, which has deployed about 100 additional staff members to the three airports. Those with symptoms of the virus, which include fever, cough and difficulty breathing, will undergo additional health assessments, the agency said. In Singapore, travelers arriving from China are being screened for fever. A 44-year-old Singaporean woman who had been to Wuhan was found to have pneumonia and was being treated and tested for coronavirus in an isolation ward ??the seventh suspected case of the virus in Singapore. The CDC said on its website that much about the virus remains unclear, from the severity of the illness to how it spreads. The risk to Americans remains low, the agency said, but officials are taking ?쐏roactive preparedness precautions.??In some cases, the virus can cause pneumonia, severe acute respiratory syndrome, kidney failure and death. Coronaviruses have a crown-like appearance under a microscope and are characterized by transmission from animals to humans. Some are no more serious than the common cold, while others can be deadly. On Monday, a respiratory disease expert with the Chinese government said cases of human-to-human transmission had been confirmed, raising the possibility that the virus could spread rapidly. Some medical workers have also tested positive for the virus, the English-language China Daily newspaper reported. In addition to those in Wuhan, five people in Beijing, two in Shanghai and 14 in the southern province of Guangdong have been diagnosed with the new virus, according to Chinese health authorities. Most had ties to Wuhan, while two in Guangdong had close contact with other patients. Chinese President Xi Jinping said that prevention and control of the outbreak is crucial, particularly because of the massive flow of Lunar New Year travelers. Xi ordered maximum efforts to treat patients, identify the causes of the infection and its spread, strengthen monitoring and standardize treatments, according to the state-run New China News Agency. Xi also said information should be released in a timely manner, and he stressed the importance of international cooperation. Officials in Wuhan are restricting the flow of people leaving the city, Foreign Ministry spokesman Geng Shuang said at a news conference on Monday. At Beijing?셲 West Station on Tuesday, railway travelers dragged heavy suitcases, bound for destinations across the country to celebrate the arrival of the new year on Saturday. Some said they were not worried about the virus. ?쏧t?셲 not close to here,??said a 26-year-old factory worker who gave only his surname, Wang, on his way to his hometown of Xian. Wang wore a light blue surgical mask, saying he had a cold that he did not want to give to others. Wang Pao, 35, who works in the service industry, said he had donned a gray surgical mask for his journey to Hebei province as a precaution against catching the virus. He said he feared it would spread with the millions of journeys taken during the holiday period. ?쏧t?셲 the new year, so people are traveling all over the country,??he said. Near a bank of automated ticket dispensers, a man in a white mask said the virus could easily take root in Beijing. The man?셲 friend Hu Qihao, wearing a black mask, said he also was uneasy about the virus. The two were headed to nearby Hebei province on the slow train, which would take four hours ??but at least they had bought reserved seats. ?쏝eijing already has cases of the pneumonia,??said Hu, 21, who works at a liquor store. Taiwan on Tuesday reported its first confirmed case of the virus, brought in by a Taiwanese woman who was recently in Wuhan, according to the island?셲 Central News Agency. Memories of the SARS outbreak, which killed nearly 40 people on the island, are still fresh, said Lee Chun-yi, a legislator representing parts of the southern city of Tainan. About 850,000 Taiwanese live in mainland China, government figures show, with many typically returning home to spend the New Year holiday with family. Chiu Cheng-hsun, a professor and physician in Linkou Chang Gung Memorial Hospital?셲 pediatric respiratory department, said the island is vulnerable because of its proximity to China and the flow of business travelers and tourists to the mainland. ?쏥iven this kind of background, if prevention is not done well, Taiwan could be the first place to be hit,??he said. North Korea had stopped receiving foreign tourists as of Wednesday as a precaution against the virus, according to China-based tour operator Young Pioneer Tours. The vast majority of foreign tourists to North Korea come from China, a rare source of foreign currency for the isolated country that is not subject to international sanctions. Times staff writers David Pierson in Singapore, Victoria Kim in Seoul, special correspondent Ralph Jennings in Taipei, Taiwan, and the Associated Press contributed to this report. 
A man in Washington state has been sickened by the new coronavirus spreading through Asia, marking the first confirmed case in the United States, experts from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention announced Tuesday. The patient, a resident of Snohomish County, Wash., recently returned to the United States after visiting the region around Wuhan, China, the epicenter of the outbreak. Once inside the U.S., he began to experience pneumonia-like symptoms and notified his doctor about his travel history. Test results for the virus returned positive over the weekend. The man, who is in his 30s, was transported to Providence Regional Medical Center in Everett, where he is being monitored and is good condition, officials said. Chinese officials said that at least 440 cases had been reported as of early Wednesday, most of them in Wuhan and surrounding Hubei province, where nine have died. Officials have also identified 21 cases in Beijing, Shanghai and southern Guangdong province. Additional cases of infected patients have been confirmed in South Korea, Japan and Thailand, according to the Chinese government. And Taiwan?셲 disease surveillance officials said Tuesday that one traveler to Wuhan has returned sickened with the virus. The patient in Everett is the only known case outside of Asia, and he represents the farthest spread of the novel coronavirus. ?쏻e do expect additional cases in the U.S. and globally,??said Dr. Nancy Messonnier, director of the CDC?셲 National Center for Immunization and Respiratory Diseases. At the same time, public heath officials emphasized that the virus poses a low risk to the American public, and that it?셲 unlikely to spread widely here. Chinese health officials initially said that most patients infected with the virus in Wuhan were exposed to live animals in a large seafood market, suggesting that the virus jumped from another species into humans and may not spread directly from person to person. But the Washington state patient, along with several others, said he had not visited the market. On Monday, Zhong Nanshan, a Chinese government scientist, announced on Chinese state television that the virus can be transmitted between humans. Even before that development, public health officials were concerned that the virus would spread more widely as travel picks up for the Lunar New Year. Airline passengers arriving from the outbreak region are already being screened for the virus??pneumonia-like symptoms at Los Angeles International Airport, San Francisco International Airport and John F. Kennedy International Airport in New York. The CDC said it would begin monitoring travelers at Chicago?셲 O?섽are International Airport and Hartsfield-Jackson Atlanta International Airport this week. The Washington state patient entered the country before any of those screenings were implemented. But even if they had been in place, he would not have been detected because he was asymptomatic at the time, experts said. ?쏬eave no doubt: Entry screening is just one part of a multilayered system,??said Dr. Martin Cetron, the head of the CDC?셲 Division of Global Migration and Quarantine. ?쏧ndividuals are empowered to make good decisions if they?셱e informed.??Outside experts cautioned that the increased airport screenings will be expensive, and that it will take some time to get answers to basic questions like what animal was the source of this virus and what makes some people more susceptible to infection than others. ?쏝asic epidemiology questions remain unanswered,??said Rebecca Katz, the director of the Center for Global Health Science and Security at Georgetown University. ?쏷he CDC is the best of the best, and we should have faith in their leadership.??Officials have begun to trace the Washington man?셲 contacts from China to his home in the United States in order to identify other people who may be infected, said Dr. Scott Lindquist, a communicable disease epidemiologist at the Washington State Department of Health. 
A man in Washington state has been sickened by the new coronavirus spreading through Asia, marking the first confirmed case in the United States, experts from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention announced Tuesday. The patient, a resident of Snohomish County, Wash., recently returned to the United States after visiting the region around Wuhan, China, the epicenter of the outbreak. Once inside the U.S., he began to experience pneumonia-like symptoms and notified his doctor about his travel history. Test results for the virus returned positive over the weekend. The man, who is in his 30s, was transported to Providence Regional Medical Center in Everett, where he is being monitored and is in good condition, officials said.  Chinese officials said that at least 440 cases had been reported as of early Wednesday, most of them in Wuhan and surrounding Hubei province, where nine have died. Officials have also identified 21 cases in Beijing, Shanghai and southern Guangdong province. Additional cases of infected patients have been confirmed in South Korea, Japan and Thailand, according to the Chinese government. And Taiwan's disease surveillance officials said Tuesday that one traveler to Wuhan had returned sickened with the virus. The patient in Everett is the only known case outside of Asia, and he represents the farthest spread of the novel coronavirus. "We do expect additional cases in the U.S. and globally," said Dr. Nancy Messonnier, director of the CDC's National Center for Immunization and Respiratory Diseases. At the same time, public health officials emphasized that the virus posed a low risk to the American public, and that it was unlikely to spread widely here. Chinese health officials initially said that most patients infected in Wuhan were exposed to live animals in a large seafood market, suggesting that the virus jumped from another species into humans and may not spread directly from person to person. But the Washington state patient, along with several others, said he had not visited the market. On Monday, Zhong Nanshan, a Chinese government scientist, announced on Chinese state television that the virus can be transmitted between humans. Even before that development, health officials were concerned that the virus would spread more widely as travel picks up for the Lunar New Year. Airline passengers arriving from the outbreak region are already being screened for the virus' pneumonia-like symptoms at L.A. International Airport, San Francisco International Airport and New York's John F. Kennedy International Airport. The CDC said it would begin monitoring travelers at Chicago's O'Hare International Airport and Hartsfield-Jackson Atlanta International Airport this week. The Washington state patient entered the country before any of those screenings were implemented. But even if they had been in place, he would not have been detected because he was asymptomatic at the time, experts said. "Leave no doubt: Entry screening is just one part of a multilayered system," said Dr. Martin Cetron, the head of the CDC's Division of Global Migration and Quarantine. "Individuals are empowered to make good decisions if they're informed." Experts said increased airport screenings will be expensive, and that it will take some time to get answers to basic questions like what animal was the source of this virus and what makes some people more susceptible to infection than others. "Basic epidemiology questions remain unanswered," said Rebecca Katz, director of the Center for Global Health Science and Security at Georgetown University. "The CDC is the best of the best, and we should have faith in their leadership." Officials have begun to trace the Washington man's contacts from China to his home in the U.S. in order to identify other people who may be infected, said Dr. Scott Lindquist, a communicable disease epidemiologist at the Washington State Department of Health. Caption: PHOTO: TRAVELERS wear masks at a Beijing railway station this week. Chinese officials have reported at least 440 cases of a new coronavirus, including nine deaths. PHOTOGRAPHER:Mark Schiefelbein Associated Press 
As millions of Chinese people jam onto trains and planes, headed to their hometowns and overseas for the Lunar New Year in the world's biggest annual mass migration, fears are growing that a new respiratory coronavirus could spread. Chinese health authorities said Wednesday morning that the number of people killed by the outbreak had increased to nine and the number of cases had reached 440 since illnesses from coronavirus were reported in December. All the deaths occurred in Hubei province, whose capital, Wuhan, is the epicenter of the outbreak, officials said. Li Bin, deputy director of the National Health Commission, told reporters that Japan and South Korea had confirmed one case each and Thailand three. The U.S. and Taiwan also confirmed one case each on Tuesday.  The outbreak began at a seafood and live animal market in Wuhan that sold bats, cats, marmots and other wild animals in addition to fish, according to public health officials. Most early patients were linked to the market, where the virus is believed to have jumped from animals to humans. The confirmation of cases in other parts of China and beyond raised the specter of an outbreak on the scale of the SARS virus, which killed nearly 800 people and sickened about 8,000 in 2003, mostly in Asia. In South Korea, a 35-year-old woman from Wuhan tested positive for the virus, called 2019-nCoV, one day after arriving at Seoul's Incheon International Airport. With China's expanding wealth, air travel by its citizens has become increasingly common. Some use the time off from work around the New Year holiday to go abroad, forgoing the more traditional pilgrimage home. Airports around the world are on alert. Travelers from Wuhan arriving at Los Angeles International Airport, San Francisco International Airport and New York's John F. Kennedy International Airport are being screened, including filling out questionnaires and having their temperatures taken, said the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, which has deployed about 100 additional staff members to the three airports. Those with symptoms of the virus, which include fever, cough and difficulty breathing, will undergo additional health assessments, the agency said. In Singapore, travelers arriving from China are being screened for fever. A 44-year-old Singaporean woman who had been to Wuhan was found to have pneumonia and was being treated and tested for coronavirus in an isolation ward -- the seventh suspected case of the virus in Singapore. The CDC said on its website that much about the virus remains unclear, from the severity of the illness to how it spreads. The risk to Americans remains low, the agency said, but officials are taking "proactive preparedness precautions." In some cases, the virus can cause pneumonia, severe acute respiratory syndrome, kidney failure and death. Coronaviruses have a crown-like appearance under a microscope and are characterized by transmission from animals to humans. Some are no more serious than the common cold, while others can be deadly. On Monday, a respiratory disease expert with the Chinese government said cases of human-to-human transmission had been confirmed, raising the possibility that the virus could spread rapidly. Some medical workers have also tested positive for the virus, the English-language China Daily newspaper reported. In addition to those in Wuhan, five people in Beijing, two in Shanghai and 14 in the southern province of Guangdong have been diagnosed with the new virus, according to Chinese health authorities. Most had ties to Wuhan, while two in Guangdong had close contact with other patients. Chinese President Xi Jinping said that prevention and control of the outbreak is crucial, particularly because of the massive flow of Lunar New Year travelers. Xi ordered maximum efforts to treat patients, identify the causes of the infection and its spread, strengthen monitoring and standardize treatments, according to the state-run New China News Agency. Xi also said information should be released in a timely manner, and he stressed the importance of international cooperation. Officials in Wuhan are restricting the flow of people leaving the city, Foreign Ministry spokesman Geng Shuang said at a news conference on Monday. At Beijing's West Station on Tuesday, railway travelers dragged heavy suitcases, bound for destinations across the country to celebrate the arrival of the new year on Saturday. Some said they were not worried about the virus. "It's not close to here," said a 26-year-old factory worker who gave only his surname, Wang, on his way to his hometown of Xian. Wang wore a light blue surgical mask, saying he had a cold that he did not want to give to others. Wang Pao, 35, who works in the service industry, said he had donned a gray surgical mask for his journey to Hebei province as a precaution against catching the virus. He said he feared it would spread with the millions of journeys taken during the holiday period. "It's the new year, so people are traveling all over the country," he said. Near a bank of automated ticket dispensers, a man in a white mask said the virus could easily take root in Beijing. The man's friend Hu Qihao, wearing a black mask, said he also was uneasy about the virus. The two were headed to nearby Hebei province on the slow train, which would take four hours -- but at least they had bought reserved seats. "Beijing already has cases of the pneumonia," said Hu, 21, who works at a liquor store. Taiwan on Tuesday reported its first confirmed case of the virus, brought in by a Taiwanese woman who was recently in Wuhan, according to the island's Central News Agency. Memories of the SARS outbreak, which killed nearly 40 people on the island, are still fresh, said Lee Chun-yi, a legislator representing parts of the southern city of Tainan. About 850,000 Taiwanese live in mainland China, government figures show, with many typically returning home to spend the New Year holiday with family. North Korea had stopped receiving foreign tourists as of Wednesday as a precaution against the virus, according to China-based tour operator Young Pioneer Tours. -- Times staff writers David Pierson in Singapore, Victoria Kim in Seoul, special correspondent Ralph Jennings in Taipei, Taiwan, and the Associated Press contributed to this report. Caption: PHOTO: WITH THE Lunar New Year arriving Saturday, millions of Chinese will be traveling amid the coronavirus outbreak. Above, travelers at a Beijing railway station. PHOTOGRAPHER:Mark Schiefelbein Associated Press 
As Chinese officials take unprecedented measures to contain the spread of a new respiratory virus of unknown potency, 21 million people at the epicenter of the outbreak are under quarantine and Lunar New Year celebrations around the country have been canceled. Despite the health crisis, millions of people have traveled to their hometowns or abroad for the holiday and will eventually return to urban areas, heightening concerns that the coronavirus, which has killed 25 people and radiated a sense of unease around the world, will take root beyond the central Chinese province of Hubei. The historic Forbidden City, a marquee tourist attraction in Beijing, was temporarily closed. In Wuhan, a city of 11 million where the outbreak appears to have originated at a seafood and wildlife market, all air, train and bus transportation ground to a halt, with six surrounding cities under similar quarantines. Surgical masks were mandatory when venturing into public, but supplies were running out, trapping people in their homes.  On Thursday, the World Health Organization stopped short of declaring the outbreak a global health emergency, citing the small number of cases outside China and the strong efforts by the Chinese government to curb the spread. The decision "should not be taken as a sign that WHO does not think the situation is serious or that we're not taking it seriously. Nothing could be further from the truth," WHO Director General Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus said. "WHO is following this outbreak every minute of every day." Stemming the spread of the coronavirus is a crucial test for Chinese President Xi Jinping, who has consolidated his power domestically amid growing tensions with the U.S. over trade and other issues. In 2002 and 2003, China was slow to respond to the SARS virus, which killed nearly 800 people, affected 8,000 and spread to more than a dozen countries. The coronavirus disrupted one of the largest holiday migrations in the world, leaving many Chinese stranded with suitcases while scrolling for news updates. On the social media platform Weibo, Wuhan residents described living in a state of siege, with dwindling food supplies at home and fears that running out of surgical masks would prevent them from going out. "Three people are in our family. All we have left are two small baby cabbages, two tomatoes, two potatoes, two pounds of meat, six eggs, one pound of frozen dumplings and five bags of instant noodles," wrote a Wuhan resident. "Got to hold up for at least three days, and hopefully things will get better.... The main thing is we can't get any masks, so we are afraid of going out." So far, most patients stricken with the pneumonia-like illness have had connections to Wuhan. Most of the 25 deaths occurred in Hubei province, and most of those who died were older than 50. More than 600 cases have been confirmed, mostly in Hubei but also in Beijing, Shanghai and other parts of China, as well as Thailand, Japan, Taiwan and South Korea. A case has been reported in Washington state, and a traveler from Mexico arriving at Los Angeles International Airport was taken to a hospital early Thursday for evaluation. Much is still unknown about the previously unseen coronavirus, which has a crown-like shape under a microscope and was initially transmitted from animals to humans. The coronavirus family includes SARS. Chinese health officials said this week that they are still determining the severity of the illness and its contagiousness, though they believe it can be transmitted from person to person, with healthcare workers included among the cases. They also do not know what animal from the seafood market was the initial host of the disease, with preliminary research pointing to snakes or bats. Linfa Wang, a virologist at Duke-National University of Singapore who recently visited Wuhan, said he could not think of a time when a large city had been shut down to contain a virus whose lethality has not yet been established. "The Chinese government is absolutely taking the most draconian measure," said Wang, who helped identify bats as the animal hosts of SARS. "But with Chinese New Year coming and the lessons learned from SARS, it's better to overreact than underreact." City and provincial officials have drawn criticism for being slow to respond when the virus emerged in December and anxiety spread from the provinces to the nation's capital. But Xi set a new tone this week by calling for transparency in releasing information and stressing cooperation with international authorities. Experts said the Chinese government has learned from its poor performance during SARS, when officials withheld information and initially did not take strong action to combat the disease. Dali Yang, a political science professor at the University of Chicago, said local Chinese officials initially downplayed the new coronavirus and might have lost crucial time in warning the public. The detention in early January of eight people who commented online about the coronavirus marked an initial attempt to clamp down on internet rumors, he said. "People had already gotten on the road. A day's difference is a big difference," Yang said. "And this was not just one day or two days." But he said Xi's statement signals to local officials that they must take decisive action, including being open with the public. "If this pandemic is controlled, his intervention would be seen as a success," Yang said of Xi. "If it's not controlled, it will have a major impact on the economy." The Chinese government has responded by immediately notifying WHO and sharing the genomic sequence of the virus, said Nicholas David Thomas, an associate professor at City University of Hong Kong. Thomas called the government reaction a "sea change" from SARS. This time, officials are quickly working to contain the outbreak as well as to convince Chinese citizens that vital information is being shared, knowing that much is at stake. "Health issues involve regime legitimacy," Thomas said. "Not-so-successful reforms can feed into, 'Can we actually trust the government to tell us about it?' The response has been good." Thomas predicted that viral outbreaks like this one could become a "new normal" in China, as increasing demand for meat, coupled with increasing urbanization, means more close contact between animals and humans. China's aging population also means that new viruses will take a deadlier toll than in a younger population, he said. In Wuhan after the quarantine was imposed Thursday, people rushed to stock up on surgical masks but were limited to one. Hubei provincial officials announced plans to build a five-acre hospital to handle the increased patient load. Chinese television showed hospital workers in white protective suits and goggles facing crowds of patients. But reports circulated on Weibo that patients with flu-like symptoms were being turned away at hospitals. "Doctors say there are only several dozen beds, and the only way to free up beds is when someone dies," one person wrote. During a normally joyful holiday -- often the only time of the year that extended families are all in one place -- people spoke of hoarding food instead of feasting on freshly made delicacies. There was resentment and tension. One person on Weibo alluded to negative comments about Wuhan by people from other regions. "We are living in a closed city. We can't buy necessities from supermarkets. Vegetables are super expensive, we can't buy masks anywhere, and we have to welcome the new year with instant noodles," the person wrote. "Even in this condition, we are still holding up, yet we have to face hatred from you guys." -- Times staff writer David Pierson in Singapore contributed to this report. Caption: PHOTO: A DRIVER'S TEMPERATURE is taken at a highway checkpoint Thursday in Wuhan, China, a city of 11 million where the coronavirus appears to have originated. Experts see President Xi Jinping's responses as a sign of progress since the SARS outbreak of 2002 and 2003. PHOTOGRAPHER:Chinatopix P: GRAPHIC: MAP: Coronavirus cases CREDIT:Los Angeles Times 
As Chinese President Xi Jinping issued a public warning Saturday of "serious" concerns over the deadly coronavirus outbreak, officials in the epicenter of Wuhan scrambled for more beds amid chaos at local hospitals, with the effects rippling across China and beyond. In Beijing, tourist attractions, including exhibitions at the Summer Palace and parts of the Great Wall, were closed indefinitely. Ice skating rinks popular with locals were also shut down. The U.S. State Department urged Americans not to travel to Wuhan, a city of 11 million in central China that has been under lockdown since Thursday, with all trains, buses and airplane flights suspended. Beginning Sunday, most private vehicle use was banned in downtown Wuhan and surrounding cities were also placed under lockdown.  Early Sunday, Chinese officials announced that the death toll from the virus, which is believed to have jumped from animals to humans at a seafood and wildlife market, has increased to 56 people, almost all in Hubei province, where Wuhan is the capital. Most of those who have died were elderly, but a 36-year-old man succumbed to the virus last week, and a healthcare worker was also reported among the fatalities. In total, the National Health Committee reported 1,979 confirmed cases in China, including 324 severe cases. The outbreak intensified as millions of Chinese were traveling for the Lunar New Year holiday, dampening celebrations around the country on Saturday. Earlier in the week, many Chinese had already gone to their hometowns to be with family or boarded planes for vacations abroad. Cases have been confirmed in South Korea, Japan and other locations in Asia, with Australia and Malaysia reporting their first cases Saturday. Most of the patients had recently been to Wuhan. Chinese travel agencies have been told to halt all group tours, the state-owned English-language China Daily newspaper reported, citing the China Assn. of Travel Services. In Hong Kong, city leader Carrie Lam said her government would raise its response to the highest emergency level and shutter primary and secondary schools for two more weeks beyond the coming week's Lunar New Year. Lam also said that direct flights and trains from Wuhan would be blocked. With five cases of the illness reported in Hong Kong, a marathon that was expected to draw 70,000 participants Feb. 9 was canceled, the South China Morning Post newspaper reported. Two cases have been diagnosed in the U.S., one in Washington state and one in Chicago. The Chicago patient is a woman in her 60s who had recently returned from Wuhan and had not had significant contact with anyone beyond her household, said Allison Arwady, commissioner of the Chicago Department of Public Health. The first coronavirus cases in Europe have also been confirmed, with three patients being treated in French hospitals. All three had recently traveled to China; they were doing well, according to officials. A leading infectious disease specialist treating two of the patients said the illness appears less serious than comparable previous outbreaks, such as the SARS epidemic that resulted in more than 800 deaths in 2003. A respiratory disease expert with the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention said she expected more coronavirus cases in the U.S., including among patients' close contacts and medical workers. But she said there was no need for Americans to panic. "Again, while there are many unknowns, CDC believes that the immediate risk to the American public continues to be low at this time, but that the situation continues to evolve rapidly," said Nancy Messonnier, director of the CDC's National Center for Immunization and Respiratory Diseases. Symptoms of the virus include fever, coughing and shortness of breath, with severe cases progressing to pneumonia. It is not clear how lethal the virus is or even whether it is as dangerous as the ordinary flu, which kills thousands of people every year in the U.S. The rapid increase in reported deaths and illnesses does not necessarily mean the situation is getting worse, experts cautioned, but could reflect better monitoring and reporting of the virus. After a slow start when the first cases were diagnosed in December, Chinese officials have sought to demonstrate a strong response to the outbreak -- unlike during SARS, when they downplayed the threat for months. On Saturday at a Communist Party Central Committee meeting to address the outbreak, Xi ordered officials at all levels of government to make it their top priority. "Life is of paramount importance. When an epidemic breaks out, a command is issued. It is our responsibility to prevent and control it," Xi said, describing the outbreak as "serious," according to the New China News Agency. Amid reports that patients with flu-like symptoms were being turned away from hospitals, about 450 military medical workers, as well as healthcare workers from other parts of the country who have volunteered to help, were arriving in Wuhan. Local officials ordered Wuhan hospitals to staff 24-hour clinics to examine people with fevers and pneumonia symptoms. More than 1,400 new beds have been added. A Wuhan city emergency command set up to address the outbreak announced Saturday that a second new hospital, with 1,300 beds, would be built within two months. State-run news media posted photos of the first hospital under construction, with swarms of bulldozers smoothing a dirt field. The Ministry of Commerce announced that 2 million protective masks would be sent to Wuhan. The ministry also ordered eggs, fish, beef, pork and other staples to be released into Wuhan from food reserve centers. The ministry also asked that supermarkets, pharmacies and gas stations remain open, and that restaurants should provide food delivery to households. In Beijing, officials announced that temperature screenings would be held at subway stations. People returning to the city from the Wuhan area should quarantine themselves at home for 14 days, a city notice said. -- The Associated Press contributed to this report. Caption: PHOTO: A MEDICAL WORKER checks a patient in a Wuhan intensive care unit. The city has added more than 1,400 hospital beds, and clinics were staffed 24 hours. PHOTOGRAPHER:Xiong Qi New China News Agency 
The Los Angeles area is bracing for the new strain of coronavirus, which has spread to at least 2,019 people in 14 countries and territories since it was discovered late last month in central China. "While we have had no cases yet, it is likely we will see some, and we are ready," Dr. Sonia Angell, director of the California Department of Public Health, said in a video released this week. As of Friday, 18 people between the ages of 3 and 58 had been tested for the virus in California, according to the state Department of Public Health. They included a traveler who arrived at Los Angeles International Airport on a flight from Mexico City and was taken to a hospital early Thursday for an evaluation.  Angell said the immediate health risk to the public in California is low, based on current information, but the department is carefully monitoring the virus and considers it "a serious public health concern." So far, only two people have tested positive for the virus in the United States -- a man in Washington state and a woman in Illinois. Though the U.S. has not seen a major outbreak, the virus has spread widely in Asia in the last month, killing at least 56 people and sickening nearly 2,000 more in China, officials there say. In China, the pneumonia-like illnesses from the newly identified coronavirus first appeared last month in Wuhan, an industrial and transportation hub in central China's Hubei province. Other cases have been reported in Japan, South Korea and Thailand. Singapore, Vietnam and Hong Kong reported their first cases Thursday. Last week, federal authorities announced that passengers flying from Wuhan into LAX, San Francisco International Airport and John F. Kennedy International Airport in New York would be examined for the virus' symptoms. Though the coronavirus hasn't yet arrived in California, it has affected travel agencies at a time when they typically do a brisk business. "Today is the first day of the Chinese New Year, but no one is here to go back to China," Albert Eng, owner of Chosen Travel in Monterey Park, said Saturday. 
Health officials confirmed California's first two cases of the new strain of coronavirus in Los Angeles and Orange counties Sunday, brought by travelers who came from the epicenter of the outbreak in Wuhan, China. In both counties, the virus infecting the two individuals was the same strain as the one that has spread to more than 2,700 people in 14 countries and territories and caused 80 deaths since it was discovered late last month in central China. Three other cases have been diagnosed in the U.S., one each in Arizona, Washington state and Chicago. In L.A. County, the infected person was a returning traveler from Wuhan who is receiving medical treatment at a hospital, officials said.  The Orange County patient is in good condition and is in isolation at a hospital, health officials said. In both counties, health authorities are following up with anyone who has had close contact with the patients, but they noted that casual contact with an infected person -- such as visiting the same grocery store or movie theater -- carries only "minimal risk of developing infection." "The risk of local transmission remains low," officials said. The L.A. County patient is a Wuhan resident who was on a return flight to China with a layover at Los Angeles International Airport on Wednesday when he alerted officials that he was feeling ill, L.A. County public health officials said during a news conference Sunday. "The infected person presented themselves immediately for care at LAX airport once they noticed they weren't feeling well," said L.A. County public health director Dr. Barbara Ferrer. The patient was taken from LAX directly to a hospital, Ferrer said. The Arizona case, which was also announced Sunday, was a Maricopa County resident who health officials described as "a member of the Arizona State University community" but who did not live in university housing. The patient had recently returned from a trip to Wuhan, health officials said. The patient was not severely ill and was being kept in isolation, the Arizona Department of Health Services and Maricopa County Department of Public Health said. Officials were working to identify and reach out to people who might have been exposed to the virus while the patient was contagious, officials said. The new strain of coronavirus, known as 2019-nCoV, can cause respiratory illness and pneumonia. It was originally thought to be spreading only from animals to people in central China, but there are now indications it is also spreading among people. The virus can lead to symptoms including fever, coughing and shortness of breath, and in extreme cases it can be fatal. Most of the dozens of deaths tied to the coronavirus to date have been in the central Chinese province of Hubei, of which Wuhan is the capital. Most of the dead were at least 50 years old with underlying medical problems or weakened immune systems, Chinese officials said. But a 36-year-old man succumbed to the coronavirus last week, and a healthcare worker also was reported to be among the fatalities. Health experts in the United States have said that there is no evidence to suggest the new coronavirus is any more virulent than the flu. But because this strain of coronavirus is new, health officials are on high alert, and researchers will have to start from square one in creating a vaccine, which will probably take years to develop. Coronaviruses include a large variety of viruses -- the common cold as well as those that caused Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome (SARS) and Middle East Respiratory Syndrome (MERS). SARS and MERS sickened thousands of people around the world and caused hundreds of deaths. It is too soon to tell how the new strain compares to coronaviruses that fueled the previous epidemics, experts said. "I think that there are important unanswered questions about this outbreak," said Anne W. Rimoin, an epidemiologist at the UCLA Fielding School of Public Health and director of the UCLA Center for Global and Immigrant Health. "We don't know how easily people transmit the virus or how ill it can make otherwise healthy people. We just don't know the true risks posed by this new virus, and these are the questions that will need to be answered." As of Friday, 18 people between the ages of 3 and 58 had been tested for the virus in California, according to the state Department of Public Health. They included a traveler who arrived at Los Angeles International Airport on a flight from Mexico City and was taken to a hospital early Thursday for an evaluation. L.A. County public health officials could not confirm whether the Mexico City traveler was the same one with the virus. "We're working very closely with LAX; we have staff stationed at the quarantine station," said Dr. Sharon Balter, director of the L.A. County Public Health Department's Acute Communicable Disease Control program. "All travelers who are arriving from China are being screened.... [LAX officials] call us immediately if they think anybody needs to be tested and then they work with our staff ... to get them to a hospital that's appropriate to test them, and everything went as one would expect in this case." Dr. Sonia Angell, director of the California Department of Public Health, said in a statement Sunday that the immediate health risk to the general public in California is low, but "the California Department of Public Health has been preparing for this situation by working closely with local health departments and health care providers." Healthcare workers who treat anyone with this kind of infectious disease should make sure they wash their hands after contact and consider wearing protective eye gear, officials said. At Orange County Global Medical Center and Regional Trauma Center, patients who come in with respiratory symptoms are given masks, and an infectious disease specialist regularly consults with the staff to provide education about what to look for when performing triage, said Dr. Vu Huynh, medical director of emergency services. If a patient is suspected to be infected with coronavirus, staffers have been instructed to quarantine them in an isolated room and contact the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention so a special series of tests can be performed, Huynh said. So far, the hospital has had one patient tested, and the results came back negative, he said. Still, the staff is prepared to see more cases of the virus. "There could have been a lot of cases that weren't caught at the beginning, and maybe those patients traveled," Huynh said. "With Southern California being a multicultural area, I think there's more risk." Though the U.S. has not seen a major outbreak, the virus has spread widely across Asia in the last month. China's health minister said the country was entering a "crucial stage" as "it seems like the ability of the virus to spread is getting stronger." As the spread of the virus continued to accelerate and fears intensified, two of Hong Kong's biggest attractions, Hong Kong Disneyland and Ocean Park, announced they were closing for the time being. The Asian Football Confederation said it was moving an Olympic qualifying event scheduled to start Feb. 3 from Nanjing to Sydney, Australia, and the International Tennis Federation moved a regional Fed Cup qualifying event from Dongguan to Kazakhstan next month. Beijing said it would delay the start of classes for all schools, from kindergarten to universities, until after the Lunar New Year holiday ends this week. In the Hong Kong suburb of Fanling, protesters set fire to the lobby of a building in an unoccupied public housing complex where officials had proposed quarantining suspected coronavirus cases. The fire was extinguished, and no major damage was reported. Also on Sunday, Chinese authorities announced a temporary ban on the trade of wild animals and warned the public against eating wild animal meat. No wildlife can be transported or sold in any markets or online, according to text of the announcement in state media, and officials said they will "severely investigate and punish" violators. The pneumonia-like illnesses from the newly identified coronavirus first appeared last month in Wuhan, where most of the early victims said they had visited a large seafood and live animal market. Other cases have been reported in Japan, South Korea and Thailand. Singapore, Vietnam and Hong Kong reported their first cases Thursday. The State Department announced Sunday morning that it will relocate personnel at the U.S. Consulate General in Wuhan to the U.S. via a single flight Tuesday from Wuhan to San Francisco. There is limited space for private American citizens on the flight, officials said. "Capacity is extremely limited; priority will be given to individuals at greater risk from coronavirus," the State Department said in a news statement. Canada reported its first case Saturday in Toronto. Officials said the man is in his 50s and recently flew from Wuhan to Guangzhou, China, and then on to Toronto on Thursday. The first coronavirus cases in Europe have also been confirmed, with three patients being treated in French hospitals. All three had recently traveled to China; they were reportedly doing well, officials said. The CDC is screening passengers on direct and connecting flights from Wuhan at five major airports in Atlanta, Chicago, New York, San Francisco and Los Angeles. Experts say that the U.S. is well equipped to deal with any possible outbreak and that it's important to remain calm. "Fear spreads a lot faster than the virus itself," Rimoin said. "We need to make sure that people do not have undue worry. We have a good public health system in place, and we've been preparing for this." -- Times staff writers Emily Baumgaertner in Los Angeles and Cindy Chang in Beijing contributed to this report. The Associated Press was used in compiling this report. Caption: PHOTO: VENDORS WEAR protective masks at a street market Sunday in Beijing amid the coronavirus outbreak. PHOTOGRAPHER:Kevin Frayer Getty Images PHOTO:A HEALTH worker checks the temperatures of passengers at a subway station in Beijing on Sunday. PHOTOGRAPHER:Betsy Joles Getty Images 
In recent days, in the largest quarantine effort in history, Wuhan city in China was put on lockdown and the Chinese government imposed wide-ranging restrictions on both domestic and foreign travel. The actions are aimed at containing a brand-new coronavirus called 2019-nCoV, which as of Monday had killed more than 80 people and sickened nearly 3,000 in China. But the quarantine's effectiveness is far from certain. Local transmission may be reduced, but the virus has already spread beyond China, with cases as far afield as Thailand, South Korea, Vietnam, Japan and the United States. And even if the quarantine is effective, it doesn't address the far bigger issue: How do we stop this from happening again?  The emergence of this new virus was predictable, even inevitable. To understand why requires looking back to an earlier virus that emerged in China, SARS. Like the new illness, SARS was caused by a coronavirus. In 2003, it exploded out of a "wet market" in Guangdong where civet cats, raccoon dogs and multitudes of other animals were caged together in tight, squalid conditions. It appears the new virus has similar origins. The initial victims were all connected to a huge wholesale market in Wuhan, where a thousand stalls housed untold numbers of live animals kept in crowded, filthy conditions. Such "wet markets" are widespread in China, providing a newly affluent upper class with status-enhancing exotic animals to serve at dinner. Some people also believe that eating wild animals has health benefits. The problem with the markets is that the unsanitary and tightly packed conditions in which the animals are held create perfect environments for the evolution of viruses that can jump from one species to another. The Chinese government shut down wet markets after the SARS outbreak, but that ban was short-lived. With SARS, the virus came initially from bats and then was passed, apparently, to civet cats and eventually to humans. Initial indications point to the new coronavirus, too, having come from bats, but it isn't yet known how it made its way to humans. Coronaviruses have proven themselves masters at jumping from one species to another, and how they affect each species can differ greatly. An infection hardly noticeable in a wild animal, perhaps a civet cat, may spread easily to the next cage, whether that cage houses more civets or another mammalian species. With coronaviruses, the jump from species to species appears to happen fairly easily. The massive poultry farms of Asia, which may house as many as 5 million chickens, present a different but also potentially lethal source of human infection. There, viruses such as influenza become highly adapted and, in crowded circumstances, ever more deadly to chickens, as there is no cost to the virus if it's lethal -- the next host is only a beak away. These virulent avian influenzas can and have killed people. But humans have to catch them directly from the birds. Because they have become so precisely adapted to chickens, the viruses have little potential for human-to-human transmission. The same evolutionary process can occur on massive pig farms, and can be even more dangerous to people, since people are more like pigs than like chickens. The deadly 2009 swine flu pandemic sprang out of one such massive pig farm in Veracruz, Mexico, where hundreds of pigs died in an outbreak that eventually moved into people. Caging different wild beasts together by the hundreds or thousands, as in a wet market, can produce a particularly dangerous environment for infectious diseases like coronaviruses. Not only is there an array of possible host species, but large numbers of humans are brought into close contact with the animals, too. With SARS, as well as the new coronavirus, it appears that the virus jumped first to the people working with these animals in the market, and then began another process of evolution, which allowed it to spread from human to human, adapting to its new host species and becoming more effective at that adaptation all the time. As a result of such evolution, we get brand-new human diseases like 2019-nCoV, which did not exist only months ago. It's too early to know what kind of threat the present virus poses. What's important is that we finally learn the right lesson. If we want to forestall the evolution of ever-newer, and possibly deadlier, human-adapted viruses, live animal markets must be permanently shut down. Until the Chinese government outlaws these markets, until factory farms housing millions of animals are eliminated, until we take the inevitable logic of disease evolution into account, novel, and potentially deadly, human diseases will continue to arise. Again. And again. And again.  Credit: Wendy Orent is the author of "Plague: The Mysterious Past and Terrifying Future of the World's Most Dangerous Disease" and "Ticked: The Battle Over Lyme Disease in the South." 
The World Health Organization declared Thursday that the deadly outbreak fueled by a new coronavirus from China has become a global health emergency, citing fears that the microbe will soon reach smaller, poorer countries incapable of stemming its spread. The decision will probably make new resources available to health officials around the world who are battling a virus that has sickened more than 9,770 people on four continents and claimed at least 213 lives. It will also establish WHO?셲 authority to lead the international response and strengthen the organization?셲 hand in shaping the domestic decisions of its 194 member nations. WHO Director-General Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus said the organization is not recommending any measures that would limit travel or international trade. Those are some of the most potent tools at his agency?셲 disposal, but they are not necessary at this time, he told reporters in Geneva. Health experts who have been tracking the virus??spread said the WHO?셲 declaration was more than justified. ?쏡eclaring an emergency gives WHO the authority to make recommendations that are very influential,??said Lawrence Gostin, an expert on public health law at Georgetown University. ?쏧t signals to the world this is a global crisis and we all need to come together to address it.??But experts also acknowledged that WHO has no way to enforce its recommendations or to constrain the actions of members. Even with the new declaration, the agency will be able to do little more than cajole and exhort the international community to cooperate, and to guide the efforts of philanthropies active in public health efforts. Tedros took pains to reassure China that WHO?셲 declaration implied no criticism of the country?셲 actions, including the ?쐃xtraordinary measures??it has taken to limit the spread of the novel coronavirus, known officially as 2019-nCoV. Among other things, the government ordered an unprecedented quarantine affecting 50 million people in 17 cities. ?쏞hina is setting a new standard for outbreak response, and it?셲 not an exaggeration,??he said. Yet with the virus now present in 22 countries and territories, and with person-to-person transmission confirmed to have taken place in five countries besides China, the potential for it to cause mayhem in countries ?쐗ith weaker public health systems??was Tedros??chief concern. ?쏻e must all act together now to limit further spread,??he said. Researchers from China?셲 leading public health agency calculated that the epidemic established itself by doubling in size every 7.4 days, according to a report published Wednesday in the New England Journal of Medicine. They also estimated that each person infected with the coronavirus passed it along to 2.2 others ??on par with the 1918 Spanish flu. An expert advisory committee debated for almost eight hours before recommending that WHO formally declare the outbreak a public health emergency of international concern. In doing so, the members recognized that the never-before-seen virus is spreading internationally, poses serious health threats, and could affect travel and trade. China first informed WHO about cases of the new virus in late December. Experts say there is significant evidence the virus is being transmitted among people in China and have noted with concern several instances in other countries ??including Japan, Germany, Canada, Vietnam, South Korea, France and most recently the U.S. ??where there have also been isolated cases of human-to-human spread. The spread of 2019-nCoV in Vietnam, a country with a rudimentary system in place to detect, track and isolate new infections, is particularly alarming to infectious disease experts. Tedros made clear that the declaration must galvanize the international community?셲 efforts to help vulnerable countries fight the spread of coronavirus. ?쏻e must support countries with weaker health systems??by providing them with tests that can quickly identify and treat those infected, he said. And when a vaccine to prevent infection becomes available, those countries must gain access to them, he added. Dr. Tom Frieden, former director of the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, praised WHO for being realistic about the threat the outbreak presents. Thursday?셲 action ?쐌atches the situation on the ground,??he said. The decision is likely to help channel more money and manpower toward countries such as Cambodia, the Philippines, Malaysia, Nepal and Thailand, all of which have seen a small number of infections. Additional resources from non-governmental organizations including Doctors Without Borders and charitable groups such as the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation could be extremely useful for governments struggling to bring in medical teams and identify infected persons, Gostin said. But WHO?셲 direct influence is limited. It can?셳 force member countries to adopt trade or travel restrictions, nor can it prevent them from taking overly aggressive steps limiting the movement of people or goods. ?쏰ne sad truth about declaring an emergency is that it doesn?셳 legally and technically grant WHO any enhanced powers or release any emergency funding,??said Gostin, who added that such a crucial deficiency should be fixed. In its deliberations leading to Thursday?셲 declaration, the WHO advisory committee relied on regulations adopted by the United Nations after the 2003 outbreak of severe acute respiratory syndrome, which sickened more than 8,000 people and caused 774 deaths. To declare an ?쐃mergency of international concern,??the agency must find that an outbreak ?쐁onstitutes a public health risk to other states through the international spread of disease,??or that it poses a ?쐓ignificant risk of international travel or trade restrictions.??A burgeoning Ebola epidemic in West Africa was designated a public health emergency of international concern in 2014, after the virus spread beyond its epicenter of Guinea, Sierra Leone and Liberia to seven other countries, including the United States. In 2016, the international agency did the same for the rapidly spreading Zika virus as the mosquito-borne pathogen marched across the Americas, causing miscarriages and birth defects when pregnant women were infected. Most recently, WHO declared a public health emergency in July as cases of Ebola mushroomed in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and spilled over into neighboring Uganda. But the agency declined on multiple occasions to give that status to an outbreak of Middle East respiratory syndrome, which is caused by another coronavirus that jumped from camels to humans. Though it sickened nearly 2,500 people in 27 countries and caused 858 deaths, WHO said travel and trade restrictions would not serve a public health purpose. The Associated Press contributed to this report. 
The World Health Organization declared Thursday that the deadly outbreak fueled by a new coronavirus from China has become a global health emergency, citing fears that the microbe will soon reach smaller, poorer countries incapable of stemming its spread. The decision will probably make new resources available to health officials around the world who are battling a virus that has sickened more than 9,000 people on four continents and claimed at least 213 lives. It will also establish WHO's authority to lead the international response and strengthen the organization's hand in shaping the domestic decisions of its 194 member nations. WHO Director-General Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus said the organization is not recommending any measures that would limit travel or international trade. Those are some of the most potent tools at his agency's disposal, but they are not necessary at this time, he told reporters in Geneva.  Health experts who have been tracking the virus' spread said WHO's declaration was more than justified. "Declaring an emergency gives WHO the authority to make recommendations that are very influential," said Lawrence Gostin, an expert on public health law at Georgetown University. "It signals to the world this is a global crisis and we all need to come together to address it." But experts also acknowledged that WHO has no way to enforce its recommendations or to constrain the actions of members. Even with the new declaration, the agency will be able to do little more than cajole and exhort the international community to cooperate, and to guide the efforts of philanthropies active in public health efforts. Tedros took pains to reassure China that WHO's declaration implied no criticism of the country's actions, including the "extraordinary measures" it has taken to limit the spread of the novel coronavirus, known officially as 2019-nCoV. Among other things, the government ordered an unprecedented quarantine affecting 50 million people in 17 cities. "China is setting a new standard for outbreak response, and it's not an exaggeration," he said. Yet with the virus now present in 22 countries and territories, and with person-to-person transmission confirmed to have taken place in five countries besides China, the potential for it to cause mayhem in countries "with weaker public health systems" was Tedros' chief concern. "We must all act together now to limit further spread," he said. Researchers from China's leading public health agency calculated that the epidemic established itself by doubling in size every 7.4 days, according to a report published Wednesday in the New England Journal of Medicine. They also estimated that each person infected with the coronavirus passed it along to 2.2 others -- on par with the 1918 Spanish flu. An expert advisory committee debated for almost eight hours before recommending that WHO formally declare the outbreak a public health emergency of international concern. In doing so, the members recognized that the never-before-seen virus is spreading internationally, poses serious health threats, and could affect travel and trade. China first informed WHO about cases of the new virus in late December. Experts say there is significant evidence the virus is being transmitted among people in China and have noted with concern several instances in other countries -- including Japan, Germany, Canada, Vietnam, South Korea, France and most recently the U.S. -- where there have also been isolated cases of human-to-human spread. The spread of 2019-nCoV in Vietnam, a country with a rudimentary system in place to detect, track and isolate new infections, is particularly alarming to infectious disease experts. Tedros made clear that the declaration must galvanize the international community's efforts to help vulnerable countries fight the spread of coronavirus. "We must support countries with weaker health systems" by providing them with tests that can quickly identify and treat those infected, he said. And when a vaccine to prevent infection becomes available, those countries must gain access to them, he added. Dr. Tom Frieden, former director of the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, praised WHO for being realistic about the threat the outbreak presents. Thursday's action "matches the situation on the ground," he said. The decision is likely to help channel more money and manpower toward countries such as Cambodia, the Philippines, Malaysia, Nepal and Thailand, all of which have seen a small number of infections. Additional resources from nongovernmental organizations including Doctors Without Borders and charitable groups such as the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation could be extremely useful for governments struggling to bring in medical teams and identify infected persons, Gostin said. But WHO's direct influence is limited. It can't force member countries to adopt trade or travel restrictions, nor can it prevent them from taking overly aggressive steps limiting the movement of people or goods. "One sad truth about declaring an emergency is that it doesn't legally and technically grant WHO any enhanced powers or release any emergency funding," said Gostin, who added that such a crucial deficiency should be fixed. In its deliberations leading to Thursday's declaration, the WHO advisory committee relied on regulations adopted by the United Nations after the 2003 outbreak of severe acute respiratory syndrome, which sickened more than 8,000 people and caused 774 deaths. To declare an "emergency of international concern," the agency must find that an outbreak "constitutes a public health risk to other states through the international spread of disease," or that it poses a "significant risk of international travel or trade restrictions." A burgeoning Ebola epidemic in West Africa was designated a public health emergency of international concern in 2014 after the virus spread beyond its epicenter of Guinea, Sierra Leone and Liberia to seven other countries, including the United States. In 2016, the international agency did the same for the rapidly spreading Zika virus as the mosquito-borne pathogen marched across the Americas, causing miscarriages and birth defects when pregnant women were infected. Most recently, WHO declared a public health emergency in July as cases of Ebola mushroomed in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and spilled over into neighboring Uganda. But the agency declined on multiple occasions to give that status to an outbreak of Middle East respiratory syndrome, which is caused by a coronavirus that jumped from camels to humans. Though it sickened nearly 2,500 people in 27 countries and caused 858 deaths, WHO said travel and trade restrictions would not serve a public health purpose. -- The Associated Press contributed to this report. Caption: PHOTO: FUNERAL workers disinfect themselves after handling a coronavirus victim in Wuhan, China. The virus has sickened more than 9,000 people and killed 213. PHOTOGRAPHER:Chinatopix 
When some 5,000 Chinese travelers arrived in South Korea last month for a company retreat, local officials rolled out a red carpet, handed them bouquets and renamed a city street after the health food firm they worked for. In recent days, however, Chinese tourists have received a different kind of greeting, as fears rise over the global spread of the deadly coronavirus that originated in the Chinese city of Wuhan. More than 600,000 South Koreans have signed an online petition asking that Chinese nationals be banned from entering their country. In Malaysia, more than 400,000 have signed a similar petition. Mongolia and North Korea, meanwhile, have sealed their borders to Chinese travelers, and the Philippines has stopped issuing visas on arrival for the Chinese.  "Even North Korea is banning Chinese from entering," the South Korean petition read. "It'll be too late after it reaches our shores. Preemptive measures are necessary." Like many of China's Asian neighbors, South and North Korea are heavily dependent on Chinese tourists and their fast-increasing spending power. The health company tour group alone, officials in the west coast city of Incheon estimated, would bring in nearly $20 million in unspecified economic gains. The widespread fears come in spite of the fact that most public health officials generally advise against travel restrictions because of the potential to cause more harm -- by hindering medical personnel, breeding a false sense of security and motivating people to skirt any bans, making infections much harder to track. Studies on the efficacy of such travel bans in the past have concluded they only briefly delayed but were ultimately unable to stop the spread of epidemics, that the costs outweighed any benefits, and that they may have in fact exacerbated the global crisis. China's own dramatic measures to contain the virus -- quarantining people within the most heavily infected areas and, beginning last week, suspending all outbound group tours -- do not appear to have lowered concerns in countries where the Chinese have been traveling in large numbers. Moreover, travel into China is now being strongly frowned upon. The U.S. State Department on Thursday issued a Level 4 "Do Not Travel" alert on China -- the highest-level warning, also in place for conflict zones including Syria and Afghanistan. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention also urged no nonessential travel to the country. And on Friday, Delta Air Lines and American Airlines announced they would halt all flights between the U.S. and China. The coronavirus, which has spread to more than 20 countries and caused at least 305 deaths, is the first outbreak originating in China since the 2003 SARS epidemic, which began in southern China. Back then, 16 million Chinese tourists went abroad a year; by 2018, as China's middle class mushroomed and with many countries easing visa restrictions to attract its travelers, the number increased more than tenfold to 162 million. Chinese spending overseas has far eclipsed that of travelers from other countries, lavishing the world with almost double what Americans spent abroad. The rapid surge has meant a particularly dramatic increase of Chinese tourists in nearby Asian countries, and businesses and governments have been eager to cater to them. The alarm since the outbreak over any and all Chinese, irrespective of whether they are from the heavily affected areas or are showing symptoms, has been fiercest in some of the destinations most dependent on tourism from China. Restaurants and retailers in South Korea and Japan, where China accounts for a third of all tourists, have posted signs on their storefronts saying "No Chinese Allowed." An Indonesian governor was pilloried online after a video showed him personally greeting a Chinese tour group at the airport; no matter that the group came from a city nearly 1,000 miles from Wuhan, far from the center of the outbreak. Malaysian media widely reported a Chinese couple's arrest after they had allegedly sneaked their child out of quarantine at a hospital despite showing symptoms; a video clip of their detention at the airport has gone viral. Even some fans of the hugely popular K-pop group BTS suggested on Twitter that Chinese nationals should be prohibited from the boy band's concert in Seoul scheduled for April, out of coronavirus concerns. The leaders of South Korea's main opposition party Tuesday urged the government to institute a ban on travel from China. South Korea's President Moon Jae-in on Thursday cautioned against succumbing to "fear and hatred" surrounding the epidemic. "We're not only up against the virus. We also need to stand firm against excessive anxiety and vague fears," he said. In the U.S. in 2014, several dozen members of Congress urged the Obama administration to impose bans on travel from three West African nations plagued by Ebola. No ban was enacted after public health officials and medical experts argued against it and urged calm. "It's only human to want to protect ourselves and our families," Tom Frieden, then-director of the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, wrote at the time. "But, as has been said, for every complex problem, there's a solution that's quick, simple and wrong. A travel ban is not the right answer." Ebola is transmitted between humans through direct contact with blood or bodily fluids. While the new virus is still being studied, similar coronaviruses in the past have spread through respiratory droplets released into the air when those infected sneeze or cough. Last week in Myeongdong, a shopping district in central Seoul popular with Chinese tourists, Chinese-language signs advertised hair treatments, beauty products and street food. A line snaked out the door of a pharmacy selling face masks; next door, a shop hawking K-pop albums and goods sat deserted. Cosmetics stores prominently displayed buy-one, get-one-free bottles of hand sanitizer in their shop windows. With efforts mounting to curtail travel, some businesspeople were expressing concerns about their bottom line. Clothing boutique operator Lee Hee-sook, 55, has weathered SARS and then MERS, which originated in the Middle East and plagued South Korea in 2015. But a travel ban now on Chinese tourists could be the last straw, she said. "It's selfish individuals thinking, I only care about my survival," she said. Most retailers, she said, "are barely hanging on, and this will destroy them." The brunt of the crisis will be borne by China's economy, which has all but ground to a halt and is expected to be slow to recover. Tourism officials elsewhere in Asia were also walking on eggshells. "We don't want Chinese tourists to feel unhappy or discriminated against. We also hope that Malaysians do not panic or misunderstand Chinese tourists," Malaysian Inbound Tourism Assn. President Uzaidi Udanis told reporters. "The Chinese market is very important for the domestic tourism sector." Indonesia's tourism minister also urged his countrymen to welcome Chinese tourists. Wolfgang Georg Arlt, chief executive of China Outbound Tourism Research Institute and a longtime consultant to governments and companies seeking to attract Chinese tourists, said any travel ban when the Chinese government was already taking drastic, proactive measures was probably excessive and disproportionate to the risk. Painting all Chinese tourists in a suspicious light could result in a backlash when tourism rebounds, he said. "If it's not worse than SARS, we'll have a three-month period where things are bad. After that it'll jump back," he said. "The Chinese government is taking unprecedented steps. ... I don't think from the Chinese point of view, they'd be happy if host governments top that." Caption: PHOTO: TOURISTS in masks visit Bangkok. Chinese spending overseas has far eclipsed that of other travelers, and many destinations rely on visitors from China. PHOTOGRAPHER:Lillian Suwanrumpha AFP/Getty Images 
As she walks through campus and sits in class, Rosen Huynh tries extra hard to suppress her coughs. Fear of the coronavirus, which was first detected in December in China, has spread around the world, and many people like Huynh are suddenly hyperaware of their East Asian roots. Every cough, every wheeze, the 22-year-old says, seems to elicit furtive glances and odd looks. "I don't know if it's just people looking at me coughing or because I'm an Asian person coughing, they think I might have the coronavirus," said Huynh, who lives in Monterey Park. "I feel like every time I cough, people are going to be uncomfortable with that. I shouldn't have to feel that way."  Viruses often spark panic. But the coronavirus has spread something else besides misinformation and false rumors: xenophobia and anti-China sentiment. People have fielded discrimination and vitriolic attacks in public spaces, including suspicious looks and nasty comments; they've seen others scrambling to avoid them. A doctor in Ontario said her son was cornered at school by children who wanted to "test" him for the virus just because he is half-Chinese. "Taking Calc 151 with only Asians in the classroom ... I hope I don't catch coronavirus ... thinkin about dropping this class now," a student wrote on his Snapchat story. The new coronavirus, which can cause respiratory illness and pneumonia, has infected at least 17,373 people worldwide, killing at least 362 of them as of Sunday night, with only one death outside China. Eleven cases have been confirmed in the United States, including six in California. False health information including warnings to avoid Asian food and Asian-populated areas has circulated, and videos of Asian people eating bats accompanied by inaccurate speculation about the cause of the virus and dehumanizing comments have gone viral. A barrage of vicious discussion and derogatory jokes about Chinese people or Asians in general have gathered steam online, drawing on age-old racist tropes associating Chinese people with disease, filth and dirty food, experts say. Some in California felt their fears of racism around the virus were confirmed Thursday when UC Berkeley's health services center listed xenophobia toward Asian people as a "normal reaction" in an informational post on Instagram focused on "managing fears and anxiety" about the pneumonia-like sickness. The campus received a flood of criticism for the post. "Feeling good about the light fear people have had of me in public all week," campus alum Michelle Lee wrote sarcastically in a tweet. The post was "blatant and awful" in its harm to people of color, and remarkable considering more than 40% of last year's freshman class was Asian, said Angie Chen, legislative aide for a Berkeley City Council member and recent alum of the university. "People can feel nervous, that's valid," she said. "But grouping in xenophobia with all the other things, like anxiety and helplessness, legitimizes these responses to the virus." Amid backlash, the university deleted the post and apologized. "We regret any misunderstanding it may have caused and have updated the language in our materials," read a statement shared by the Tang Center on Friday. Aida Zhu, 21, who was about to board a flight back home to San Diego, saw an agent with the Transportation Security Administration staring at her as she shuffled through security at William P. Hobby Airport in Houston while wearing a mask. "I hope you're not ill," he said to her in a disgusted tone. Zhu said she's been mulling over the incident all week. She thinks racist sentiment has been latent, but there all along. "The coronavirus is bringing it to the surface." Andrew Nguyen, 22, an employee at Aape, a retail clothing store in West Hollywood, was ringing a customer up last week when the man gave him a dirty look. Nguyen reached into the bag to scan the tag on the mask the man was purchasing -- the type of face mask meant to be fashionable, not a medical one -- his fingers brushing the cloth. The man brusquely said, "Can you get me a new one?" "Why?" Nguyen shot back. "Because you touched it," the man responded. It happened when videos of Asian people eating "weird" things were going around, Nguyen said. "I felt like maybe he had seen one of those." Reading the vitriolic comments on articles about the virus has taken a toll on 26-year-old Katherine Lu. She's not worried about experiencing racism in person, however, since she lives in Los Angeles and rarely takes public transit. "If I lived in a metropolitan area where trains were essential to my day-to-day life, I would worry that people were worried about sharing the same airspace as me, just based on my face," she said. "The coronavirus is an opportunity for them to safely express their racist thoughts in a way that can be excused." The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention advised people not to panic about the coronavirus and against stereotyping people in a statement issued Friday. "Do not assume that if someone is of Asian descent, they have coronavirus," said Dr. Nancy Messonnier, director of the CDC's National Center for Immunization and Respiratory Diseases. But many have panicked; calls for self-imposed or community-imposed sanctions that are not based on official medical advisory have erupted. "Close UCSB temporarily before one of us dies from the coronavirus," one student posted, linking to a petition on Change.org, on an informal Facebook page where UC Santa Barbara students sell used items. "We have a large number of commuters from China and other people visiting China that have the potential to infect everyone." After receiving critical comments, the post was edited to read "this is not directed towards any particular group of people," and later deleted. The Change.org petition was still online as of Sunday, and has garnered more than 1,000 signatures. "We have this tendency to confuse people who are sick with entire groups of people, and that's what makes it discriminatory," said Gilbert Gee, a professor at UCLA's Fielding School of Public Health. "If someone exhibits symptoms, treat the sickness -- people who might actually have the disease. When you single out entire groups of people, that becomes prejudice," he said. Huynh said one of her professors went on a spiel about the virus at the beginning of class last week. He asked that students who had recently traveled to China refrain from attending class for a few weeks. His comments made her feel alienated, she said, as one of the few Asian people in the class. When she tweeted about the incident, writing, "sir your xenophobia is showing," she was slammed by a steady stream of racist replies. "Your home nation's garbage quality of life is a product of your own people's negligence," one user tweeted at her, using a racial slur and other vulgar language. Where practical concerns about infection end and where fear, misinformation and xenophobia begin is not always clear, but medical experts have pointed out that the coronavirus should not be top of mind for people in the U.S. So far, 11 people in the United States have been diagnosed with the coronavirus. None have died. By contrast, the flu has killed roughly 10,000 Americans since October. "The racialization of coronavirus as this exotic foreign threat has a lot to do with the hysterical response in the West," Mark Tseng-Putterman, a graduate student in American studies at Brown University, said in an email. The U.S. decided to break the quarantine on Wuhan and evacuate its diplomatic personnel, "but you're not going to have people wondering if the white people on the subway or in the store are diplomats who could be spreading the infection," he said. Geopolitical tensions and U.S. political strategy that sees China as, in the words of Secretary of State Michael R. Pompeo, the "central threat" facing the U.S. may also be fueling some of the xenophobia. This is clear in conspiracy theories that have circulated, such as those claiming that photos of heavy machinery clearing land for emergency quarantine hospitals in Wuhan were actually digging mass graves or those that claim the Chinese Communist Party itself created the virus, Tseng-Putterman said. "That these cynical rumors are being spread while lives have been lost, millions of Chinese families have had their Spring Festival disrupted, and countless medical workers are putting their lives on the line to contain the virus is quite disappointing," he said. As airlines cancel flights to China and the U.S. issues a "do not travel" advisory, and China takes its own dramatic measures -- quarantining more than 50 million people -- anti-Chinese sentiment has reverberated globally. Hundreds of thousands in South Korea and Malaysia signed petitions asking that Chinese nationals be banned from entering their countries. In Vietnam, restaurants put up signs declaring "No Chinese." Discrimination draws on this idea "that is very, very old indeed -- that Chinese people as a race, no matter where they are, are disease carriers," said Erika Lee, professor of history and Asian American studies at the University of Minnesota. "Yellow peril," the strain of thought that maintained all things Asia were a great threat to the white world, can be traced back to Europe in the 19th century. The idea took a particularly violent and effective turn in the U.S., where policies were often created based on the idea that Asian people were disease-ridden, Lee said. Chinese migrants were subject to invasive and often humiliating medical inspections upon arriving at Angel Island that Europeans arriving through Ellis Island weren't. When the bubonic plague hit San Francisco at the beginning of the 20th century, Chinatown was forcibly quarantined. Public health fears are easily projected on racial groups or other marginalized communities, said Gee, the UCLA professor. For example, one of the earliest names for HIV was "gay-related immune deficiency," and homophobic stigma helped fuel the epidemic. In the early 1930s, Los Angeles County and California public health officials submitted a resolution to Congress recommending a mass deportation of Filipinos. They argued that high rates of tuberculosis among Filipinos overburdened public health infrastructure. "Treat people who exhibit symptoms rather than targeting people for quarantine or barring them from public places simply because of the way that they look," said Lee, the University of Minnesota professor. "It's really about using common sense and not letting fear and panic drive us to revert back to more base fear of foreigners." Caption: PHOTO: LOS ANGELES COUNTY Supervisor Hilda Solis, flanked by Assemblyman Ed Chau, left, and Health Officer Dr. Muntu Davis, holds a fake letter that circulated on Facebook about a coronavirus outbreak in Carson. PHOTOGRAPHER:Damian Dovarganes Associated Press 
In the prosperous capitals of Asia, money could buy anything ??until a mysterious coronavirus hit, striking fear in rich and poor alike. Now, surgical masks are nearly impossible to find on store shelves from Taipei to Hong Kong to Manila, prompting a panic reminiscent of wartime scarcity, with long lines and reports of hoarding, price gouging and fake products. People have turned to social media to share creative solutions. How about a mask made of a maxi pad? Half an orange? A water bottle? Bad advice abounds. Note to self: Steaming masks to disinfect them does not work. Some governments have organized mask lotteries. Others are rationing masks. Political leaders tour mask factories, seeking to reassure citizens that manufacturing is being ramped up. On an increasingly interconnected continent, every major Asian city has extensive business and tourism ties with China, where the deadly outbreak originated. At their simplest, the masks are a thin, pleated layer of gauze ??a few millimeters of protection from the world. Other versions, like the N95 used by healthcare workers, contain advanced carbon filters. Most people are just glad to have a mask in standard white, blue, green or black, but plaid, camouflage, heart and cartoon animal versions are also seen on the streets. People in China, Japan and other parts of Asia are accustomed to donning surgical masks to fend off pollution or germs, as well as to protect others from sneezes and coughs. Many have a small stash at home, but that will last only so long. Medical experts say it is more important to wash your hands than to wear a mask. Early indications are that the new strain of coronavirus, which causes flu-like symptoms and has killed more than 700 people, is less lethal than 2003?셲 SARS virus. Cases have been confirmed in two dozen countries, but the vast majority are in the Chinese city of Wuhan and the surrounding province of Hubei. As conditions deteriorate in Wuhan and other parts of China, life has proceeded with limited disruption elsewhere in Asia, other than the extension of school vacations in some areas and an undercurrent of paranoia. For those uncomfortably close to the outbreak?셲 epicenter, surgical masks provide a degree of insurance against an unseen enemy. In some corners of the internet, the masks have become a new form of chic. Instagram influencers have seized on the trend, striking glamorous poses in masks while urging their followers to adopt good hygiene habits and support those affected by the outbreak. ?쏱REVENTION is better than cure. Let?셲 pray that we can get through this together. All stores MASK OUT OF STOCK,??wrote Adena Wilson from the Philippines, who has 27,700 Instagram followers, under a photo of herself in an off-the-shoulder top and black face mask.  PREVENTION is better than cure . Let?셲 pray that we can get through this together. All stores MASK OUT OF STOCK ?????? Video on my YouTube channel Don?셳 forget do subscribe ???? Adena Wilson link on my profile . . . . . . #travelblogger #travel #cebu #philippines #coronavirus #coronavirusoutbreak #cebu #cebublog #cebuvlogger #blog #blogger #vlogger #philippines #igers #igph #igersph A post shared by Adena Wilson ?? (@adenawilson.ph) onJan 30, 2020 at 1:13am PST  In China, where the outbreak has rippled beyond Hubei province, masks are such a precious commodity that officials in southwestern Yunnan province co-opted a shipment meant for the city of Chongqing. A municipal health official was fired over the incident. The BBC reported that China, one of the world?셲 largest producers of surgical masks, imported 220 million masks between Jan. 24 and Feb. 2. Communist Party members in the city of Xian banded together to sew homemade masks with two layers of gauze, two layers of white cloth and one layer of plastic wrap, washed three times with disinfectant. Nearly 200 households received two masks apiece. The local government of Xiamen in Fujian province has launched a lottery system for mask purchases through the WeChat messaging app. Winners can buy six masks from designated local stores. Nanjing is among the cities instituting online reservation systems for masks. Shortly after news of the coronavirus broke in late January, masks began selling out across Southeast Asia ??an indication of how tightly interwoven this region is. The virus could easily spread through tourists, migrant workers and factory supply chains that benefit the economies of many countries. In the Malaysian state of Sabah, a popular draw for Chinese sunbathers and snorkelers, drugstores quickly sold out of face masks. Earlier this week, President Rodrigo Duterte of the Philippines reassured his country that stockpiles of face masks would be replenished after being depleted by panicked buyers. The health minister in Thailand handed out free masks to passersby Friday, then provoked controversy by berating European tourists who refused to take them, saying they should be ?쐊icked out??of the country. Singapore, which has 30 confirmed coronavirus cases, the most outside China, responded to the outbreak with typical efficiency. Each of the city-state?셲 1.3 million households was allotted four masks, with soldiers working around the clock to prepare the packages. A government website helped residents figure out when and where to collect the white surgical-style masks, which come with a label stating: ?쏡o not use this if you are well.??Many Singaporeans seemed to be following the directive, with only a slight increase in the numbers of people wearing masks on the streets. Still, many drugstores were sold out. In Hong Kong, where pro-democracy street protests have been ongoing for months, the situation was more chaotic as lines outside chain drugstores stretched for blocks. A box of 50 masks that cost $8 before the outbreak now fetches around $40. Some mom-and-pop pharmacies carry masks, but Hong Kongers say they have seen piles of them loosely packed in plastic bags. Social media videos show people scavenging masks from garbage cans. Popular anger has been directed at the Hong Kong government and its chief executive, Carrie Lam, who are accused of responding too slowly to the outbreak and putting people at risk by refusing to completely seal the border with China. The virus has sickened about two dozen people in Hong Kong, killing one. The government says it has ordered more face masks and boosted production in the city?셲 prisons, where inmates churn out tens of thousands per day. South Korean officials are cracking down on people trying to profit off the mask shortage. Hoarding of masks is now punishable by prison or fines. People can report abusive sales tactics to a tip line and website, with nearly 200 inspectors assigned to investigate. In the capital city of Seoul, many stores are sold out of masks. Meanwhile, officials are distributing free masks on buses and at subway stops, as well as to the needy. Some masks in government packaging are advertised online, raising concerns that they are being resold for profit. North Korea says it is boosting mask production. An illegal mask trade may also be flourishing in the secretive, authoritarian country, with smugglers hawking South Korean-made masks near the border with China, according to Daily NK, a Seoul-based news site with sources inside North Korea. In Taiwan, many are desperately seeking masks despite assurances from government officials that people need facial protection only if they are ill or in crowded places. On the self-governing, democratic island, which China claims as a renegade province, nearly every crisis relates back to the mainland. Images of masks imprinted with the Taiwanese national flag were widely shared online. Chinese people should be forced to wear these, commenters joked sardonically ??China does not recognize Taiwan as a country and will not allow Taiwan to join the World Health Organization. At first, convenience stores were authorized to sell masks three at a time. Officials scrapped that system after long lines and shortages, in favor of a new rationing system that began Thursday. But, so far, there only seemed to be more long lines and more shortages. At Li Tai Pharmacy in Taipei?셲 Daan district on the first day of the new system, a stream of customers arrived asking for masks. The store?셲 daily allotment of 200 adult masks had been sold out since 9 a.m., though some children?셲 masks were still left. A harried store manager said he had planned to start selling the masks in the afternoon because the computer system for logging the purchases was not ready. But people who had waited outside the store since 8 a.m. protested. So the manager collected their ID cards and sold them each two masks for five New Taiwan dollars, or about 17 cents, apiece ??a price set by the government. On Tuesdays, Thursdays and Saturdays, people with even-numbered ID cards can purchase masks ??a maximum of two per week. Mondays, Wednesdays and Fridays are for odd-numbered cards. On Sunday, everyone is allowed to buy. ?쏷hey?셱e already gone???said a man in a black mask. ?쏻hat good is this???Another customer, Morgan Tsai, bought gauze so she could fashion her own face masks. The green mask she wore was given to her by a friend, she said, and she had been reusing it often. She does not believe the advice from government officials that most people do not need to wear masks. ?쏧f everyone believes that, why are they in line to buy masks???said Tsai, who is in her 40s and works in marketing. ?쏧f the government spoke honestly and transparently, people wouldn?셳 panic.???쏮ay I interrupt???asked a bare-faced elderly man. ?쏧 have diabetes, and I don?셳 have enough masks. How do I even get any? All I can do is stay home.??Chang reported from Taipei, Taiwan; Bengali from Singapore; and Kim from Seoul. Nicole Liu and Gaochao Zhang of The Times??Beijing bureau, Times staff writer David Pierson in Singapore, special correspondent Tang Wai Yin in Hong Kong and special correspondent Ralph Jennings in Taipei and Kota Kinabalu, Malaysia, contributed to this report. 
In the prosperous capitals of Asia, money could buy anything -- until a mysterious coronavirus hit, striking fear in rich and poor alike. Now, surgical masks are nearly impossible to find on store shelves from Taipei to Hong Kong to Manila, prompting a panic reminiscent of wartime scarcity, with long lines and reports of hoarding, price gouging and fake products. People have turned to social media to share creative solutions. How about a mask made of a maxi pad? Half an orange? A water bottle? Bad advice abounds. Note to self: Steaming masks to disinfect them does not work.  Some governments have organized mask lotteries. Others are rationing masks. Political leaders tour mask factories, seeking to reassure citizens that manufacturing is being ramped up. On an increasingly interconnected continent, every major Asian city has extensive business and tourism ties with China, where the deadly outbreak originated. At their simplest, the masks are a thin, pleated layer of gauze -- a few millimeters of protection from the world. Other versions, like the N95 used by healthcare workers, contain advanced carbon filters. Most people are just glad to have a mask in standard white, blue, green or black, but plaid, camouflage, heart and cartoon animal versions are also seen on the streets. People in China, Japan and other parts of Asia are accustomed to donning surgical masks to fend off pollution or germs, as well as to protect others from sneezes and coughs. Many have a small stash at home, but that will last only so long. Medical experts say it is more important to wash your hands than to wear a mask. Early indications are that the new strain of coronavirus, which causes flu-like symptoms and has killed more than 700 people, is less lethal than 2003's SARS virus. Cases have been confirmed in two dozen countries, but the vast majority are in the Chinese city of Wuhan and the surrounding province of Hubei. As conditions deteriorate in Wuhan and other parts of China, life has proceeded with limited disruption elsewhere in Asia, other than the extension of school vacations in some areas and an undercurrent of paranoia. For those uncomfortably close to the outbreak's epicenter, surgical masks provide a degree of insurance against an unseen enemy. In some corners of the internet, the masks have become a new form of chic. Instagram influencers have seized on the trend, striking glamorous poses in masks while urging their followers to adopt good hygiene habits and support those affected by the outbreak. "PREVENTION is better than cure. Let's pray that we can get through this together. All stores MASK OUT OF STOCK," wrote Adena Wilson from the Philippines, who has 27,700 Instagram followers, under a photo of herself in an off-the-shoulder top and black face mask. In China, where the outbreak has rippled beyond Hubei province, masks are such a precious commodity that officials in southwestern Yunnan province co-opted a shipment meant for the city of Chongqing. A municipal health official was fired over the incident. The BBC reported that China, one of the world's largest producers of surgical masks, imported 220 million masks between Jan. 24 and Feb. 2. Communist Party members in the city of Xian banded together to sew homemade masks with two layers of gauze, two layers of white cloth and one layer of plastic wrap, washed three times with disinfectant. Nearly 200 households received two masks apiece. The local government of Xiamen in Fujian province has launched a lottery system for mask purchases through the WeChat messaging app. Winners can buy six masks from designated local stores. Nanjing is among the cities instituting online reservation systems for masks. Shortly after news of the coronavirus broke in late January, masks began selling out across Southeast Asia -- an indication of how tightly interwoven this region is. The virus could easily spread through tourists, migrant workers and factory supply chains that benefit the economies of many countries. In the Malaysian state of Sabah, a popular draw for Chinese sunbathers and snorkelers, drugstores quickly sold out of face masks. Earlier this week, President Rodrigo Duterte of the Philippines reassured his country that stockpiles of face masks would be replenished after being depleted by panicked buyers. The health minister in Thailand handed out free masks to passersby Friday, then provoked controversy by berating European tourists who refused to take them, saying they should be "kicked out" of the country. Singapore, which has 30 confirmed coronavirus cases, the most outside China, responded to the outbreak with typical efficiency. Each of the city-state's 1.3 million households was allotted four masks, with soldiers working around the clock to prepare the packages. A government website helped residents figure out when and where to collect the white surgical-style masks, which come with a label stating: "Do not use this if you are well." Many Singaporeans seemed to be following the directive, with only a slight increase in the numbers of people wearing masks on the streets. Still, many drugstores were sold out. In Hong Kong, where pro-democracy street protests have been ongoing for months, the situation was more chaotic as lines outside chain drugstores stretched for blocks. A box of 50 masks that cost $8 before the outbreak now fetches around $40. Some mom-and-pop pharmacies carry masks, but Hong Kongers say they have seen piles of them loosely packed in plastic bags. Social media videos show people scavenging masks from garbage cans. Popular anger has been directed at the Hong Kong government and its chief executive, Carrie Lam, who are accused of responding too slowly to the outbreak and putting people at risk by refusing to completely seal the border with China. The virus has sickened about two dozen people in Hong Kong, killing one. The government says it has ordered more face masks and boosted production in the city's prisons, where inmates churn out tens of thousands per day. South Korean officials are cracking down on people trying to profit off the mask shortage. Hoarding of masks is now punishable by prison or fines. People can report abusive sales tactics to a tip line and website, with nearly 200 inspectors assigned to investigate. In the capital city of Seoul, many stores are sold out of masks. Meanwhile, officials are distributing free masks on buses and at subway stops, as well as to the needy. Some masks in government packaging are advertised online, raising concerns that they are being resold for profit. North Korea says it is boosting mask production. An illegal mask trade may also be flourishing in the secretive, authoritarian country, with smugglers hawking South Korean-made masks near the border with China, according to Daily NK, a Seoul-based news site with sources inside North Korea. In Taiwan, many are desperately seeking masks despite assurances from government officials that people need facial protection only if they are ill or in crowded places. On the self-governing, democratic island, which China claims as a renegade province, nearly every crisis relates back to the mainland. Images of masks imprinted with the Taiwanese national flag were widely shared online. Chinese people should be forced to wear these, commenters joked sardonically -- China does not recognize Taiwan as a country and will not allow Taiwan to join the World Health Organization. At first, convenience stores were authorized to sell masks three at a time. Officials scrapped that system after long lines and shortages, in favor of a new rationing system that began Thursday. But, so far, there only seemed to be more long lines and more shortages. At Li Tai Pharmacy in Taipei's Daan district on the first day of the new system, a stream of customers arrived asking for masks. The store's daily allotment of 200 adult masks had been sold out since 9 a.m., though some children's masks were still left. A harried store manager said he had planned to start selling the masks in the afternoon because the computer system for logging the purchases was not ready. But people who had waited outside the store since 8 a.m. protested. So the manager collected their ID cards and sold them each two masks for five New Taiwan dollars, or about 17 cents, apiece -- a price set by the government. On Tuesdays, Thursdays and Saturdays, people with even-numbered ID cards can purchase masks -- a maximum of two per week. Mondays, Wednesdays and Fridays are for odd-numbered cards. On Sunday, everyone is allowed to buy. "They're already gone?" said a man in a black mask. "What good is this?" Another customer, Morgan Tsai, bought gauze so she could fashion her own face masks. The green mask she wore was given to her by a friend, she said, and she had been reusing it often. She does not believe the advice from government officials that most people do not need to wear masks. "If everyone believes that, why are they in line to buy masks?" said Tsai, who is in her 40s and works in marketing. "If the government spoke honestly and transparently, people wouldn't panic." "May I interrupt?" asked a bare-faced elderly man. "I have diabetes, and I don't have enough masks. How do I even get any? All I can do is stay home." Chang reported from Taipei, Taiwan; Bengali from Singapore; and Kim from Seoul. Nicole Liu and Gaochao Zhang of The Times' Beijing bureau, Times staff writer David Pierson in Singapore, special correspondent Tang Wai Yin in Hong Kong and special correspondent Ralph Jennings in Taipei and Kota Kinabalu, Malaysia, contributed to this report. Caption: PHOTO: MASKS aren't vital to stave off the coronavirus, but they are a must-have for many in Asia. With supplies limited, some have resorted to homemade options. PHOTOGRAPHER:AFP/Getty Images; EPA/Shutterstock PHOTO:IN BEIJING, a man swims with a mask on. China imported 220 million masks between Jan. 24 and Feb. 2. PHOTOGRAPHER:Wang Zhao AFP/Getty Images PHOTO:FLIGHT ATTENDANTS arrive in Thailand. The masks provide a sense of insurance against illness. PHOTOGRAPHER:Rungroj Yongrit EPA/Shutterstock 
Seven hours before the K-pop band SuperM took the stage for its sold-out show at the Forum last week, crowds were already packed outside the venue. No one needed to be there so early. The unseasonably hot weather sent sweat down fans' faces -- many covered with surgical masks, perhaps from coronavirus fears -- and dampened their SuperM sweatshirts, SuperM T-shirts and SuperM proprietary lightsticks. But thousands of young K-pop stans had waited months for this day, when an unprecedented supergroup of South Korea's top pop stars would headline Los Angeles as part of a U.S. and worldwide arena tour. The boys were just steps away, in fact, down the Forum Club stairs, past the giant portraits of Bob Dylan and Guns N' Roses, in a windlowless backstage green room. There, SuperM's Taemin, Kai, Baekhyun, Mark, Ten and Lucas (all early to mid-20s), kicked back on a gigantic couch, dressed in Balenciaga sweatshirts and high-streetwear bomber jackets. Their green, blue and bleach-blond hair fell over skin so flawless it looked like they'd had Instagram filters implanted.  Taeyong, the seventh, was a bit worse for wear, clutching his stomach in agony from an unspecified illness. He powered through the shivering to silently nod hello to a Times reporter, before beelining back to the dressing room to recover. Still, the band felt prepared for the night. "I was really nervous when I first went on that stage, I actually didn't have too much confidence," Lucas said, about the band's first-ever live show outside the offices of their U.S. label Capitol back in October (all members but Mark used a translator for English interviews). "A lot of the nervousness came from the fact that I really wanted to put my best foot forward. But now, I can definitely say I feel more confident about where I am." Super M's only been a group for six months, but they were as surefire an idea as any in pop. Its members had been K-pop stars for nearly their whole lives, in the groundbreaking groups EXO, SHINee, NCT127 and WayV. In the wake of BTS' rout of the U.S. pop charts and stadiums, SuperM is already tipped as the next phenomenon in K-pop, with four popular bands' fan bases built in, and both Capitol and SM Entertainment, the most storied label in K-pop from founder Lee Soo-Man, behind them. In October, the band set a record for debut week sales by a K-pop act and topped the Billboard 200 album charts with its self-titled EP. K-pop pressure But it's also endured tragedy, including the 2017 suicide of Jonghyun, Taemin's bandmate in SHINee. These seven young men, none older than 27, face the all-consuming demands of K-pop celebrity and an industry going through a time of profound self-reflection and change. As they limbered up for this set -- maybe the biggest show of their young careers in this band -- they knew the stakes. "This is basically like the re-debut for a lot of us," Kai said. "There is some of that pressure and that expectation on us, because there was a kind of shock value to this group. This is going to be a different kind of stage." In K-pop, it's common for bands to be modular. Groups often have sub-units or spinoffs to appeal to different markets like Chinese speakers. It's especially helpful for boy bands, where superstardom is no insulation from compulsory military service in South Korea, and acts can be reconfigured to keep stars on the road. But nothing like SuperM has happened in the genre before, where standout members of already superfamous bands joined forces. "The Avengers of K-pop" comparisons come up often, but maybe instead think of the 1992 U.S. Olympic basketball "Dream Team," with seven-part harmonies and two-hour sets of impeccable choreography. Even though all the members are in their 20s, in the ultra-compressed world of K-pop, SuperM is intergenerational. "I used to listen to SHINee before I even came to the label to train," Mark, 20, said, looking over admiringly at his bandmate Taemin, 26. "To have our voices be harmonized together, and to be able to see him as a guy I know as a friend, that changes the way I listen to his music or see his performance." Being in the new band was also a chance to break out of the established roles in their main acts. "In EXO, I'm one of the youngest, but here I'm one of the oldest and that's a really fun dynamic," Kai, 26, said. "When I look at Lucas, I remember back when I first debuted and that makes me feel young again, like 'Oh, I remember when I was like that too.' " "Men get more attractive as they get older, so it's kind of better to debut later," 21-year-old Lucas joked, ribbing his bandmate in return. SuperM isn't diluted for Western tastes. But they are particularly rangy for K-pop: At the Forum show, Taemin, one of the older members and a K-pop veteran since 2008, sang pristine R&B on "Goodbye" and nailed every mark of a long, complicated solo dance. Kai's trap-influenced "Confession" was the raciest number, punctuated by long flashes of abs that sent fans into paroxysms of lust. "The genre as a whole is exploding over here," said Tarynn Law, 27, who works at a music tech firm in Malibu and ponied up $175 for a floor seat to the Forum show. "Artists like Taemin and EXO haven't toured here in quite some time or, in WayV's case, at all, which makes SuperM's love for the States pretty special for a lot of fans too." The group's new material -- the purring melodic bounce of "No Manners" and the hard-pivoting EDM of "Jopping" (a goofy portmanteau of "Jumping" and "Popping") -- show an ear for K-pop sounds that can translate not just globally but specifically on U.S. streaming and arena tours. "I personally think that this group itself is not really westernized or altered at all for any type of market," said Baekhyun. But he agrees that their sound challenges both K-pop and Western styles. "To be honest, when I first heard the song 'Jopping,' I thought it sounded a little bit too different. But now when I see the U.S. or the international fans' reaction, it really made an impression on them. There was a bigger picture that Mr. Lee was thinking of." After helping to push NCT127 to the top tier of K-pop acts in the U.S., Capitol sees SuperM as both the most promising new bet in K-pop today, and the start of a deeper relationship with the Korean label SM Entertainment and its founder Lee Soo-Man, at 67 a titanic figure in South Korean business and culture (imagine Steve Jobs or Marvel's Kevin Feige, if they'd invented a music genre that became their country's most visible export). Given K-pop's uniquely devoted fan culture, where physical record sales are an expression of loyalty and fans camp out to buy $70 avant-garde sweatshirts, it's no surprise that Capitol wanted to continue what "Mr. Lee," as he is affectionately known in South Korea, had started. "Like many music executives, I've watched with keen interest how K-pop's immense popularity has been spreading around the globe," Steve Barnett, the chairman and CEO of Capitol Music Group, said in an email. "I've certainly wanted to be in this space for a while, but I knew I had to find the right partner. Mr. Lee is an incredibly impressive and successful entertainment executive and creative force. Everything is first rate with his company and the artists he develops and brings to the world." A stronger spotlight Indeed, Mr. Lee, who hand-picked the members of SuperM, was at the Forum show, and when the camera panned to him in his suite, he was cheered as loudly as any star on stage. Given BTS' "Saturday Night Live" and Grammy performances, Blackpink's knockout set at Coachella last year and the reunion of veteran K-pop act BigBang this year at the same fest, the genre and its figureheads have never been more visible in the U.S. But the squeaky-clean scene has, over the last few years, faced many of the same reckonings about overwork, toxic fan culture, misogyny and mental health that the wider entertainment industry has dealt with. Last year, K-pop was shaken by the suicides of two female stars, Goo Hara and Sulli, that thrust those long-simmering issues to the forefront. Taemin knows that sense of tragedy more intimately than anyone. As a founding member of SHINee, he was devastated by the suicide of his bandmade Jonghyun in 2017. The loss shook K-pop as a whole, including all the members of SuperM. But Taemin lost a bandmate and close friend. He still struggles with how to speak about it, and when the topic came up, a Capitol rep encouraged him to be as honest as he felt comfortable with. He wanted to keep the personal pain of that loss private, he said, but acknowledged that speaking out on mental health issues in K-pop is the only way to effect change. "When it comes to celebrities, it's always kind of a double-edged sword. They're loved by so many, but at the same time, they're in the spotlight and everything they do is analyzed or scrutinize by so many people," Taemin said. "But the industry is definitely changing for the better." In a few hours, they would walk out to a packed Forum and show fans what K-pop is capable of. For two hours, they demonstrated the virtuosity, musical range and physical craft that goes into a set pushing the peak of a genre. As a cultural phenomenon, K-pop has nothing left to prove in America anymore. Now it's up to its acts to show what's possible within it. "It's really encouraging to see how we can all bridge the gap, and everyone can just be part of a global music scene," Kai said. "This shows us that K-pop is not just for K-pop fans anymore." Caption: PHOTO: AS K-POP explodes in global popularity, the band SuperM tries for a different dynamic in the face of tragedy. PHOTOGRAPHER:Genaro Molina Los Angeles Times PHOTO:MEMBERS OF OTHER top K-pop bands came together to form SuperM, which performed a sold-out show at the Forum on Feb. 1 that Kai called their "re-debut." PHOTOGRAPHER:Genaro Molina Los Angeles Times 
On Friday evening, supermarkets in Taipei put out their usual stocks of toilet paper, stacked floor-to-ceiling in brick-sized packets stuffed into bags decorated with colorful cartoon characters. By Monday, just barren racks ??and bewildered shoppers ??were left. In Taiwan, Hong Kong and Singapore, shoppers are stockpiling toilet paper, hand sanitizers, rice, instant noodles, cured meats, sanitary napkins and other products as fears over the new strain of coronavirus from China continue to ripple across Asia. Many consumers are worried that more infections in their countries and territories ??which have some of the highest numbers of coronavirus cases outside China ??will make it unsafe to go shopping. Others are concerned that the Chinese economy will be weakened by the outbreak and unable to keep exporting the goods many rely on. Still others were scared when images of empty shelves and snaking lines outside supermarkets flooded social media over the weekend, making them think they should be stocking up too. ?쏷his is mental illness, too much panic,??griped Chiu Yuan-chao, 50, a Taipei elementary school volunteer and mother of two. Chiu tried to order toilet paper online Monday after she realized supermarkets were empty, but the e-commerce website she usually uses was sold out. She eventually tracked down three small packs at a convenience store. ?쏧?셫 not too worried yet,??Chiu said. ?쏝ut if China can?셳 get a lid on this outbreak or find a cure, then there will be more panic.??Since the virus began popping up outside China in January, consumers from the U.S. to Southeast Asia have been buying up protective masks to guard against infection, even though doctors say the thin masks cannot stop transmission. Some of the hoarding in Taiwan is driven by reports that toilet paper and sanitary napkins could be used, in a pinch, as makeshift masks. ?쏻hen there is this sort of extraordinary demand, it?셲 simply a question of fear,??said Liang Kuo-yuan, president of Yuanta-Polaris Research Institute, an economic think tank in Taipei, the Taiwanese capital. ?쏽ou can impose some controls, but once a government does something like that people become even more afraid.??The virus that was discovered in Wuhan, China, in December had killed 1,118 people as of Wednesday ??more than the SARS epidemic that originated in China in 2003 ??but with only one fatality outside China. The Chinese government responded by imposing lockdowns in Wuhan and much of surrounding Hubei province, while multiple Asian countries have banned travelers from China. A dozen Asian countries have reported cases of the virus but no signs that the outbreak is spreading rapidly among the general population. In Singapore, which has 47 coronavirus cases, the most outside China, the government raised its disease alert level Friday to orange, indicating a severe outbreak was spreading from person to person. After the announcement, shelves were emptied of hand sanitizer, napkins, tissues, noodles, rice and other staples, with many Singaporeans fearing what would happen if the threat were elevated to red, the highest level. Singaporeans, who boast the highest per-capita income in Asia and pride themselves on the efficiency of their authoritarian city-state, are also known for a ruthless survival instinct. It?셲 a result of the country?셲 small size and scant natural resources, and produces a national ethos that fears losing out. ?쏯o hand sanitizer, no canned goods, no paper products,??lamented Jeeva Pillay, a 45-year-old data engineer who moved to Singapore from South Africa last month. She and her husband spent much of Sunday waiting in line at another supermarket for paper towels and cleaning supplies for their new apartment, but coming away empty-handed. ?쏞learly people are panicking,??Pillay said. ?쏻e didn?셳 feel like there was a need to stock up but now we feel like we have to follow suit.??The run on goods prompted the government-linked NTUC FairPrice grocery chain to limit purchases: four packs of paper products such as toilet paper, two bags of rice, four packets of instant noodles and about $36 worth of vegetables. Over the weekend, Singapore Prime Minister Lee Hsien Loong urged residents to not panic and insisted the government was better prepared than during the SARS epidemic. ?쏻e are not locking down the city or confining everybody to stay at home,??Lee said. ?쏻e have ample supplies, so there is no need to stock up with instant noodles, tinned food or toilet paper, as some people did yesterday.??The alert prompted fears of being holed up indoors indefinitely, said Rajiv Biswas, a Singapore-based economist at market research firm IHS Markit. ?쏱eople became very nervous,??Biswas said. ?쏶upermarket shelves were empty over the weekend I guess because people were planning to bunker into their houses until this was over.??In Hong Kong, fears of the virus, which has infected 50 people, have cleaned out nearly all stocks of sanitary goods. Consumers line up at the semiautonomous Chinese territory?셲 dispensaries up to five hours before they open, sometimes pouncing on toilet paper seconds after the shelves are restocked. Rice, canned sardines and lunch meats were also selling out. The panic buying recalled the anxious days of 2011, when fears of radiation emanating from the earthquake-damaged Fukushima Daiichi nuclear reactor in Japan fueled a run on table salt in Hong Kong, out of an erroneous belief that iodine would ward off ill effects. ?쏧n both situations people are panicking when facing hazards, so I think the [people?셲] attitude is not improved,??19-year-old Hong Kong shopper Hailey Yan said. ?쏝ut for now, with better technology, we have more access to information. The younger generation is more objective when facing rumors of hoarding, but for some elder people, they still have the idea of stocking up on food to prevent hunger.??Panicked bulk buying of surgical masks has also been reported in Japan, South Korea, Thailand and Vietnam. South Korean authorities last week stiffened penalties for hoarding masks or sanitizing liquids. Violators face up to two years in prison or fines of about $42,000. Authorities in Taiwan, which has reported 18 coronavirus infections, this week recommended prosecution for three women suspected of spreading social media messages suggesting that toilet paper, table napkins and sanitary napkins could be used to craft mask substitutes, and warning that those products could soon be in short supply. The women could be prosecuted under anti-fake news laws passed in early 2019 to prevent rumors affecting consumers. The Taiwanese government?셲 Industrial Development Bureau clarified on its Facebook page that those paper goods couldn?셳 be used for masks. The bureau?셲 deputy director, Yang Bo-ken, said this week that suppliers were ready to restock toilet paper in stores, although clerks told customers it could take several days for the goods to reach shelves. Liang, of the Taipei think tank, said governments in the region should ensure they can ship enough nonperishable goods from outside China in case the virus incites more panic. ?쏷he most important thing they can do is ensure supplies,??he said. Special correspondent Jennings reported from Taipei and Times staff writer Bengali from Singapore. Special correspondent Antonia Tang contributed to this report from Hong Kong. 
On Friday evening, supermarkets in Taipei put out their usual stocks of toilet paper, stacked floor-to-ceiling in brick-sized packets stuffed into bags decorated with colorful cartoon characters. By Monday, just barren racks -- and bewildered shoppers -- were left. In Taiwan, Hong Kong and Singapore, shoppers are stockpiling toilet paper, hand sanitizers, rice, instant noodles, cured meats, sanitary napkins and other products as fears over the new strain of coronavirus from China continue to ripple across Asia.  Many consumers are worried that more infections in their countries and territories -- which have some of the highest numbers of coronavirus cases outside China -- will make it unsafe to go shopping. Others are concerned that the Chinese economy will be weakened by the outbreak and unable to keep exporting the goods many rely on. Still others were scared when images of empty shelves and snaking lines outside supermarkets flooded social media over the weekend, making them think they should be stocking up too. "This is mental illness, too much panic," griped Chiu Yuan-chao, 50, a Taipei elementary school volunteer and mother of two. Chiu tried to order toilet paper online after she realized supermarkets were empty, but the e-commerce website she usually uses was sold out. She eventually tracked down three small packs at a convenience store. "I'm not too worried yet," Chiu said. "But if China can't get a lid on this outbreak or find a cure, then there will be more panic." Since the virus began popping up outside China in January, consumers from the U.S. to Southeast Asia have been buying up protective masks to guard against infection, even though doctors say the thin masks cannot stop transmission. Some of the hoarding in Taiwan is driven by reports that toilet paper and sanitary napkins could be used, in a pinch, as makeshift masks. "When there is this sort of extraordinary demand, it's simply a question of fear," said Liang Kuo-yuan, president of Yuanta-Polaris Research Institute, an economic think tank in Taipei, the Taiwanese capital. "You can impose some controls, but once a government does something like that, people become even more afraid." The virus that was discovered in Wuhan, China, in December had killed 1,118 people as of Wednesday -- more than the SARS epidemic that originated in China in 2003 -- but with only one fatality outside China. The Chinese government responded by imposing lockdowns in Wuhan and much of surrounding Hubei province, while multiple Asian countries have banned travelers from China. A dozen Asian countries have reported cases of the virus but no signs that the outbreak is spreading rapidly among the general population. In Singapore, which has 47 coronavirus cases, the most outside China, the government raised its disease alert level Friday to orange, indicating a severe outbreak was spreading from person to person. After the announcement, shelves were emptied of hand sanitizer, napkins, tissues, noodles, rice and other staples, with many Singaporeans fearing what would happen if the threat were elevated to red, the highest level. Singaporeans, who boast the highest per-capita income in Asia and pride themselves on the efficiency of their authoritarian city-state, are also known for a ruthless survival instinct. It's a result of the country's small size and scant natural resources, and produces a national ethos that fears losing out. "No hand sanitizer, no canned goods, no paper products," lamented Jeeva Pillay, a 45-year-old data engineer who moved to Singapore from South Africa last month. She and her husband spent much of Sunday waiting in line at another supermarket for paper towels and cleaning supplies for their new apartment, but coming away empty-handed. "Clearly people are panicking," Pillay said. "We didn't feel like there was a need to stock up, but now we feel like we have to follow suit." The run on goods prompted the government-linked NTUC FairPrice grocery chain to limit purchases: four packs of paper products such as toilet paper, two bags of rice, four packets of instant noodles and about $36 worth of vegetables. Over the weekend, Singapore Prime Minister Lee Hsien Loong urged residents to not panic and insisted the government was better prepared than during the SARS epidemic. "We are not locking down the city or confining everybody to stay at home," Lee said. "We have ample supplies, so there is no need to stock up with instant noodles, tinned food or toilet paper, as some people did yesterday." The alert prompted fears of being holed up indoors indefinitely, said Rajiv Biswas, a Singapore-based economist at the market research firm IHS Markit. "People became very nervous," Biswas said. "Supermarket shelves were empty over the weekend I guess because people were planning to bunker into their houses until this was over." In Hong Kong, fears of the virus, which has infected 50 people, have cleaned out nearly all stocks of sanitary goods. Consumers line up at the semiautonomous Chinese territory's dispensaries up to five hours before they open, sometimes pouncing on toilet paper seconds after the shelves are restocked. Rice, canned sardines and lunch meats were also selling out. The panic buying recalled the anxious days of 2011, when fears of radiation emanating from the earthquake-damaged Fukushima Daiichi nuclear reactor in Japan fueled a run on table salt in Hong Kong, out of an erroneous belief that iodine would ward off ill effects. "In both situations people are panicking when facing hazards, so I think the [people's] attitude is not improved," 19-year-old Hong Kong shopper Hailey Yan said. "But for now, with better technology, we have more access to information. The younger generation is more objective when facing rumors of hoarding, but for some elder people, they still have the idea of stocking up on food to prevent hunger." Panicked bulk buying of surgical masks has also been reported in Japan, South Korea, Thailand and Vietnam. South Korean authorities last week stiffened penalties for hoarding masks or sanitizing liquids. Violators face up to two years in prison or fines of about $42,000. Authorities in Taiwan, which has reported 18 coronavirus infections, this week recommended prosecution for three women suspected of spreading social media messages suggesting that toilet paper, table napkins and sanitary napkins could be used to craft mask substitutes, and warning that those products could soon be in short supply. The women could be prosecuted under anti-fake news laws passed in early 2019 to prevent rumors affecting consumers. -- Special correspondent Jennings reported from Taipei and Times staff writer Bengali from Singapore. Special correspondent Antonia Tang in Hong Kong contributed to this report. Caption: PHOTO: A COUPLE shop for groceries in Beijing. Consumers in Asia have been stockpiling key items, fearing the coronavirus epidemic will curtail exports from China. PHOTOGRAPHER:Kevin Frayer Getty Images 
The coronavirus outbreak that originated in China is serious enough to qualify as a global health emergency. But is it a pandemic? Excellent question. Let's review some epidemiology basics to find out. Think back to the town where you grew up, and the infections that made the rounds. An "endemic" level of disease -- or a community's baseline prevalence of it -- isn't always zero. Consider chicken pox in the United States, or malaria in some African countries. Endemic disease certainly isn't preferable, but it's expected.  A sudden increase in the number of people with a particular disease in a limited area can signal the onset of an outbreak. So can the emergence of an unusual type of disease, such as a strain of the flu that's never been seen before. If an outbreak expands to a broader population, it becomes an epidemic. That's the case with the novel coronavirus spreading in China and beyond. The decision by the World Health Organization to declare a "public health emergency of international concern" wasn't an arbitrary one. The WHO considers three factors when weighing that designation: 1. Is the outbreak unusual or unexpected? With a never-before-seen virus like COVID-19, the answer is yes. 2. Does the outbreak have implications for health beyond a national border? With dozens of exported cases on four continents, the answer is another yes. 3. Does the outbreak require immediate international action? Since airport screenings and aid money are needed to contain the virus' spread, the answer is once again yes. But epidemics can be severe without ever rising to the level of a pandemic, so long as they predominantly affect one region -- in this case, China. The U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention defines a pandemic as one that has spread to several countries or continents, usually affecting a large number of people. The severity of illnesses is not a consideration, nor is the number of deaths. There are currently 29 confirmed coronavirus cases in Japan, 67 in Singapore and 33 in Thailand, for example. Compared with China, which is dealing with more than 66,000 cases, most experts agree: It's not a pandemic -- yet. But as scientists learn more about the virus, the prospect of a pandemic looks increasingly likely. "Diseases are not terribly good at respecting borders," said U.S. Health and Human Services Secretary Alex Azar. The new coronavirus appears to be spreading readily among humans. That makes it more similar to influenza -- a classic pandemic agent -- than to other coronaviruses. A handful of patients in countries including Germany, South Korea, Japan and the United States have become sick with COVID-19 despite having no travel history to China.If the coronavirus is soon contained in those countries, "we would just call those individual outbreaks that occurred and were controlled," said Dr. Tom Inglesby, director of the Center for Health Security at the Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health. But if the number of cases in Europe and the United States drastically escalates with no clear ties back to China, "that is enough to call it a pandemic," he said. Beyond the case count, a pandemic contrasts with an epidemic because it has global consequences. Right now, the hit to China's workforce is steep, but few other countries face a real health or economic crisis. Aside from airport screenings and frequent hand-washing, it's mostly business as usual. The coronavirus that causes Middle Eastern respiratory syndrome, or MERS, never got past this stage. Since it began circulating in humans in 2012, MERS has infected only about 2,500 people, mostly in and around the Arabian Peninsula. On the other hand, the coronavirus responsible for severe acute respiratory syndrome, or SARS, earned pandemic status because it affected 26 countries, with ongoing chains of transmission not just in China, the epicenter, but also in Canada, Hong Kong, Taiwan, Singapore and Vietnam. The new coronavirus could wind up following the path of the H1N1 swine flu, which caused a pandemic in 2009. That outbreak subsided in 2010, but the virus continues to circulate as one of the primary strains of the seasonal flu. Sam Scheiner, a mathematical modeling expert for infectious diseases at the National Science Foundation, said that if COVID-19 joins the list of seasonal respiratory viruses, it could ultimately lead to tens of thousands of deaths in the United States each year. Caption: PHOTO: A MAKESHIFT HOSPITAL treats COVID-19 patients in Wuhan City, China. The disease appears to be spreading readily among humans, but it's been largely confined to China, which has seen some 66,000 cases. PHOTOGRAPHER:EPA/Shutterstock 
The mysterious virus first emerged in the winter in eastern China, a never-before-seen pathogen that would rattle the world's sense of safety and ignite a global panic. In the months that followed, hundreds of people began seeking medical treatment because they were coughing, struggling to breathe and, in some cases, approaching death. Scientists racing to quell the outbreak determined the source was a novel strain of coronavirus. The World Health Organization called for immediate action to prevent the global health threat from sweeping across multiple continents and killing thousands.  It was early 2003, the beginning of the battle against severe acute respiratory syndrome, more commonly known as SARS. The SARS outbreak was the first deadly epidemic caused by a coronavirus. "It was a tremendous concern," said Alan Rowan, a public health professor at Florida State University involved in Florida's response to the SARS outbreak. "It was a novel virus, and it was frightening." Much like the strain of coronavirus currently spreading across the world, the SARS virus prompted people to hoard face masks, cancel trips to Asia and institute massive quarantines amid fears that the disease would become entrenched. But eight months after SARS began circulating, it was contained. The virus died out. The stamping out of SARS has been lauded as one of the biggest recent public health victories, achieved with a strong and swift response and a dose of good luck. But as the number of cases of the new coronavirus swells, it appears less likely that history is going to repeat itself. The virus' path suggests containment will be much more difficult than with SARS and the harm much greater, experts say. On Feb. 9, the death toll from COVID-19 surpassed that of SARS. In the days since, it has climbed even higher. 'Enormous panic' After originating in southeastern China's Guangdong province in late 2002, SARS had spread by early spring to about 1,500 people. Officials from the World Health Organization said SARS could become the most serious health threat to emerge in more than 20 years, with the exception of AIDS. SARS was a pneumonia-like illness that killed about 1 in every 10 people stricken, far higher than the estimated 1-in-50 mortality rate for COVID-19 infections. "There was enormous panic," said Lawrence Gostin, director of the World Health Organization Collaborating Center on National and Global Health Law. The SARS outbreak, which reached 32 countries and territories, was ultimately contained using traditional public health measures, such as testing, isolating patients and screening people at airports and other places where they might spread the virus, Gostin said. The strategy is simple: If sick people can be stopped from infecting healthy people, the disease will eventually die off. But limiting the current outbreak with these tried-and-true public health strategies has proved harder now because of the sheer number of cases, Gostin said. By the end of the SARS epidemic, 8,000 people had been infected. Already, more than 73,000 people have been diagnosed with COVID-19, and some experts think undetected milder cases push the true tally even higher. "It's affecting hundreds of thousands of people, and potentially a lot more going forward. It's really hard to contain once you've got that kind of saturation," Gostin said. "This is a much bigger challenge than SARS." During SARS, remembered as the first pandemic of the 21st century, public health officials watched in horror as an interconnected, global society facilitated the spread of disease like never before. A Canadian couple who visited Hong Kong started a SARS outbreak in Toronto that killed 24 people. Virus cousins Those risks are even greater now. Chinese people travel domestically and internationally at a much higher rate now than in 2003, which makes containment "that much more difficult," Gostin said. The World Health Organization has declared COVID-19 an international health emergency and announced Friday that the virus reached a fifth continent, Africa, after a case was detected in Egypt. Any dips in weekly case numbers should not be interpreted as signs of abatement, officials say. "This outbreak could still go in any direction," Director-General Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus said during a news conference last week. Officials know how fickle these viruses can be. The SARS response benefited from "good fortune as well as good science," Dr. David Heymann, who led the World Health Organization's infectious disease unit during the SARS pandemic, wrote in a 2004 paper evaluating the international response to the disease. Officials were lucky that SARS never popped up in developing countries with less sophisticated healthcare systems that would have struggled to contain the illness, he wrote. The virus was also easier to stop because it turned out to have relatively low transmissibility, he wrote. "Its rapid containment is one of the biggest success stories in public health in recent years," Heymann wrote. "How narrow was the escape from an international health disaster? What tipped the scales?" Scientists will probably soon find out. SARS and COVID-19 are like cousins, sharing 70% of their genetic material. Both are corona- viruses, a family of viruses that before 2003 had been known to cause only the common cold in humans. While the SARS virus replicated deep in people's lungs, probably contributing to the higher mortality rate, that also made it less likely to spread than the COVID-19 virus, said Dr. Stanley Perlman, a microbiologist at the University of Iowa who studies coronaviruses. The new coronavirus grows in people's noses and airways, so it can be more easily spread through coughing and sneezing, like the flu, he said. Though people with SARS probably weren't contagious until they were very ill, that isn't the case for COVID-19, so it will be harder to catch people before they infect others, he said. "As soon as you start having very, very minor symptoms, that sore throat, that itchiness, that sneezing, then you're contagious," Perlman said. "I don't think it's going to be like SARS and just go away." Even if COVID-19 doesn't die out, it could wane so much that cases become extremely rare, or emerge only in the winter. Viruses tend to have seasonality, appearing for only a few months a year, so some hope warmer weather will make the virus recede. Faster response With this outbreak, international officials were notified much sooner and the virus was sequenced much faster than with SARS. Yet COVID-19 remains trickier to get ahead of because of the virus' traits, said Brittany Kmush, a public health researcher at Syracuse University's Falk College. Viruses spread most when they are very contagious and not that deadly, she said. If a virus is very lethal, patients often die before they can transmit the illness to many other people. COVID-19's low mortality rate compared with SARS, though a relief to doctors, may actually hinder prevention efforts, she said. "I think if SARS had similar characteristics to this coronavirus, it would still be circulating," Kmush said. Caption: PHOTO: AN IMPERIAL guard wears a mask in Seoul outside the Gyeongbok Palace, the main royal palace during the Joseon Dynasty. South Korea has seen at least 30 cases of the novel coronavirus that began in Wuhan, China. PHOTOGRAPHER:Ahn Young-joon Associated Press P: GRAPHIC: Sizing up COVID-19 and SARS (MAPS: the World) CREDIT: Lorena Iniguez Elebee Los Angeles Times 
(Want to get this briefing by email? Here’s the sign-up.) The coronavirus causing a new respiratory illness is now capable of spreading from person to person, a prominent Chinese scientist said on Monday, as the authorities reported a third death and doubled the number of cases from a day earlier, including in Beijing and southern China for the first time. Cases have also been reported in Japan, South Korea and Thailand. With hundreds of millions of people in China expected to travel for the Lunar New Year holiday, which begins Friday, public health officials are working to forestall a major outbreak. Some experts have suggested that there are probably far more cases of the illness than China’s authorities have disclosed. When a Boeing 737 crashed near Amsterdam in 2009, killing nine people, the accident was blamed on Dutch pilots. But Boeing’s mistakes also contributed, including its design choices and faulty safety assessments. A review by The New York Times of evidence from the 2009 accident, some of it previously confidential, reveals striking parallels with recent Boeing crashes that killed hundreds — and resistance by a team of Americans, including Boeing and federal officials, to a full airing of findings that later proved relevant to Boeing’s Max plane. An expert commissioned by the Dutch Safety Board to analyze the 2009 crash said it “represents such a sentinel event that was never taken seriously.” His study was never made public. Comparisons: In the 2009 and Max accidents, the failure of a single sensor caused systems to misfire, with catastrophic results, and Boeing did not provide pilots with information that could have helped them react to the malfunction. Quotable: The Turkish Airlines crash “should have woken everybody up,” said one aviation safety expert. The board, which is separate from the Times newsroom, announced that it’s supporting both Amy Klobuchar and Elizabeth Warren for the Democratic presidential nomination. The dual endorsement is a departure from convention. The board says that it is meant to address the party’s “realist” and “radical” models. While arguing that President Trump must be defeated, the board did not take a position on which was the best path forward for Democrats, writing that both “warrant serious consideration.” Read the endorsement here, which distills the themes and challenges of the election coming in November. Background: The board’s 15 members met with nine candidates and released full transcripts of their interviews. Behind the scenes: The endorsement process has typically been opaque, but this year, our TV show “The Weekly” was invited in. Our deputy editorial page editor explained the process and the decision to open it up to cameras. Thousands of people were left without power as baseball-size hailstones pummeled major cities in the country’s southeast over the past two days, the latest turn in a summer of extreme weather. Although a drought — along with the devastating wildfires it has fed — is far from over, thunderstorms have lashed Sydney, Canberra and Melbourne. What’s next: Meteorologists warned that the storms would continue for the next few days. Hot and windy conditions are expected to return to many parts of New South Wales later this week. Isabel dos Santos, above center, Africa’s richest woman, often took cuts of her country’s wealth through decrees signed by her father. Global banks, bound by strict rules about politically connected clients, largely declined to work with her family. But global consulting firms embraced her business, helping her amass a fortune in a country hobbled by corruption and park it abroad, according to a trove of documents obtained by the International Consortium of Investigative Journalists and shared with The Times. The vast empire stretches from Hong Kong to the U.S. India: As the country seeks to rein in foreign technology companies and international news outlets, its leaders have pressured Jeff Bezos, who owns one of each: Amazon and The Washington Post. How warm was your town?: Scientists said that 2019 was the second-warmest year on record, and an AccuWeather database of 3,500 cities around the world showed that more than 80 percent experienced higher-than-normal average temperatures last year. See how your city compares. China: Video of a pig being tied up and shoved off a bungee tower at a theme park in Chongqing has sparked outrage in a country where animal rights activism is a relatively new phenomenon. Snapshot: Above, mounds of plastic junk on the outskirts of Beijing. In an effort to combat waste, China is banning the use of disposable foam cutlery and nonbiodegradable plastic bags in major cities by the end of this year, with broader bans to follow. What we’re reading: This piece in Taste about a food specialty familiar to only a small subset of Italian-Americans. “It has come to my attention that some of you do not know the first blessed thing about lard bread," tweeted our food critic Pete Wells. “Max [Falkowitz] is here to guide you into the light of lardy knowledge.” Cook: Vegetarian skillet chili is one of those pantry meals that you’ll memorize. (Our Five Weeknight Dishes newsletter has more recommendations.) Read: The Chilean poet Pablo Neruda helped save over 2,000 refugees. Isabel Allende’s latest book, “A Long Petal of the Sea,” imagines two of them. Smarter Living: Should you live out of a suitcase when you travel, or unpack your things? There are arguments for both. A hundred years ago this month, the U.S. embarked on a 13-year official prohibition on the “manufacture, sale or transportation of intoxicating liquors” anywhere within the country. It didn’t go well. Bootlegging liquor operations proliferated, as did the illicit bars known as speakeasies. And the drink of choice: the cocktail, which spread out the hooch or disguised its sometimes bad flavors. The boom far outlasted Prohibition. Sidecar, anyone? Dave Wondrich, a drinks historian, tracked down the source of the word “cocktail.” In the second edition of his landmark reconstruction of mixed drinks, “Imbibe!,” he notes that prospective horse sellers in England would give old or droopy specimens a rectal dose of ginger to make them cock their tails for a younger, zippier appearance. From there it was just a short jump to the zingy drinks that made humans perk up, at least at the start of their alcoholic forays.
(Want to get this briefing by email? Here’s the sign-up.)  Good evening. Here’s the latest. 1. This was the capital today.  President Trump and Vice President Mike Pence visited the Martin Luther King Jr. Memorial in Washington to honor the civil rights leader’s federal holiday. And the House impeachment managers and the president’s defense team took turns touring the Senate chamber and surrounding offices, transformed into a court for the nation’s third-ever impeachment trial, which opens Tuesday with a debate on rules for the proceedings. Mr. Trump’s legal team called on the Senate to “swiftly reject” the impeachment charges and acquit him, arguing that Democrats would “permanently weaken the presidency” if they succeeded in removing him from office over what the team characterized as policy and political differences.  2. Thousands of pro-gun advocates, many of them armed, converged in Virginia. They gathered outside the Virginia State Capitol in Richmond, most in an area where guns were allowed, to oppose a series of gun-control measures being considered in the State Legislature. Despite fears of potential violence, as of this writing there were no official reports of skirmishes or major incidents among the 22,000 in attendance, with 16,000 outside the perimeter and 6,000 inside. “It was like a family gathering,” said one protester who drove from Texas to participate. The State Senate last week approved three gun control bills, which the House of Delegates could approve as early as this week. 3. A united front for Democrats. Several Democratic presidential candidates — including Senators Bernie Sanders and Elizabeth Warren — put aside their recent sparring and marched arm in arm through the streets of South Carolina’s capital to honor Dr. King. Former Vice President Joe Biden has a strong lead in South Carolina polls and is widely favored among black voters. His rivals didn’t take him on directly but sought to make the case to African-Americans about how the next president could benefit their interests. After the march, most of the candidates headed to an Iowa forum focused on minority communities, a scant two weeks before the state caucuses there. 4. A deadly Boeing 737 crash in 2009 held lessons that were never learned. Documents and interviews show that the Dutch Safety Board either excluded or played down criticisms of the plane manufacturer in its final report on a crash near Amsterdam, after pushback from a team of Americans that included Boeing and federal safety officials. The muted criticism fits within a broader pattern, brought to light since the more recent 737 Max tragedies, of how the company has benefited from a light touch by safety officials. In the 2009 crash and the Max accidents, the failure of a single sensor caused systems to misfire, and Boeing had not provided pilots with information that could have helped them react to the malfunction. 5. Just don’t call it climate change. States that apply for billions of dollars in a federal natural-disaster program must first explain why they need the money. And some conservative states feel compelled to avoid mentioning climate change. A 306-page draft proposal from Texas — hit by Hurricane Harvey, above, in 2017 — doesn’t use the term, nor does South Carolina’s. Louisiana includes it in an appendix on the final page. There are exceptions, like Florida. “Climate change is a key overarching challenge which threatens to compound the extent and effects of hazards,” state officials wrote in their application. 6. Disposable plastic’s new enemy: China. The government introduced measures to drastically cut the amount of disposable plastic items like bags and cutlery. Previous efforts to reduce the use of plastic bags have faltered in China, but the government has indicated that, this time, it will be more serious and systematic in tackling the problem. The Chinese generally generate less plastic waste per capita than Americans, but almost three-quarters of China’s ends up in poorly managed landfills, or out in the open. 7. A new view of President Trump at Davos. Mr. Trump leaves tonight for the World Economic Forum in Switzerland, where he is likely to see an increasing sense of acceptance. The U.S.’s growing economy, stock market boom and trade deals speak loudly to C.E.O.s, our DealBook columnist Andrew Ross Sorkin writes. For this year’s forum as a whole, climate change is at the top of the priorities. Several groups will be pushing companies toward greater disclosure and action on emissions. The question for many is: Will all the talk matter? 8. A virus in China grows more threatening. A top Chinese government-appointed expert says a new respiratory virus is now being transmitted human to human, heightening fears of a possible pandemic. The World Health Organization said it was convening an emergency meeting on Wednesday to evaluate the risk of the newly identified coronavirus. The known death toll so far is three, but human transmission could vastly expand its range. Chinese authorities said cases had been detected for the first time in Beijing, Shanghai and Shenzhen, far from the original outbreak focused on a live-animal market in Wuhan. Cases have also been reported in Japan, South Korea and Thailand. 9. “I think the sky’s the limit for her.” That’s the tennis star Venus Williams talking about 15-year-old Coco Gauff, who beat Williams in first-round action at the Australian Open in Melbourne today. Elsewhere in Australia, dozens of fires are still burning, some out of control, in New South Wales and Victoria. But some places were hit by hailstones as large as baseballs, wind gusts topping 70 miles per hour and an inch of rain in just 30 minutes. Thousands of people were left without power. 10. Who’s at the door? Dramas are being performed daily on a new American stage: the front porch. Images from video-enabled doorbells linked to smartphones are meant to let owners see and speak with visitors. But more than 500 police departments have partnered with Ring, the surveillance-device maker acquired by Amazon, to use them to help solve crimes. Not everyone is aware of the camera, which captures everything from the boring to the surprising. How about a dog who figures out how to ring the bell? Have a resourceful evening. Your Evening Briefing is posted at 6 p.m. Eastern. And don’t miss Your Morning Briefing. Sign up here to get it by email in the Australian, Asian, European, African or American morning. Want to catch up on past briefings? You can browse them here. What did you like? What do you want to see here? Let us know at briefing@nytimes.com. 
WUHAN, China — The mysterious coronavirus that has killed at least four people and sickened more than 200 in China is capable of spreading from person to person, a prominent Chinese scientist said on Monday, adding to fears of a broader epidemic. The disclosure increased pressure on the Chinese government to contain a growing public health crisis, just as China enters its busiest travel season of the year. On Tuesday, the authorities confirmed a fourth death from the illness in the central Chinese city of Wuhan. The authorities had previously said the deadly virus seemed capable of spreading only from animals to humans in most cases, tracing the outbreak to a market in Wuhan. But in recent days at least two people have become infected with the pneumonialike virus even though they live hundreds of miles from Wuhan, experts said on Monday, suggesting that the illness is spreading from person to person. “Now we can say it is certain that it is a human-to-human transmission phenomenon,” Dr. Zhong Nanshan, a scientist who is leading a government-appointed expert panel on the outbreak, said in an interview on state-run television on Monday. The World Health Organization announced Monday that it was convening an emergency meeting on Wednesday “to ascertain whether the outbreak constitutes a public health emergency of international concern, and what recommendations should be made to manage it.” Millions of Chinese are traveling this week for the Lunar New Year holiday, adding to fears that the virus could spread swiftly and on a broader scale. Experts said the severity of the outbreak would now depend on how many people, on average, a person with virus could infect. “There are now sufficient cases that it’s not going to die out by chance,” said Neil Ferguson, a public health expert at Imperial College London who has studied the new virus. “The real question now is, how efficiently can this virus spread from person to person?” China’s leader, Xi Jinping, said on Monday that the outbreak “must be taken seriously” and that every possible measure should be taken to contain it, according to the state broadcaster CCTV. Also on Monday, the authorities reported that new cases had been detected for the first time in Beijing, Shanghai and the southern province of Guangdong, all hundreds of miles from Wuhan. Cases have also been reported in Japan, South Korea and Thailand. In many of these cases, people infected with the virus had traveled to Wuhan. Here is what we know about the virus, where it has been found, how it is spreading and what precautions are being taken: The government of Wuhan first confirmed on Dec. 31 that hospitals in the city were treating dozens of patients for pneumonia with an unknown cause. Many of the cases were connected to the Huanan Seafood Market, which also sold live poultry and exotic animal meats. Considered a likely source of the virus, the market was closed and disinfected. The health commission in Wuhan said on Sunday that the illness had also appeared in people who had not been exposed to the market, raising the possibility that the virus could be present elsewhere in the city. Local officials have pledged to handle the outbreak with transparency. But the memory of how China initially covered up the extent of a deadly SARS outbreak that infected more than 8,000 people in 2002 and 2003 has not completely faded. Although flu experts have said the Chinese government is trying to be more transparent now, many in China remain skeptical. Over the weekend, the number of reported cases more than tripled to about 200, mostly in Wuhan. One more person in the city died, bringing the total death toll to three, while nine others remained critically ill, the city’s health commission said. Twenty-five people have recovered. The authorities have started detecting the country’s first cases outside of Wuhan. Five new cases were reported in Beijing, 14 in Guangdong Province, and two in Shanghai. The total number of cases climbed to at least 219. The World Health Organization said the spike in reported cases was the result of increased searching and testing for respiratory illnesses. Researchers in China identified the mysterious pneumonialike illness in early January as a new coronavirus. Experts initially said that it did not appear to be readily spread by humans, but on Monday Dr. Zhong, the scientist appointed by the government to study the outbreak, said that in Guangdong, two individuals appeared to have been infected by relatives who had traveled to Wuhan. Dr. Zhong said the virus could be present in particles of saliva. In one case, he said, a patient appears to have infected 14 medical workers. Coronaviruses are named for the spikes that protrude from their membranes, like the sun’s corona. Such viruses cause several illnesses of the respiratory tract, ranging from the common cold to severe diseases like SARS. Dr. Zhong was China’s leading SARS expert during that outbreak. According to the World Health Organization, common signs of infection include fever, cough, and respiratory difficulties like shortness of breath. Serious cases can lead to pneumonia, kidney failure and even death. The authorities in Thailand detected the new coronavirus last week in two Chinese women who had flown from Wuhan to Bangkok on separate trips. The government said the women, aged 74 and 61, were in good condition. In Japan, a Chinese man who returned from Wuhan on Jan. 6 was also confirmed to have the disease. He was discharged after five days in a hospital. South Korea confirmed its first case of the coronavirus on Monday in a 35-year-old Chinese woman from Wuhan who arrived on Sunday at Incheon International Airport, which serves Seoul. The woman was found with a fever, muscle pain and other symptoms while going through customs and was immediately quarantined for tests, said Jung Eun-kyeong, director of the Korea Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. The woman was traveling with five other people intending to spend the Lunar New Year holidays in South Korea and Japan, Ms. Jung said. South Korean officials were running tests on anyone believed to have come in contact with the woman in the plane, she said. In Hong Kong, the government initiated a disease response plan after the first cases were reported in Wuhan. Dozens of people were hospitalized after returning to Hong Kong from mainland China, but none were found to have been infected with the new virus. Five people who traveled from Wuhan to Zhejiang, a coastal Chinese province south of Shanghai, are being treated for fever but have not been diagnosed with the new coronavirus, the health authorities there said. State media also reported six suspected cases on Monday, including two in Sichuan Province, one in Shanghai, one in Yunnan Province, one in Shandong Province and one in the region of Guangxi. In the southern city of Shenzhen, the authorities have started imposing temperature screening procedures at the airport and at train and bus stations. The city said it would also crack down on the illegal trading of wild animals. The W.H.O. says animals appear to be the most likely primary source of the outbreak, though it is still not known which animals are responsible. Past outbreaks of similar illnesses, like SARS, were believed to have emerged from markets where people and live animals were in regular contact. To prevent the spread of respiratory infections, the W.H.O. recommends that people wash their hands regularly, cover their mouths and noses when coughing and sneezing, and avoid direct contact with farm or wild animals. The health authorities in Hong Kong have also advised residents traveling outside the city not to touch live animals, not to eat wild animals, and to avoid markets selling fresh meat and live poultry. 
(Want to get this briefing by email? Here’s the sign-up.) President Trump is expected to speak today at the World Economic Forum in Davos, Switzerland, just as his impeachment trial begins in earnest in Washington. U.S. senators are bracing for a rancorous debate over the trial’s ground rules, which will determine how Democrats prosecute Mr. Trump on charges of abuse of power and obstruction of Congress linked to his Ukraine pressure campaign. Senator Mitch McConnell, the chamber’s top Republican, angered Democrats on Monday by unveiling trial rules that would limit each side’s arguments to 24 hours over two days, and require a separate vote to admit evidence unearthed in the fall by the House of Representatives. Analysis: Mr. Trump’s lawyers have not contested the basic facts of the case, and scholars say their central argument — that the impeachment charges are invalid because the president has not been accused of committing an ordinary crime — defies a long-established legal consensus. Go deeper: The trial will include some of the same faces that animated President Bill Clinton’s impeachment trial 21 years ago. But Mr. Clinton did not command his own party the way Mr. Trump does now. Related: The business and political elites who gather each year at Davos appear to be warming to Mr. Trump, even if some may roll their eyes behind his back, writes our DealBook columnist, Andrew Ross Sorkin. (One reason? He may be in office for another four years.) A new pneumonialike illness that has killed four people in China and infected more than 200 others in the country and elsewhere in Asia is now capable of spreading from person to person, a leading Chinese scientist said on Monday. The fear is that the virus — which has spread to Japan, South Korea and Thailand — could set off a broader pandemic as millions of Chinese travel for the seven-day Lunar New Year holiday, which begins on Friday.  Experts say the severity of the outbreak will now depend on how many people, on average, a person with the virus could infect. The World Health Organization will hold a meeting on Wednesday to determine whether the virus is a “public health emergency of international concern,” a designation it has given to previous outbreaks of Ebola and other diseases. Background: The illness, which started in the Chinese city of Wuhan, is a coronavirus, a family of viruses that affect the respiratory tract and range from the common cold to severe diseases like SARS. Animals are thought to be the most likely primary source, and complications can include pneumonia, kidney failure or death. Go deeper: The current outbreak has echoes of the deadly SARS outbreak of 2002 and 2003 that infected more than 8,000 people — one that China initially tried to cover up. Experts say the authorities are trying to be more transparent this time, but many in China are skeptical. President Emmanuel Macron of France said on Monday that he and President Trump would work together on a deal to avoid an escalation of tariffs linked to a French proposal to tax digital services provided by American tech giants. Mr. Macron wants to avoid retaliatory U.S. tariffs on French products like wine, cheese, handbags and other luxury goods. We have a timely profile of Brune Poirson, above, France’s de facto fashion minister and a negotiator in the so-called handbag war. Details: Mr. Macron and Mr. Trump agreed on Monday to hold off on any tariffs until the end of the year, while negotiators at the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development continue talks on developing a broader framework for digital taxes.  Domestic politics: Philippe Martinez, the leader of France’s most militant union, has emerged as the face of the country’s longest-ever transport strike — and as a foil to Mr. Macron’s business-friendly vision. A woman from a Norwegian-Pakistani family moved to Syria in 2013, marrying twice in Islamic State territory and having two children. Now she’s back in Norway, and her mere presence threatens to bring down the country’s government. Prime Minister Erna Solberg has said that the woman, 29, who returned over the weekend after being plucked out of a Kurdish-controlled detention camp in Syria, was allowed to re-enter Norway so her 5-year-old could receive medical treatment. The police have not raised the terrorism threat level as a result. But many Norwegians say the woman poses a security threat. And in a gesture of protest, the anti-immigrant Progress Party resigned on Monday from the four-party, center-right coalition that has governed since 2013. Quotable: “We do not want her kind in Norway, and we certainly don’t want Norwegian authorities spending enormous resources getting them to Norway,” a Progress Party spokesman, Jon Engen-Helgheim, said last week. What’s next: The Progress Party said it would continue to support the governing coalition. The woman has been charged with “participation in a terrorist organization” and faces up to six years in prison. An American airstrike in Afghanistan killed the poet Zaheer Ahmad Zindani’s father, and one of his three sisters burned to death when a Taliban roadside bomb hit a bus he was traveling in. The bomb also robbed Mr. Zindani, above, of his eyesight, prompting the family of his teenage love to reject him. But his mother, a polio vaccinator, was determined to find him a match. A correspondent in our Kabul bureau traveled to Kandahar to hear Mr. Zindani’s story. Boeing crash: A Times review of evidence from the deadly 2009 crash of a 737 in the Netherlands reveals striking parallels with two recent crashes of a newer model of the aircraft — the 737 Max — and similar pushback, from the company and American safety officials, against criticism of Boeing.  Russia: President Vladimir Putin prompted new speculation about his future role when he proposed constitutional amendments on Monday that would empower a previously toothless advisory council that he now leads. Serbia-Kosovo flights: The two Balkan countries agreed to resume flights between their capitals for the first time in more than two decades, a step toward reconciliation. How warm was your town? Scientists said 2019 was the second-warmest year on record, and an AccuWeather database of 3,500 cities showed that more than 80 percent experienced average temperatures that were higher than normal last year. See how your city compares. Snapshot: Above, Elaine Lau at her noodle shop in Hong Kong. It’s one of many so-called yellow shops in the restive Chinese territory that openly support the city’s democracy movement. (“Blue” ones, by contrast, support the police.) Sperm health: Young men who took fish oil supplements had higher sperm counts, greater sperm volume and larger average testicular size, a study in Denmark found.  What we’re reading: This piece in Taste about a food specialty known to few outside a small subset of Italian-Americans. “It has come to my attention that some of you do not know the first blessed thing about lard bread,” tweeted our food critic Pete Wells. “Max [Falkowitz] is here to guide you into the light of lardy knowledge.”  Cook: Vegetarian skillet chili is one of those pantry meals that you’ll memorize. (Our Five Weeknight Dishes newsletter has more recommendations.)  Watch: Ruth Negga, an Ethiopian-Irish actress, is set to play Hamlet in Brooklyn. Next up for her: a film adaptation of a 1920s novel about passing for white. Smarter Living: Should you live out of a suitcase when you travel, or unpack your things? There are arguments for both. A hundred years ago this month, the U.S. embarked on a 13-year official prohibition on the “manufacture, sale or transportation of intoxicating liquors” anywhere within the country. It didn’t go well. Bootlegging liquor operations proliferated, as did the illicit bars known as speakeasies. And the drink of choice: the cocktail, which spread out the hooch or disguised its sometimes bad flavors. The boom far outlasted Prohibition. Sidecar, anyone? Dave Wondrich, a drinks historian, tracked down the source of the word “cocktail.” In the second edition of his landmark reconstruction of mixed drinks, “Imbibe!,” he notes that prospective horse sellers in England would give old or droopy specimens a rectal dose of ginger to make them cock their tails for a younger, zippier appearance. From there it was just a short jump to the zingy drinks that made humans perk up, at least at the start of their alcoholic forays. 
(Want to get this briefing by email? Here’s the sign-up.) Countries around the world are scrambling to prevent the spread of a deadly outbreak of the coronavirus that started in Wuhan, China, and has spread to Taiwan, Japan, Thailand, South Korea and now the U.S., where a case was confirmed in Washington State. As fatalities doubled to at least six with hundreds more people infected, airports around the world, including in Australia and the U.S., were checking passengers on flights from Wuhan, where the virus began in a seafood and poultry market. North Korea temporarily closed borders to tours from China. Here’s what else we know. The World Health Organization called a meeting to decide whether to declare the outbreak an international health emergency as evidence mounted that the virus spreads from person to person. In one case, a patient appeared to have infected 14 medical workers. Fears: Many in China recalled the government’s slow response to the 2003 outbreak of the SARS virus, which killed more than 800 people and infected more than 8,000. President Trump’s historic trial began in the Senate with a fight between Democrats and Republicans over the rules that will govern it. Under procedures proposed by the majority leader, Senator Mitch McConnell, each side would have three days to present its case, and the House’s evidence from its inquiry would be admitted into the Senate record. Mr. McConnell said he had enough votes to defeat any Democratic changes, and he warned Democrats that the chamber would stay into the wee hours if they offered a long string of proposed changes. In the room: Senators have to give up their cellphones and remain silent at their desks at virtually all times “on pain of imprisonment.” As the yearly meeting of global business leaders in Davos, Switzerland, opened with a focus on global warming, many watched for the dynamic between two seemingly opposing figures on the topic: President Trump and Greta Thunberg, the 17-year-old climate activist. Though Mr. Trump spoke mostly about the economy — proclaiming “the American dream is back” — and said that it was “not a time for pessimism,” Ms. Thunberg gave a characteristically cutting speech to those who had not taken action on climate change. “Our house is still on fire,” she said, referring to her address at the same conference a year earlier. “Your inaction is fueling the flames by the hour.” Context: The Davos forum has for some become a symbol of all that is wrong with the world, our reporter writes, but its proponents say it makes businesses more responsible. Related: Australia’s biggest mining company announced that coal output was down over the last six months because of smoke from wildfires, a crisis exacerbated by climate change, which is caused in no small part by the burning of coal. The irony was not lost on many Australians. Is there a more exciting and complicated phrase than “I quit”? Our collection of 21 first-person narratives discusses quitting all sorts of things, including jobs, sex, the presidential campaign and even the task of writing about quitting. Interpol: A former senior Chinese police official who served as head of the international crime-fighting body was sentenced to 13½ years in prison for bribery. His wife says he is the victim of a political vendetta. Royals in Canada: As Prince Harry reportedly landed on Vancouver Island to join his wife, Meghan, and their son, a survey showed that about half of Canadians say they “don’t care” if the couple moves in. But an overwhelming 73 percent said they do not want Canada to pay royal security costs. Ancient climate changer: The planet’s oldest asteroid impact, from 2.2 billion years ago, was found in Western Australia — and researchers suggested the cataclysm might have catapulted the planet out of an ice age. Snapshot: Above, people in pajamas. Officials in the eastern Chinese city of Suzhou apologized after publishing surveillance-camera photos to shame residents who sport their sleepwear in public. Their attempt to curb “uncivilized behavior” sparked a backlash nationwide. What we’re reading: This article in The New Yorker. Brent Staples, a Pulitzer Prize winner, calls it “a vivid new history” of “how slave rebellions (not white abolitionists) defeated slavery in the hell that was the Caribbean.” Cook: If you’re looking for comfort food, make a batch of sopa de albóndigas, a Mexican meatball soup. Read: Kyle Chayka’s new book, “The Longing for Less,” explores minimalism as a manifestation of civilization’s discontents, among other things. Watch: Ruth Negga, an Ethiopian-Irish actress, is set to play Hamlet in Brooklyn. She spoke to The Times about the role and her part in an upcoming film adaptation of a 1920s novel about passing for white. Smarter Living: Organize your fridge the way pros do. It saves both food and time. One of the reasons Prince Harry and his wife, Meghan, cited in their decision to step back from their royal duties is the need for a more private life. The desire is understandable. Paparazzi hound celebrities of all kinds, and the prince’s mother, Diana, died in Paris as her car raced away from chasing photographers. Fifty-one years ago, another hounded Brit took a very different approach. John Lennon had become a global star as the Beatles rose to extravagant heights of popularity, but in 1969, the band was inexorably breaking up. The other Beatles’ lack of enthusiasm for Lennon’s devotion to the conceptual artist Yoko Ono added to the tension — and further whetted the public appetite for gossipy details. After the two married in March of that year, in a hastily arranged ceremony in Gibraltar, they knew there was no way to avoid being set upon by reporters and photographers. So they invited them in. They took up residence for days at a hotel in Amsterdam, holding open hours from 9 a.m. to 9 p.m., and later did the same in Montreal, using the “bed-ins” to promote global peace. 
A man in Washington State is infected with the Wuhan coronavirus, the first confirmed case in the United States of a mysterious respiratory infection that has killed at least six people and sickened hundreds more in Asia, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention announced on Tuesday. Federal officials also announced expanded screenings for the infection at major airports in the United States. In addition to New York, Los Angeles and San Francisco, airports in Atlanta and Chicago will begin examining passengers arriving from Wuhan, China, for signs of illness. The infected man, who is in his 30s and a resident of Snohomish County, Wash., developed symptoms after returning from a trip to the region around Wuhan where the outbreak began. He returned from Wuhan on Jan. 15, two days before passenger screening was instituted at three major airports in the United States, but he had no symptoms at the time. He read online about the mysterious new virus that causes fever and respiratory illness, and informed his doctors about his recent trip when he sought care on Sunday, federal officials said. [What parents need to know about coronavirus] He was seen at a clinic in Snohomish County and is now hospitalized at Providence Regional Medical Center-Everett. Specimens from the patient were sent to the C.D.C. in Atlanta, and officials confirmed on Monday that he was infected with the Wuhan coronavirus, also called 2019-nCoV. Health officials declined to identify the patient, but said that he has a mild case of pneumonia, is doing well and has been very cooperative. Health care workers are also trying to identify people who may have had contact with the infected traveler, and are notifying some of the passengers on his return flight who might have been exposed. They will monitor those fellow passengers for fever and respiratory symptoms. “We’re very comfortable the patient is isolated and poses little risk to the staff or general public,” said Dr. Chris Spitters, health officer at the Snohomish Health District, adding that the strict isolation practices were implemented in “an abundance of caution.” News of the first case of the virus in the United States surfaced as officials studied growing evidence that the disease can be transmitted from person to person, although it is not clear how easily. “There is new information hour by hour, day by day, that we are tracking and following closely,” said Dr. Nancy Messonnier, director of the C.D.C.’s National Center for Immunization and Respiratory Diseases. The C.D.C. has deployed staff overseas who are working closely with the ministries of health in China and Thailand. “The key issue we all need to understand is how easily and sustainably the virus is spread from human to human,” Dr. Messonnier said. Federal health officials plan to expand the screening of passengers arriving in the United States from Wuhan to five airports that are major international hubs. All travelers from the city will be funneled through those airports. Screenings started on Friday and Saturday at New York’s Kennedy International Airport, San Francisco International and Los Angeles International. Now they will be expanded to Hartsfield-Jackson Atlanta International and Chicago O’Hare International over the next few days. Passengers from Wuhan planning to arrive in other cities will be issued new tickets taking them to one of the five screening airports, officials said. The outbreak, which began in December in a seafood and poultry market in Wuhan, a city of 11 million, is spreading: Patients have been identified in Beijing, Shanghai and Shenzhen, as well as Taiwan, Japan, Thailand and South Korea. On Tuesday, Chinese authorities confirmed that six people have died of the infection in Wuhan. Nearly 300 cases have been reported to date in China, and federal health officials said that number is likely to grow. Many of the patients lived in or traveled to Wuhan. In Mexico, President Andrés Manuel López Obrador said Wednesday morning that the Mexican health authorities had identified a possible case in the northeastern state of Tamaulipas. The patient was “under observation,” the president said during a news conference. The patient with the suspected case of coronavirus is a 57-year-old researcher in a university biotechnology laboratory who lives and works in Reynosa, a border town that abuts McAllen, Texas, according to officials in Tamaulipas. The man traveled to China on Dec. 25 and visited relatives in Wuhan, returning to Mexico on Jan. 10. In recent days, the man came down with a dry cough and a runny nose, and decided to report himself to the health authorities, officials said. The man is now isolated in his house, where he lives alone, and test results that could confirm a coronavirus infection are expected in the next few days, said Gloria Molina, the health secretary for Tamaulipas. The World Health Organization is meeting on Wednesday to decide whether to declare the outbreak an international public health emergency. But information about the new virus is still thin, and it’s not clear whether or how many Americans are at risk. [Like the Science Times page on Facebook. | Sign up for the Science Times newsletter.] “There are still more questions that we don’t know the answers to than things we do know,” said Dr. William Schaffner, a professor of preventive medicine and infectious diseases at Vanderbilt University Medical Center in Nashville. “For example, what is the source? We don’t know exactly. The location likely was the live animal market, but we don’t know the particular animal.” The more pressing and urgent question, he said: “How frequent is human-to-human transmission?” “Could people with mild infections transmit this virus from person to person?” he added. “That all remains still under investigation.” The patient in Washington told doctors that he had not visited the animal markets in Wuhan, nor had he come into contact with anyone who was sick. On Monday, Vanderbilt University Medical Center in Nashville changed its electronic prompts so that any patients coming in to its hospital, emergency room or clinics with a fever or respiratory symptoms will be asked whether they have been to China recently or have had contact with anyone who has recently traveled to China. Hospitals around the country are likely taking similar steps, Dr. Schaffner said, in an effort to quickly identify infected patients and place them in isolation so they can be cared for safely by hospital workers, and so specimens can be collected for testing. Dr. Schaffner cautioned anyone traveling to China to avoid visiting live animal markets and to keep a distance from all live animals, including domesticated farm animals. Travelers to China should practice lots of good hand hygiene, he added, and do their best to avoid anyone who is coughing or sneezing. 
WUHAN, China — Facing growing pressure to contain a deadly viral outbreak that has spread halfway around the world, China’s ruling Communist Party raced on Tuesday to confront the disease, slapping restrictions on the city where it started and warning that anyone who hides infections will be “forever nailed to history’s pillar of shame.” The response by the Chinese leadership, which has come under intensifying criticism that it has been slow to acknowledge the severity of the outbreak, came as fatalities from the disease tripled to at least nine. Infections surged from 200 to 440, and global financial markets were rattled by the possibility of a pandemic emanating from the world’s most populous country during the Lunar New Year — Asia’s heaviest travel season. Already, cases of the pneumonia-like virus have been found in Taiwan, Japan, Thailand and South Korea, and on Tuesday the first was confirmed in the United States. Airports in Atlanta and Chicago said they would screen passengers from Wuhan, joining airports in New York, Los Angeles, San Francisco and cities around the world in doing so. North Korea temporarily closed its borders to foreign tours, the vast majority of them from China. The World Health Organization has called a meeting on Wednesday over whether to declare the outbreak an international health emergency. In Wuhan, the central Chinese city of 11 million where the outbreak began, the authorities have banned group tours out of the city and ordered vehicles checked for live animals. Nervous residents are buying up face masks and flooding hospitals to report fevers and coughs. Some schools are canceling classes and even Buddhist temples are turning away the faithful. At home and abroad, the Chinese authorities are facing demands for greater transparency in their disclosures about the disease, as new cases emerge in other major Chinese cities. As of late Tuesday, there were 440 cases in 13 provinces in China. The outbreak is testing China’s leader, Xi Jinping, and the party’s penchant for secrecy in moments of crisis, 17 years after Beijing drew widespread criticism for withholding information and acting slowly in handling the outbreak of SARS, which killed more than 800 people and infected more than 8,000 worldwide. Mr. Xi, who has sought to expand China’s global influence, seems eager to shake the shadow of SARS and show that Beijing can handle a public health crisis like a responsible world power. A top party committee on Tuesday said in stark terms that it would not tolerate any efforts to hide infections. “Whoever deliberately delays or conceals reporting for the sake of their own interests will be forever nailed to history’s pillar of shame,” the committee said in a post on a popular social media site. The post was later deleted. On Monday, China’s health commission said it would respond with measures intended to manage outbreaks of the most virulent diseases, including mandatory reporting of cases. It classified the virus as a class B infectious disease — a category that includes diseases such as SARS. But the government, wary of letting fear run rampant, is also working meticulously to control the narrative about the virus by censoring news articles and social media posts. The police in Wuhan investigated eight citizens this month for spreading what it described as rumors on the internet. Now, even as the government works to isolate sick patients amid travel by millions of people making visits for the Lunar New Year holiday, there is concern that the party’s long-held reluctance to divulge damaging news could hinder the effort to contain the virus. For weeks, the government had largely treated the outbreak as a problem isolated to Wuhan. It was only after the Hong Kong news media reported that cases of the coronavirus had been detected elsewhere that the government began acknowledging, early Monday, that the disease had spread to other cities. Many wondered why the central government waited until Monday to allow a top health expert to speak publicly about the outbreak. The expert not only corroborated what the Hong Kong news media had already reported but confirmed vital new information: that the virus spreads between people. “The response is not fast enough, it’s not strong enough,” said Shen Zhengjiang, 57, a teacher, as he looked for masks at a pharmacy in Wuhan on Tuesday. “The local officials are paying attention to this now only because Xi Jinping spoke up.” The outbreak presents Mr. Xi, who rose to power in 2012, with one of the most serious public health crises of his tenure. It will be a significant test of his leadership at a time when China is seeking to strengthen trust in the party and to project confidence in Mr. Xi’s authoritarian approach. Any missteps could undermine the party’s credibility in the eyes of the public, experts said. “This is the sort of thing that could absolutely gnaw at the confidence and legitimacy of the whole regime,” said Kerry Brown, director of the Lau China Institute at King’s College London. Experts said the challenge for Mr. Xi would be daunting, as the world looks to China to stop the virus before it spreads on a global scale. Yanzhong Huang, director of the Center for Global Health Studies at Seton Hall University, said that it appeared Mr. Xi was seeking to show that the virus is under control and would not cause social unrest. But he said the government’s initial failure to detail the spread of the virus to mainland cities and to disclose that medical workers had been infected was worrying. “So far this pattern of a lack of transparency and inaction has unfortunately not changed,” said Professor Huang, an expert on the SARS epidemic. “The politics continue to constrain the government to respond effectively.” The Chinese government, which has been praised by the W.H.O. for its efforts so far, has said it took time to analyze the coronavirus, which experts believe appears to be mostly transmitted to humans by animals. The delay in reporting the spread of the disease was attributed to technological challenges, but also bureaucratic ones. Some hospitals lacked testing kits, according to remarks on Monday by Dr. Zhong Nanshan, a prominent scientist who is leading a government-appointed panel of experts helping control the outbreak. The process was also slowed down, he said, because local hospitals were required to submit cases to the central health commission in Beijing for review before going public. For weeks, the authorities in Wuhan seemed to play down the threat posed by the virus. The health department said that it had been found only in people who visited a local market that sold live fish, birds and other animals, and that workers had disinfected and shut down the site. Questions have emerged on Chinese social media about whether the Chinese government has been forthcoming. Many articles and posts, including some using the hashtag #WuhanSARS, were censored. After his stepmother died of viral pneumonia last week, Kyle Hui, 32, an architect from Shanghai, turned to Weibo, a Twitterlike site, to report her case. Mr. Hui’s stepmother was never formally tested for the virus, and he was concerned that the Wuhan government was underreporting cases of the illness. But his post soon disappeared from the internet. “People accuse me of spreading rumors, but I’m just trying to tell my stepmother's story,” he said in an interview at a cafe in Wuhan. It was not until Monday that the government changed course, after news outlets in Hong Kong reported over the weekend that there were several potential cases of the illness in Shanghai and Shenzhen, a southern city. The central government dispatched Dr. Zhong, a renowned expert with a reputation for bluntness, to Wuhan. Dr. Zhong revealed for the first time that the virus could spread from person to person — noting, for example, that one patient had infected 14 medical workers. Dr. Zhong won wide praise from the Chinese public, and memes circulated online contrasting his urgent tone with the calm words of local officials. The spread of the virus has upended the Lunar New Year holiday this week, when millions of Chinese return to their hometowns to celebrate.  In Wuhan, some residents have canceled plans to go out to lavish meals for the new year and say they are avoiding enclosed spaces like movie theaters. Some firms have instructed employees to stay home. Many people now wear masks throughout the day, as they make dinner, play cards or chat with friends. Some residents are packing up and leaving Wuhan, vowing to stay away until the virus is contained. At the Wuhan airport on Tuesday, Luo Jie, 62, a retiree, rushed to catch a flight to Beijing that she had booked that morning. She said she wanted to “escape” because the outbreak reminded her of the SARS crisis. “I hope the government will report the epidemic honestly,” she said. “That’s how to set people’s minds at ease.” 
SEOUL, South Korea — North Korea has temporarily barred foreign tourists as a protection against the mysterious virus from China that has killed at least nine people and sickened more than 400, a leading tour operator reported on Tuesday. The operator, Young Pioneer Tours, which specializes in taking tourists from China to North Korea, said on its website that the country was closing its border to foreign ​tourists starting on Wednesday. Practically all foreign tours to North Korea come through China, and the vast majority of tourists are Chinese. Simon Cockerell, general manager of Koryo Tours, which also takes tourists to North Korea, said his company had been told that “action was being considered” by the North Korean authorities to prevent the spread of the virus. “We have been informed that we will be told more information in the morning,” he said Tuesday night. State-run media in North Korea, which tightly controls information from the outside world, reported on the Chinese outbreak of the coronavirus Wednesday, though the reports did not mention a tourist ban. A television news program said officials were working with the World Health Organization to keep the virus from spreading to the North, according to the South Korean news agency Yonhap, which monitors North Korean media. The virus has been spreading rapidly from the central Chinese city of Wuhan. That is bad news for North Korea, where Chinese tourists have become an increasingly important source of cash for the country, hobbled by international sanctions. ​ Tourism is one of the few North Korean industries not covered by the sanctions, which have been imposed by the United Nations Security Council and the United States in response to the North’s nuclear weapons and missile programs. North Korea’s leader, Kim Jong-un, recently declared that his country no longer expected a breakthrough in deadlocked negotiations with Washington over how to denuclearize his country and ease or end the sanctions. Mr. Kim said his country would therefore strengthen its economy without relief from the sanctions, and boosting tourism is a key part of that strategy. To attract foreign tourists, North Korea has recently completed or is building seafront resorts or ski and spa complexes. The number of Chinese tourists to North Korea has been rapidly rising since​ President Xi Jinping of China visited Pyongyang​ last June. ​China has gone along with Security Council sanctions on North Korea in recent years but does not want the Communist government in Pyongyang to collapse. 
(Want to get this briefing by email? Here’s the sign-up.) China said it was shutting down transportation from the city of Wuhan, the site of an outbreak of a new coronavirus that has killed 17 people, infected hundreds and spread halfway around the world. As of 10 a.m. today, planes and trains leaving the city were to be canceled, and buses, subways and ferries within it suspended. Residents were urged not to leave. The move could upend the plans of millions of Chinese citizens, who travel in huge numbers during the Lunar New Year holiday that officially begins on Friday. Experts have warned that the virus would proliferate during the mass travel period. World Health Organization: The group postponed a decision on whether the outbreak constitutes a “public health emergency of international concern.”  Context: The disease began in a seafood and poultry market in the city of 11 million, but is unclear from what kind of animal. Two prominent United Nations experts said that a WhatsApp account belonging to Crown Prince Mohammed bin Salman appears to have been used to hack into the cellphone of Jeff Bezos in an effort to “influence, if not silence” reporting on the kingdom by the newspaper he owns, The Washington Post. The news came after a forensic analysis found with “medium to high confidence” that the Amazon chief’s device was hacked after he received a video from that WhatsApp account, and that his phone began sending large volumes of data. Months later, the tabloid publisher American Media Inc., whose head was courting the Saudis, reported that Mr. Bezos had been having an extramarital affair.  Response: After initial reports of the forensic analysis surfaced, the Saudi Embassy denied that the government was involved, calling the idea “absurd.” Pattern: Recent years have seen documentation that well-known Saudi dissidents have been hacked, and social media in the kingdom manipulated to amplify voices praising Crown Prince Mohammed and drown out his critics. At the time Mr. Bezos’ phone was hacked, The Post was publishing coverage critical of the kingdom. Jamal Khashoggi, the dissident Saudi writer who was later killed by a Saudi hit team in Istanbul, was a regular columnist and often criticized the crown prince. If you thought this step in Britain’s yearslong drama over its departure from the European Union would be more complicated, you weren’t alone. But without any of the histrionics of the last few years, Parliament finalized a withdrawal bill and set the stage for Britain’s Jan. 31 departure from the European Union. The Conservative Party’s overwhelming majority made this step essentially a formality. Queen Elizabeth II is expected to approve the bill, and the European Parliament is expected to pass it with ease next week. What’s next: British and European representatives will have to negotiate a trade deal, something analysts say will be tougher and could take years. Investors have long been divided on Elon Musk’s electric car company, with many betting on its stock to fall. But since October, when the long-troubled company reported an unexpected quarterly profit, its fans have been lifting the price. Today, their trading pushed Tesla’s stock to a record high of more than $590 per share, resetting the company’s value beyond $100 billion. That was a signal of faith in electric cars and a humbling moment for automakers with longer histories and greater productivity. Musk’s reward: The milestone also started a clock on a huge windfall for Mr. Musk. If the valuation is sustained over at least six months, it could trigger a measure that allows him to buy some 1.69 million shares at about $350 each — a payout that could be worth nearly $400 million. A Trump bump: In a CNBC interview from Davos, Switzerland, on Wednesday, President Trump described Mr. Musk as “one of our great geniuses” and compared him to the inventor Thomas Edison. While observers and scientists around the world have pointed out the connections between climate change and the devastating wildfires in Australia, Craig Kelly, a Parliament member, has used this dark hour to become the country’s climate-change denier in chief. With posts and comments on his increasingly popular Facebook page that cherry-pick data and make unsupported claims, he has amassed a following in wide areas of the country. But even some members of his own party are trying to distance themselves. Impeachment: Seven House impeachment managers began to present their cases against President Trump in opening arguments, with Representative Adam Schiff accusing him of using his power “to cheat” in the election. South Korea: The military will discharge a soldier who had undergone gender-reassignment surgery but wanted to remain in military service as a woman. Byeon Hee-su, a staff sergeant, must leave the army by Friday. Snapshot: Above, Naomi Osaka serving at the Australian Open on Wednesday. She goes to tournaments “to win them, not to play finals or semifinals,” her coach told our reporter. Tennis fans will be watching for a showdown between Ms. Osaka and Coco Gauff after Ms. Gauff advanced on Wednesday. In memoriam: Terry Jones was a member of the British comedy troupe Monty Python and also had success as a director, screenwriter and author. He died on Tuesday at 77. What we’re reading: This explainer on a different measure of deliciousness, from Taiwan Business Topics: “Today’s lesson,” writes our food correspondent Kim Severson, “is understanding the Q factor in Taiwanese food. It’s good-chewy.” Cook: If tres leches cake is not enough, add three more milks. Watch: The actor Michael Sheen discussed his portrayal of a serial killer dad on the Fox drama “Prodigal Son.” Listen: Aidy Bryant, the comedian and star of “Shrill,” shared what she watched, read and listened to last week. Smarter Living: Here’s how to tip hotel workers when you travel. Javier C. Hernández, a correspondent in our Beijing bureau, is reporting this week from the Chinese city of Wuhan, the epicenter of the coronavirus outbreak. Mike Ives, on the Briefings team, spoke with Javier via Slack, a messaging service. Hi, Javier. What’s the mood in Wuhan right now? Walking the streets, you definitely feel a sense of urgency is spreading. Lots of people are now wearing masks and avoiding big crowds. All of this is happening in the midst of the Lunar New Year holiday, so it has forced many families to rethink their plans. People are canceling dinners, staying home from work and hunkering down. It must be hard to avoid big crowds in a city of 11 million people. Yes, it’s almost impossible to avoid crowds in a modern Chinese city. But Wuhan is trying to push people to take more precautions. When you get in a cab now, there are reminders about opening the window and wearing a mask. Some of the famous street markets are now totally empty, surrounded by signs warning about the virus. Are you hearing any common sentiments in your interviews? Several people told me about their memories of the SARS crisis of 2003, which killed hundreds of people in China. They’re worried this could erupt into a full-blown epidemic. Of course, others say they’re not very concerned and have faith that China can beat this. One common theme is people say they want the Chinese government to speak honestly about the severity of the outbreak — something that didn’t happen during SARS. Are you taking any specific precautions, like wearing a mask? Yes, at the advice of experts, my colleague Elsie Chen and I are washing our hands regularly and avoiding meat markets and hospital wards. We are wearing masks all the time. It’s a bit odd having that kind of barrier when you’re interviewing people on the street. But we’ve found that it is quickly becoming the norm in Wuhan. There are even videos now circulating of people giving New Year’s toasts with their masks on! 
BEIJING — Chinese authorities on Thursday morning closed off Wuhan — a city of more than 11 million people and the epicenter of a pneumonia-like virus that has spread halfway around the world — by canceling planes and trains leaving the city, and suspending buses, subways and ferries within it. The announcement, shared on Chinese state media just hours before it was to take effect, was a significant escalation from just the day before, when the authorities had urged people not to travel to or from the central Chinese city but had stopped short of shutting down transportation. The new virus, which first emerged at the end of December, has killed at least 17 people and sickened more than 570, including in Taiwan, Japan, Thailand, South Korea and the United States. It has raised the specter of a repeat of the SARS epidemic, which broke out in China in 2002 and 2003 and spread rapidly while officials obscured the seriousness of the crisis. That virus eventually killed more than 800 people worldwide. In recent days, governments around the world have introduced special screening measures at ports of entry, and the World Health Organization is weighing the declaration of an international emergency. The Chinese authorities said that the measures in Wuhan were needed to “effectively cut off the transmission of the virus, resolutely curb the spread of the epidemic, and ensure the safety and health of the people.” They said they would later announce an end date for the restrictions. The news spread quickly. On Sina Weibo, a Twitter-like Chinese social media site, the hashtag #WuhanLockdown was the top trending topic, with more than 1.6 million views. Chinese users left comments on the government’s announcement expressing support for the lockdown and concern for the residents of the city. “Go Wuhan,” several posted. Others wondered how sick residents would get from their homes to hospitals without public transportation. Some who said they lived in Wuhan asked what would happen to them. “Who will think of the lives of those of us who are healthy in Wuhan? We are also afraid,” wrote one user, who described herself as a designer living in Wuhan. “Even before the city was closed, we protected ourselves and hid at home. Now we are lambs who will still be slaughtered, and we can only leave our fates to the heavens.” Extreme measures during outbreaks have been imposed elsewhere before. During the Ebola epidemic in West Africa in 2014, Sierra Leone ordered everyone in the nation to stay home for three days as the authorities went door-to-door checking for new cases, retrieving dead bodies and trying to stop the disease from spreading further. In Monrovia, the capital of Liberia, a sprawling neighborhood with tens of thousands of people was put under strict quarantine by the government and guarded by police officers in riot gear, setting off violent clashes with penned-in residents. During the 2003 SARS outbreak, anyone in China who displayed symptoms of the disease was hospitalized, and students were examined daily. In Singapore, people suspected of having SARS were confined to their homes and monitored with webcams and electronic bracelets. Still, medical experts were startled by the scale of the shutdown in Wuhan, which has more people than the entire country of Sierra Leone. Dr. Tom Inglesby, director of the Johns Hopkins Center for Health Security, said that a city the size of Wuhan has “tens of thousands of connections with the outside world that are coming and going all the time, bringing food and medicine.” ”The complexity and downside cost of that will be potentially very high,” Dr. Inglesby said. Roughly 30,000 people fly out of Wuhan on an average day, according to air traffic data analyzed by researchers at Northeastern University in Boston. Many more leave using ground transportation like trains and cars. The city is the hub of industry and commerce in central China, home to the region’s biggest airport and deep-water port and sometimes known as the Chicago of China. It is popular among tourists for its colonial architecture, spicy noodles and proximity to the Yangtze River. In the short term, the sudden restrictions could upend the travel plans of millions of Chinese citizens, who travel in huge numbers during the Lunar New Year holiday, which begins on Friday. The government said it would close Wuhan’s airport and train stations to departures, and it urged residents not to leave the city — a major transportation hub — unless they had an urgent reason to do so. The Lunar New Year in China is typically the world’s largest annual migration of people, with hundreds of millions of travelers fanning out across the country and the world, and hundreds of billions of dollars spent on hotels, restaurants and shopping. Before the virus emerged, the Chinese government had estimated that domestic travelers would make three billion trips over the holiday period, also known as the Spring Festival. But with the new coronavirus, the mass migration is also an epidemiologist’s nightmare. On Wednesday, a senior Chinese health official delivered a stark warning: The tide of travel during the holiday would make it more difficult to contain the outbreak. In addition, “the possibility exists that the virus could mutate, and there are risks that the epidemic could spread further,” said the official, Li Bin, a deputy head of China’s health commission. Chinese officials had already classified the virus as a class B infectious disease, a category that includes SARS. Before the transportation shutdown, the Wuhan government had also issued a ban on large public gatherings and performances at hotels and sightseeing destinations. They had announced that all locals were required to wear masks in public to help prevent the spread of the virus. Tour companies had promised penalty-free refunds for hotel bookings and air and train tickets to and from the city. Travel operators had suspended itineraries with stops there. Outside of Wuhan, many Chinese have also already canceled travel plans, forgoing vacations and what for some is their only chance to return home for family reunions during the year.  “After we heard how bad the situation was on Monday, we held a family meeting and decided that it just wasn’t worth the risk,” said Yan Chaowei, 32, a Shanghai resident who was planning on taking a seven-hour bullet train to her family home in southeastern Jiangxi Province. “It just wouldn’t be a relaxing trip, especially with a small child,” she added. “When we finally made the decision to stay home, we sighed with relief.” For Chinese companies, the outbreak could deal yet another blow at a time of slowing economic growth. According to official estimates, Chinese spent $74 billion on travel and $145 billion on shopping and food during the Spring Festival holiday last year.  But this week, the Taiwanese president, Tsai Ing-wen, said that all travel by tour groups between Wuhan and Taiwan would be suspended. North Korea also temporarily banned foreign tourists, many of whom come from China, according to a leading tour operator. Some international health experts, including the World Health Organization, have praised the Chinese government’s response as timely. But the government, particularly in Wuhan, has drawn public criticism at home for what some see as a delay in the reporting of cases that evoked the memory of the SARS outbreak, in which the Chinese government withheld critical information. A top committee of the ruling Communist Party warned officials on Tuesday in a social media post that anyone who sought to hide infections would be “forever nailed to history’s pillar of shame.” And new cases were continuing to emerge. In Mexico, President Andrés Manuel López Obrador said Wednesday morning that the Mexican health authorities had identified a possible case in the northern state of Tamaulipas. The patient was “under observation,” the president said during a news conference. Gloria Molina, the health secretary for the state of Tamaulipas, said that the patient is a 57-year-old researcher in a university biotechnology laboratory who had visited Wuhan recently and works in Reynosa, a border town near McAllen, Texas. Despite the spread of the virus, some experts are urging the public to remain calm. “This is a SARS-like event but not as severe as SARS,” said Wang Linfa, director of the emerging infectious disease program at Duke-NUS Medical School in Singapore. “During an outbreak like this from an unknown pathogen, overreacting might be better than underreacting, but we still have to be realistic.” Zhu Niancheng, 19, a chemistry major at a university in Wuhan, appeared to be heeding that advice on Wednesday as he sat on a suitcase outside a Beijing train station smoking a cigarette. “Don’t worry, I’m not going to Wuhan,” he said, as a phalanx of People’s Liberation Army soldiers in green uniforms and black face masks marched behind him. Asked if he was concerned about his classmates back in Wuhan, the teenager laughed and said, “I’m not really afraid. We just make fun of each other on WeChat, like ‘Yo, you still alive?’” 
(Want to get this briefing by email? Here’s the sign-up.) The authorities imposed strict travel restrictions on five cities, including Wuhan, the epicenter of a deadly respiratory virus that has already spread to Japan, South Korea, Thailand, Taiwan and the U.S. Here are the latest updates. Experts said the size of the lockdown, which affects roughly 20 million people, was unprecedented. A patient also died in the province of Hebei, 600 miles north of Wuhan, in the first confirmed death outside the epicenter. The World Health Organization decided not to declare a global health emergency — yet. Several members thought it was “still too early,” the W.H.O. said in a statement. The details: The virus has killed at least 18 and sickened more than 600. Here are maps of its spread. The victims are so far mostly older men, many of whom had previous health issues. What’s next: The Lunar New Year holiday, when hundreds of millions travel across China, begins today. Epidemiologists fear it could make the outbreak harder to contain. Several U.S. firefighters were killed on Thursday when a plane carrying fire retardant went down in the mountains south of Canberra. They were not immediately identified. The fiery crash, on a hill near a wildlife sanctuary, ended a brief lull in the country’s summer of deadly wildfires. Rain had offered a reprieve, but temperatures roared back on Thursday to over 100 degrees. “We’re devastated because those Americans, they’re not going home,” said Alison Myers, a deputy captain with the Numeralla fire brigade, which covers the surrounding district. Context: At least five firefighters have been killed this season, and the death toll from the fires now exceeds 30. More than 2,500 homes have been destroyed, and millions of acres have burned. The International Court of Justice ruled on Thursday that Myanmar must “take all measures within its power” to protect Rohingya Muslims, who have been killed and driven from their homes in what the country’s accusers have called a campaign of genocide. The court said the Rohingya faced “real and imminent risk” as it put Myanmar under judicial oversight. The move essentially rejected the defenses offered by the country’s civilian leader, Daw Aung San Suu Kyi. Impact: Some observers noted that because the court did not outline specific steps and does not have enforcement power, it would take more action to protect the ethnic minority group. “The chances of Aung San Suu Kyi implementing this ruling will be zero unless significant international pressure is applied,” said the director of one human rights group. Background: In 2017, Myanmar’s military waged a brutal assault against the Rohingya in the western state of Rakhine, prompting more than 700,000 to flee to neighboring Bangladesh. When the brothers Ali and Amar Sitayeb, above, opened a convenience store in 1984 in the Marais, Paris’s historically Jewish quarter, the neighborhood had plenty of textile and metal factories. Today, their shop is among the independent businesses being swept away by gentrification. A Japanese-owned lingerie chain will take the space. “How is a bra going to replace my orange juice?” asked a retiree who has lived next to the shop for two decades. Angola: Isabel dos Santos, the daughter of the country’s former president, is set to face charges after an investigation into the embezzlement of millions from the state oil company, which she once headed. A banker who managed the company’s account was found dead at his Lisbon home in what was most likely a suicide, a police source said. Impeachment: House managers laid out their legal case against President Trump. The Senate is expected to meet for an abbreviated session on Saturday. Follow our updates here. Jungle prince, epilogue: For those of you who were as obsessed as we were with Ellen Barry’s story about a Delhi family that presented itself as royalty, here’s an update based on leads from readers’ letters and emails. Snapshot: Above, world leaders coming together in Israel for the 75th anniversary of the liberation of Auschwitz. They talked about rising anti-Semitism. What we’re reading: This profile of Lizzo in Rolling Stone “reveals how hard the Grammy-nominated singer fought to become a new kind of superstar,” writes Remy Tumin on the Briefings team. “The photos by David LaChapelle alone are worth the read.” Cook: Pasta alla vodka is a 30-minute dinner that leaves enough time to make a salad and pour a glass of wine. Skip the pancetta to make it vegetarian. Watch: Twenty-five years after the release of “Before Sunrise,” the film’s stars and creators spoke to The Times about how they made movie magic out of a tiny budget and capricious trains. Read: “Leadership Strategy and Tactics,” by the former Navy SEAL Jocko Willink, is a No. 1 debut on our advice, how-to and miscellaneous best-seller list. Smarter Living: Our Climate Fwd: newsletter usually brings us a weekly tip on “One thing you can do for the environment,” but this week, its team is looking at the bigger picture. Of the many rules that govern the Senate impeachment trial of President Trump, there is none more incongruous than the food and drink allowed on the floor during the marathon proceedings: water, milk and candy. That’s it. The candy is thanks to the “candy desk,” a historical relic that is currently assigned to Senator Patrick Toomey of Pennsylvania. It’s on the Republican side of the chamber, in the back row on the aisle. The tradition of the candy desk started in 1965 with Senator George Murphy, a sweet-toothed California Republican, and in recent years has been controlled by lawmakers from Pennsylvania, which has the country’s biggest confectionary industry. It’s currently stocked with Hershey bars with almonds, Rolo caramels, Milky Ways, 3 Musketeers bars, Palmer Peanut Butter Cups and Goldenberg’s Peanut Chews. As for beverages, only water is permitted — either still or sparkling — though a legislative rule book does refer to a lawmaker being permitted to ask for a glass of milk in 1966. Unfortunately for everyone involved in the proceedings, which have so far made for some very long days, coffee is not allowed. 
(Want to get this briefing by email? Here’s the sign-up.)  Good evening. Here’s the latest. 1. Twenty million people are on lockdown as China tries to contain a deadly virus. The authorities imposed strict travel restrictions on five cities, including Wuhan, the epicenter of a coronavirus outbreak that has already spread to Japan, South Korea, Thailand, Taiwan and the United States. Above, a thermometer screening checkpoint near Wuhan. Experts said the size of the lockdown was unprecedented. The respiratory virus has killed at least 18 people and sickened more than 600. The World Health Organization decided not to declare a global health emergency — yet. Several members thought it was “still too early,” the W.H.O. said in a statement. U.S. health officials are investigating a second suspected case of the virus in Brazos County, Texas. 2. Day 2 of the Senate impeachment trial. House impeachment managers, above, focused their argument on the abuse-of-power charge against President Trump. They also made a strategic decision to home in on the actions of former Vice President Joe Biden and his son Hunter Biden, a move Mr. Trump’s defenders jumped on. Here’s the latest. The managers and Mr. Trump’s defense team sit at curved tables built before President Bill Clinton’s impeachment trial. They were brought out of storage last week. Here’s a 3-D tour of how the Senate was transformed for this trial. The ripple effects of the impeachment trial — and its strict rules — are being felt in Iowa, where senators campaigning for the Democratic presidential nomination have put their campaign needs in the hands of their young field organizers and political surrogates. 3. The Trump administration removed pollution controls for streams and wetlands. A new rule will allow landowners and property developers to dump pollutants such as pesticides and fertilizers directly into many waterways, and destroy or fill in wetlands for construction. Above, farmland abutting wetlands in North Dakota. One lawyer described it as “the biggest loss of clean water protection the country has ever seen.” In other regulatory moves, pregnant women may be denied visas if officials think they plan to give birth in the U.S. to make their babies citizens, the State Department said. 4. World leaders gathered in Jerusalem to commemorate the 75th anniversary of the liberation of Auschwitz, in a demonstration of resolve to fight anti-Semitism. The kings of Spain, Belgium and the Netherlands, Britain’s Prince Charles and the presidents of Russia, France, Germany, Italy and Ukraine were among those leading nearly 50 delegations attending the events, which culminated with a visit to Yad Vashem, the hillside memorial to the Holocaust. A formal ceremony at the former Nazi death camp is scheduled for Monday. Our At War column is documenting lesser-known stories from World War II. The first dispatch is about a family who fled Nazi Germany just weeks before Adolf Hitler invaded Poland. 5. Pope Francis replaced a conservative archbishop, a sign that the pontiff is still intent on changing the church’s ideological direction in the U.S. Archbishop Charles Chaput, who was appointed to the position in Philadelphia by Pope Benedict XVI in 2011, was often at odds with Francis’ mission to move beyond the culture wars. Above, Francis and the archbishop in 2015. The move shifts one of its most traditionalist dioceses toward a more pastoral approach. Bishop Nelson Perez of Cleveland, a former Philadelphian and relative newcomer to the national scene, will assume the role. 6. Wells Fargo’s ex-C.E.O. agreed to a lifetime ban from banking and will pay $17.5 million over the bank’s fake account scandal — a rare case of a leader being held accountable for a bank’s misdeeds. In addition to John Stumpf, two other former executives were also fined, and Wells Fargo’s chief federal regulator, the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, said it would seek penalties against five others. Wells Fargo’s pattern of foisting unwanted products and sham bank accounts on millions of customers erupted into public view in late 2016. 7. Harvey Weinstein’s accusers are taking the stand for the first time at his long-awaited criminal trial. The actress Annabella Sciorra fought back tears as she told a rapt courtroom, in excruciating detail, about the night she said the former movie producer raped her. The searing testimony in State Supreme Court in Manhattan is just the beginning; five more accusers are expected to testify that Mr. Weinstein attacked them. 8. The Eli Manning era is officially over. Will he make the Pro Football Hall of Fame? With the Giants quarterback, above in 2012, set to hold a news conference on Friday to confirm his retirement, the debate about his accomplishments, which has simmered for years, will have closure. Our reporter weighs the odds of his being enshrined in the Hall. Looking ahead to the next generation of greats, we previewed the rematch between Coco Gauff and Naomi Osaka at the Australian Open on Friday and detailed the much-anticipated N.B.A. debut of Zion Williamson. A blitz of 17 points in about three minutes showed flashes of a bright future. 9. Lizzo has eight Grammy nominations, a performance slot during the awards show and the devotion of fiercely loyal fans (here’s looking at you, Lizzbians). What’s behind the Lizzo moment? Our music and culture critics discuss. “What’s exhilarating about her as an artist: She’s got nerve,” says Wesley Morris. “And the nerve is what’s made her a hit.” 10. And finally, a talking mummy. Nesyamun was an Egyptian priest who lived in Thebes. Now, some 3,000 years into the afterlife, Nesyamun can once again be heard  — sort of. Scientists used a CT scanner to create a 3-D-printed version of the mummy’s mouth and throat, and combined it with an electronic larynx to make, as one researcher put it, “the sound that would come out of his vocal tract if he was in his coffin and his larynx came to life again.” Their work may lay the groundwork for recreating and listening to an ancient person’s voice Listen to it here. (Spoiler alert: It sounds like what you think a mummy would sound like.) Have an animated night. Your Evening Briefing is posted at 6 p.m. Eastern. And don’t miss Your Morning Briefing. Sign up here to get it by email in the Australian, Asian, European, African or American morning. Want to catch up on past briefings? You can browse them here. What did you like? What do you want to see here? Let us know at briefing@nytimes.com. 
The World Health Organization on Thursday decided not to declare the Wuhan coronavirus outbreak a global emergency, despite the spread of the dangerous respiratory infection from China to at least five other countries. Although the disease has reached beyond China, the number of cases in other countries is still relatively small, and the disease does not seem to be spreading within those countries, agency officials said. Of more than 800 cases now reported, the wide majority — and all the 25 deaths — have been in China, according to Chinese officials. “At this time, there is no evidence of human-to-human transmission outside China,” Dr. Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, the W.H.O.’s director general, said at a news conference in Geneva. “That doesn’t mean it won’t happen.” “Make no mistake,” he added. “This is an emergency in China, but it has not yet become a global health emergency. It may yet become one.” The committee weighing the decision was divided, its chairman, Dr. Didier Houssin, said during the briefing. Some members felt the course of the outbreak warranted an emergency declaration now, but others said it that was too soon to decide, citing the limited number of cases in countries outside China as well as the country’s efforts to contain the virus. Emergency declarations can appear to single out one country as a threat to the rest of the world. Dr. Houssin said the committee also considered the potential impact of its decision on people in China. Dr. Tedros said he would not hesitate to ask the W.H.O. to reconsider declaring an emergency, even within a matter of days, if more evidence emerges to prove that the outbreak poses a global threat. There will probably be more cases of the disease in other parts of China and other countries, and all countries should have measures in place to detect cases, including at health facilities, W.H.O. officials said. Although several countries, including the United States, have begun screening air travelers arriving from Wuhan, Dr. Tedros said that the W.H.O. prefers exit screening for people leaving affected regions. “There is still a lot we don’t know,” Dr. Tedros said. “We don’t know the source, we don’t know how easily it spreads, we don’t understand its clinical features or severity.” The new infection is caused by a coronavirus, from the same family that caused epidemics of SARS and MERS, which have killed hundreds of people in dozens of countries. The first cases of the Wuhan illness occurred in people who had been to a market that sold fish and a variety of live animals for consumption, and researchers think the virus came from one of those animals. But which animal is not known. The market was shut down, and it is not clear whether any of the animals or products there were kept for testing. Finding the source is important, so sales of that animal and its meat can be halted. China has many such markets, and they were also the origin of SARS. [Like the Science Times page on Facebook. | Sign up for the Science Times newsletter.] So far, Dr. Tedros said, about a quarter of the people infected had become severely ill, but most others had milder symptoms. Most who died had underlying health problems, and many were older than 60. About 830 people have been infected with the virus in China, and at least 25 have died, according to Chinese authorities. Human-to-human transmission has occurred in China, but so far appears limited to people in close contact with patients: family members and health workers caring for the ill. Carried by travelers, the virus has reached Japan, South Korea, Thailand, Singapore, Taiwan, Vietnam and the United States. Investigators in other countries, including Mexico, are evaluating suspected cases. Officials in China have closed transportation links from and within Wuhan, and are imposing travel restrictions on other affected cities. These steps have significantly escalated the country’s efforts to contain the spread of the virus just days before the Lunar New Year holiday, when hundreds of millions travel in and out of the country. Dr. Tedros said that he hoped that the measures China took would be effective and short-lived. Only five global public health emergency declarations have been made in the past: The decisions are fraught. Health authorities do not want to cry wolf by raising alarms about an illness that turns out not to be severe — or to ignore a real threat. If they act relatively early in an outbreak, as in this case, they may lack key information about the severity and contagiousness of the disease. There are political and economic considerations as well. Declaring an emergency signals to governments that the situation is serious and that international help and cooperation are needed to contain the outbreak. Control measures may save not only lives, but money. The SARS epidemic, caused by a related coronavirus in 2002 and 2003, cost the global economy $30 billion to $100 billion, according to an article published Thursday in the medical journal JAMA. But declaring an emergency may stigmatize the country struggling with an outbreak, and spur costly bans on travel and trade by other countries, even if health authorities discourage those actions. “I think there is a general sense that we need to go back and revisit public health emergencies and what they mean,” said Michael Osterholm, an epidemiologist at the University of Minnesota. “I think it’s not clear — do they or do they not bring more resources, or more controversy?” 
On Sunday, a friend of mine in China wrote an ominous, two-word post on WeChat: “Broke out.” He meant that a mysterious surge in cases of pneumonia in Wuhan, a city in central China, was, in fact, an outbreak of something more serious. The first case of the Wuhan virus was detected on Dec. 12. Until last Thursday, only 45 cases, with two deaths, all in Wuhan, had been reported, and no health care workers were said to have been infected. The virus was mild, we were told then, with no evidence of human-to-human transmission; all confirmed cases seemed to originate from a food market where live animals are sold. On Jan. 11, local health authorities even suggested that the outbreak was over because they hadn’t registered any new case since Jan. 3. By Wednesday, though, 17 deaths and more than 470 cases had been confirmed. Cases of ill travelers from Wuhan have been reported in Hong Kong, Taiwan, Thailand, Japan, South Korea and the United States. Disease-modeling experts at Imperial College, in London, have estimated that as many as 4,000 to 9,700 people could be infected just in Wuhan, a city of more than 11 million people. According to Guan Yi, a virologist based in Hong Kong, the trajectory of the Wuhan virus parallels the early spread of SARS, the virus that spread to 29 countries, sickened thousands and killed 774 people in 2002 and 2003. Perhaps just as worrisome: The government’s response today seems remarkably similar to its response back then. The Chinese government’s initial response to SARS was, at least at the national level, a combination of inaction, denial and deception. The earliest case of SARS occurred in mid-November 2002; it’s clear that by late January of 2003 the Health Ministry was aware of a dangerous new type of pneumonia in Guangdong Province. Yet the government did not issue a nationwide bulletin to hospitals with instructions for preventing the spread of the disease until April 3. And it was not until mid-April that it formally listed SARS as a disease to be closely monitored, with daily reports. In the wake of that debacle, the Chinese government does seem to have become more willing to share disease-related information with both its people and international health organizations. But the government continues its top-down, state-dominated approach in disease surveillance, reporting and response. Global health experts have pointed out that this time around, the government was tight-lipped for two weeks after the onset of the Wuhan virus. Yes, it shared the virus’s genetic sequence, but only under increasing pressure from the international scientific community. For a time, the government tried to restrict the release of any information related to the disease. Local police departments threatened to punish anyone who spread “false information” about the outbreak. Only two quasi-independent media outlets in China, Caijing and Caixin, provided extensive coverage on the disease, and there was little discussion of the virus on Chinese social media. According to Caixin, 15 health care workers were infected in Wuhan between Jan. 12 and Jan. 21. Yet the local health authorities — presumably in an attempt to play down the seriousness of the situation — chose not to report that fact until after Monday, after the government warned that any official who tried to cover up information about the virus, or delay reporting, would be “nailed on the pillar of shame for eternity.” As a result, people in China were poorly informed about the outbreak in its early days, when its spread might have been contained more easily. When I mentioned the Wuhan virus to some of my high school classmates in a WeChat group last week, one of them, who happens to live in Wuhan, was offended. “Our country’s disease prevention and control system has been very well developed and is transparent,” he responded. “Only overseas people are panicking for us.” That could be part of the problem: On Monday, 40,000 families in the city held potluck banquets to celebrate the coming Lunar New Year. The next day, municipal authorities were trying to lure more tourists to the city by distributing 200,000 coupons for free events. Needless to say, encouraging large groups of people to come together in the epicenter of a potential outbreak is not an effective health strategy. Along with its information semi-blackout, the government has failed to respond effectively. Yes, the Chinese Center for Disease Control and Prevention started an investigation immediately after the first cases of the mysterious pneumonia were identified. The Wuhan health authorities also conducted epidemiological investigations. On Jan. 1, they closed down the market where the first cases of infection were traced. And this week they halted travel to or from Wuhan. Then again, back when SARS broke out, China’s health authorities also responded relatively well at the very beginning. The problems started when the government then failed to undertake effective measures to prevent the disease from spreading further. Both the Wuhan and the central health authorities could already have done much more to stem the spread of this new virus, including asking people to take precautions like wearing masks. Many suspected cases in Wuhan reportedly were not tested for the disease or quarantined; some people were simply sent home from the hospital without having been screened. Outside Wuhan, even as the number of patients with pneumonialike symptoms has increased, the authorities may have been reluctant to report cases because the three-step confirmation procedure set out by the central government is so cumbersome. As a result, no new cases were reported in China beyond Wuhan between Dec. 12 and Monday, and yet cases were surfacing overseas. Some Chinese sarcastically took to calling the virus “patriotic” — a disease more interested in infecting people overseas than in China. But this virus is anything but patriotic. It is exploding in China and spreading to other countries, much as SARS did in 2003. Has the Chinese government fundamentally changed its response to a possible epidemic since then? It appears not, or at least not enough. And to my surprise, people in China, including some in the know, seem to agree. “From 2003 to 2020,” according to one article shared by a government adviser on a WeChat group, Beijing’s “conduct has not changed at all.” 
This briefing has ended. Read about developments in the coronavirus outbreak here.  The Chinese National Health Commission reported early Friday that there have been 25 deaths from and 830 cases of the coronavirus, a sharp increase.  The death toll increased by more than a half-dozen in 24 hours, while the number of confirmed cases jumped by more than 200.  Earlier, the first death was confirmed outside the virus epicenter.  A patient died in the province of Hebei — more than 600 miles north of the city where the outbreak began — after contracting the coronavirus, the provincial authorities announced on Thursday.  The victim was an 80-year-old man who had lived in the city of Wuhan, where the outbreak originated, for more than two months, according to Hebei’s provincial health department. Wuhan is a major port city of 11 million in the province of Hubei, where all of the 17 previously reported deaths have taken place.  The victim died on Wednesday, but officials did not confirm that he had died of the coronavirus until Thursday, the Hebei provincial announcement said. The announcement did not say when the man had returned to Hebei Province from Wuhan, but said that he had developed chest tightness and difficulty breathing after his return. Like many of the other confirmed victims of the virus, he appeared to have other underlying health issues: After being admitted to a hospital, he also was treated for high blood pressure, chronic bronchitis and emphysema, the authorities said. After two days of deliberations, an emergency committee convened by the World Health Organization decided not to declare a global health emergency — but planned to meet again within 10 days, acknowledging the “urgency” of the situation. The committee had first planned to issue a recommendation on Wednesday about whether to declare an emergency (the decision ultimately falls to the W.H.O.’s director general). Such a declaration would give the W.H.O. broader authority to shape different countries’ responses. But committee members were split. On Thursday, after news of Wuhan’s travel restrictions and the increased death count emerged, the committee met again, and decided not to recommend the declaration. Several members thought it was “still too early,” the W.H.O. said in a news release.  Agency officials explained that although the disease has reached beyond China, the number of cases in other countries is still relatively small, and the disease does not seem to be spreading within those countries.  “At this time, there is no evidence of human to human transmission outside China,” Dr. Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, the W.H.O.’s director general, said at a news conference in Geneva. “That doesn’t mean it won’t happen.” “Make no mistake,” he said. “This is an emergency in China, but it has not yet become a global health emergency. It may yet become one.” Only five global public health emergency declarations have been made in the past. The decisions are fraught, with health authorities wary of causing panic, or of suggesting that governments cannot handle outbreaks on their own. Still, the W.H.O. called on the Chinese government to share more information on how it was handling the crisis.  The authorities expanded travel restrictions to several Chinese cities near Wuhan hours after announcing that the death toll and number of cases had risen sharply. Currently, at least 18 victims have been confirmed dead and more than 600 infected, according to Chinese officials. The restrictions on train and other forms of travel will apply to tens of millions of people and come just days before the Lunar New Year holiday, when hundreds of millions of people travel around and out of the country.  The Chinese authorities on Thursday morning closed off Wuhan by canceling flights and trains leaving the city, and suspending buses, subways and ferries within it. Late on Thursday, the local authorities also announced that they would suspend for-hire vehicles and limit taxis, beginning at noon on Friday.  Roughly 30,000 people fly out of Wuhan on an average day, according to air traffic data. Many more leave using ground transportation like trains and cars.  By evening, officials planned to also close off Huanggang, a city of seven million about 30 miles east of Wuhan, shut rail stations in the nearby city of Ezhou, which has about one million residents, and impose travel restrictions on the smaller cities of Chibi and Zhijiang. In Huanggang, public transportation and departing trains stopped at midnight. Residents are not allowed to leave the city without special permission, according to a government statement. In Ezhou, all rail stations were to be closed. Separately, the provincial authorities in Hubei announced late Thursday some restrictions for the entire province, not just specific cities. Travel agencies are prohibited from taking customers and organizing tours, for example, and business trips are being suspended.  Schools throughout the province, which have breaks scheduled for the Lunar New Year holiday, will postpone their post-break start dates indefinitely.  The new virus, which first emerged at the end of December, has sickened people in Taiwan, Vietnam, Japan, Thailand, Singapore, South Korea and the United States. It has raised the specter of a repeat of the SARS epidemic, which broke out in China in 2002 and 2003 and spread rapidly while officials obscured the seriousness of the crisis. That virus eventually killed more than 800 people worldwide. In Beijing, the government said it would cancel large public gatherings for the holiday, including fairs at temples that usually draw shoulder-to-shoulder crowds, and the Forbidden City, a popular tourist attraction in the heart of the capital, will close starting on Saturday.  Coronaviruses are named for the spikes that protrude from their membranes, which resemble the sun’s corona. They can infect both animals and people, and cause illnesses of the respiratory tract, ranging from the common cold to severe conditions like SARS. Symptoms of infection include a high fever, difficulty breathing and lung lesions. Milder cases may resemble the flu or a bad cold, making detection difficult. The incubation period — the time from exposure to the onset of symptoms — is believed to be about two weeks. While the headlines are alarming, health experts cautioned that it was too early to gauge the severity of the outbreak. There are too many unknowns: Where did it start? How easily does it spread? How does it compare to other coronaviruses, like SARS? Dr. William Schaffner, a specialist in infectious diseases at Vanderbilt University Medical Center, said the illness should be viewed in perspective. While a new virus spreading internationally gets more attention, the much more common influenza virus is the bigger hazard for most people, he said.  “If I look at this winter respiratory season, influenza is going to cause many more illnesses and more deaths than this coronavirus,” he said. “It’s one of those circumstances where, if familiarity doesn’t breed contempt, it certainly breeds a certain nonchalance.” As anxiety about the virus has grown, governments around the world have taken precautions to isolate anyone displaying symptoms, though several cases have proved not to be the coronavirus. Health officials in the United States said on Thursday that there could be a second infection in the country, after the authorities in Washington State confirmed earlier this week that a man there had fallen sick with the Wuhan coronavirus. The second possible patient was in Brazos County, Texas, where officials said they were keeping a patient isolated at home while they did additional testing. Vietnam’s Ministry of Health announced on Thursday that it had confirmed two cases of the coronavirus, in two male Chinese patients. In Mexico, two out of five potential coronavirus cases were officially ruled out by the Health Ministry on Thursday after comprehensive tests were conducted, according to state and federal government officials. A health official said that one of the patients, a 57-year-old professor, had been diagnosed with a common cold. The three other cases, in the western state of Jalisco, were under observation and were being tested, according to the Health Ministry report. The patients include a 42-year old man who returned to Mexico from Wuhan on Jan. 10, and two other women who had contact with him. Across Wuhan on Thursday, residents — some wearing masks, some sniffing or coughing — visited hospitals and clinics seeking treatment. In interviews with a New York Times correspondent in the city, some said they were angry about the sudden lockdown. Others said they were confused by the restrictions. Outside the Wuhan No. 3 Hospital, Yang Lin, said she had come to the hospital to see if a sniffling cold she had might be the coronavirus. After a quick check, the doctors told her not to worry. But she was not reassured. “They said it was just a common cold, and told me to get some medicine and go home,” Ms. Yang, 28, said. “But how am I to know? They didn’t even take my temperature. It’s just not responsible.” The outbreak is testing Wuhan’s health care system. Several Wuhan residents said on social media websites that they had gone from hospital to hospital, waiting in lines for hours, only to be sent home with medicine and instructions to seek further treatment later if symptoms persisted in a few days. Doctors told some patients that there was a shortage of hospital beds as well as testing kits, according to posts on Chinese social media sites.  China’s Ministry of Finance said on Thursday that it would allocate 1 billion yuan, or about $144 million, to officials in Hubei to fight the virus, though it did not specify how the money would be used. Wuhan officials also said that they would construct a new hospital specifically for coronavirus patients. The new hospital was ordered built within six days, according to People’s Daily, the ruling Communist Party’s main newspaper. Cheng Shidong, a doctor at the Zhongnan Hospital of Wuhan University, said in an interview that his hospital had set up 100 beds to receive infected patients, but that it didn’t have enough protective material, such as masks and suits, for the medical staff.  In Wuhan, Ms. Yang said that while she was in a pharmacy buying medicine, another person complained that he thought he had the coronavirus but had not been isolated. The city’s medical system, especially its smaller hospitals, seems unprepared for the influx of patients, she said. “I’m willing to accept that we have to stay in Wuhan, O.K., but the medical care needs to keep up,” she said. “You shouldn’t tell us we can’t leave, and then give us second-rate medical care. That’s unfair.” China’s health commission, which has tightly controlled news about the toll of the outbreak, released on Thursday its most detailed list of the people who have died of the disease. The first 17 people were largely older men, many with underlying health problems. All died in Hubei Province, which includes the city of Wuhan. The first confirmed death was a 61-year-old man who went to a hospital in Wuhan on December 27, weak with a fever and a cough. He was transferred to another hospital as his condition worsened, and he was later attached to a machine that helped oxygenate his blood. But he died on Jan. 9. Twelve of the other 17 deaths in Hubei were also men, and four were women, officials said. The youngest victim was a 48-year-old woman who died on Monday. The oldest were two 89-year-old men. Separately on Thursday, the health authorities in Hebei Province, to the north of Hubei Province, announced that an 80-year-old man there had died, bringing the death count to 18. Many of the victims had underlying conditions like cirrhosis of the liver, hypertension, diabetes and Parkinson’s disease. Most had gone to the hospital with a fever and a cough, though at least three had no fever when they were admitted, according to the health commission. While a full picture of the virus is still unknown, medical experts found positive signs in the fact that the disease did not appear to be killing young and otherwise healthy people. “The majority of fatal cases are elderly and/or have a chronic disease that would increase their susceptibility to infectious diseases,” said Dr. W. Ian Lipkin, an epidemiologist at the Mailman School of Public Health at Columbia University in New York. In an unusually blunt interview, Dr. Guan Yi, a professor of infectious diseases in Hong Kong and expert on SARS, criticized the authorities in Wuhan for acting too slowly and obstructing his efforts to investigate the outbreak. Dr. Guan, who helped successfully identify the coronavirus that caused SARS during the 2002-2003 outbreak in China, told the influential Chinese magazine Caixin that he was deeply frustrated by the city government’s response to the spread of the virus. He and his team had visited Wuhan on Tuesday hoping that they could track the animal that was the source of the coronavirus but were shocked to find that residents at a market were not taking any precautions or wearing masks. No special measures were in place at the airport to disinfect surfaces and floors, either. This showed that the city government was being complacent despite the urgent orders handed down by Beijing, he said. “I thought at the time, we had to be in a ‘state of war’, but how come the alarm has not been raised?” he told Caixin. “Poor citizens, they were still preparing to ring in the New Year in peace and had no sense about the epidemic.” He also criticized the local authorities for disinfecting the market where many infections had been traced to, saying that made it difficult for researchers to investigate where the virus came from. “I consider myself a veteran in battles,” he said, citing his experience with bird flu, SARS, and other outbreaks. “But with this Wuhan pneumonia, I feel extremely powerless.”  There are growing concerns that the Chinese authorities are underreporting the number of people who are ill with the virus. Relatives of patients say that some hospitals, strapped for resources as they deal with an influx of patients, are turning sick people away or refusing to test them for the coronavirus. Many people remain skeptical of the government’s official statistics, with memories of the effort to cover up the severity of the SARS outbreak still fresh. In Wuhan, Kyle Hui, an architect from Shanghai, said that doctors at Tongji Hospital declined to test his stepmother for the virus, even though she was showing symptoms like a cough and a fever. She died on Jan. 15 of “severe pneumonia,” according to a copy of her death certificate. Mr. Hui said that hospital workers treated his stepmother as if she had the coronavirus, wearing hazmat suits. After she died, the hospital instructed the family to cremate the body immediately. Mr. Hui said that after her death, doctors informed the family that they suspected his stepmother had the coronavirus. “I’m very sad my stepmother left without any dignity,” Mr. Hui said during an interview this week in a cafe in Wuhan. “There was no time to say goodbye.” Chris Buckley, our chief China correspondent, headed to Wuhan from Beijing to cover the outbreak. He is sending live dispatches from his trip. The G79 high speed train from Beijing to Hong Kong, which stops in Wuhan, was crowded with holiday passengers. The train was a hubbub of conversation, much of it about the deadly coronavirus and the lockdown around Wuhan. Guo Jing, a worker from northeast China, was headed with two friends for a holiday in Macau. After some hesitation, they had taken off their masks. “They’re too uncomfortable inside,” Mr. Guo said. “My view is we have to be careful but not panic. If you’re the panicky type, then you wouldn’t be on this train.” Half an hour out from Wuhan, the train is quite crowded with passengers. When I explain that I’m getting off at Wuhan, the reactions vary from advice — wear masks, don’t go, drink lots of water — to mordant jokes that I may be there a long time. “You should know that they probably won’t let people out until the New Year holiday is over,” said one woman, who would only give her family name, Yang.  Wuhan Railway Station, usually thronging with people in the days before the Lunar New Year holiday, is very empty. An announcement playing on a loop over the speakers tells the few people here that residents cannot leave the city and the station is temporarily closed.  Scientists have been scrambling to understand the source of the coronavirus, in particular, the animals from which the virus may have jumped to humans. Many of the cases in Wuhan were connected to a market that sold live poultry and exotic animal meats. The market was closed and disinfected. Early epidemiological research is indicating that it may have come from wild animals such as bamboo rats and badgers, said Dr. Zhong Nanshan, a prominent Chinese scientist who was the country’s leading expert during the SARS outbreak, during an interview with state media on Monday. Named for its bamboo-heavy diet, the cat-sized bamboo rat has become a somewhat popular delicacy in recent years in China, promoted for its purported health properties. A group of Chinese researchers from the eastern city of Tianjin and Nanjing in the south, said the Wuhan coronavirus may have originated from Chinese horseshoe bats, according to a study they published in the Chinese Journal of Bioinformatics on Tuesday. China’s National Genomics Data Center said the Wuhan virus was 88 percent genetically similar to a SARS-like coronavirus that was collected from bats in China in 2017. Still another group of Chinese scientists suggested that snakes were the “most probable wildlife animal reservoir” for the novel coronavirus, then transmitted to humans, in an article published in the Journal of Medical Virology Wednesday. But that assessment immediately drew fire from the international health community. The study’s lead author, Wei Ji of the Peking University Health Science Center School of Basic Medical Sciences, did not actually find the new coronavirus in a snake, noted David Robertson, a professor at the University of Glasgow. Instead, Dr. Ji and his colleagues compared the genomes of an assortment of viruses and hosts and claimed to find a similarity between the genomes of the new virus and snakes. Dr. Ji did not respond to an email query by the time of publication. The announcement that the city of Wuhan would be temporarily sealed off from the outside world starting at 10 a.m. on Thursday came while most residents were asleep at 2 a.m. Some decided to flee the city. Residents were seen hauling their luggage to a train station in the early hours before the citywide lockdown took effect, the Chinese news outlet Caixin reported. Several people said they would buy tickets for any destination as long as they could leave Wuhan, the magazine reported. Lines of passengers in masks and down jackets, lugging suitcases, formed outside the major Hankou railway station just 20 minutes before the cutoff time, a live video by media outlet The Paper showed. Han Zhen and Wang Mengkai, two migrant workers from Henan Province, said they had rushed to the railway station in order to leave on Wednesday night, but missed the last train out. Both said they were frustrated by the sudden lockdown and were scrambling to find a way home. “It’s serious but not that serious,” said Mr. Wang, who works in an electronics parts factory. “We’re trying to figure out how we can get home. If we can’t get out on a train, we’ll try putting together a car with a driver.” Asked if they were motivated to leave by fear of the virus, Mr. Han said: “No, we are not scared.” “It’s the New Year, we just have to go home,” he said.   
HONG KONG — When the man finally went to a hospital, he had been sick for a week. It was Dec. 26, and Mr. Zeng, 61, was weak with a cough. He got worse. A day later he was transferred to intensive care, and on Dec. 30 he was put on a ventilator to try to keep him alive. He was moved to another hospital and attached to another machine that oxygenated his blood. Still, he got worse, and on Jan. 9 his heart stopped. Mr. Zeng, whom the authorities have identified only by his surname, became the first confirmed death from the new coronavirus that emerged in the central city of Wuhan and has since spread around the country and beyond. China’s health commission, which has tightly controlled news about the toll of the outbreak, on Thursday released details about the first 17 confirmed deaths from the disease. (Several more deaths were announced early Friday, bringing the death toll to 25.)  The detailed information was released as the authorities canceled transportation within Wuhan and several nearby cities and largely blocked residents from leaving. Medical experts have questioned whether the measures in Wuhan have come too late to prevent the spread of the coronavirus, which has been found in infected travelers in Washington State, Japan, South Korea, Thailand and Taiwan. Dr. Guan Yi, a professor of infectious diseases at the University of Hong Kong who visited Wuhan this week, warned that there was a potential for the virus to spread rapidly despite the controls put in place on Thursday morning. “We have a chance to have a pandemic outbreak,” said Dr. Guan, who was part of the team that identified the coronavirus that caused the deadly SARS outbreak in 2002 and 2003. SARS infected more than 8,000 people and killed nearly 800. Dr. Guan also told Caixin, an influential Chinese magazine known for investigative reports, that he had traveled to Wuhan hoping to help track the virus’s animal source and control the epidemic. But he left, he said, feeling “powerless, very angry.” Dr. W. Ian Lipkin, an epidemiologist at Columbia University who advised the Chinese government and the World Health Organization during the SARS outbreak, said that infected people outside Wuhan would continue to spread the disease. “The horse is already out of the barn,” he said. An examination of the information provided by the government about the initial deaths show a disease that has thus far largely killed older men, many of who had underlying health problems. Most had gone to the hospital with a fever and a cough, though at least three did not have fevers when they were admitted, according to the health commission’s statement. Among the first 17 victims were 13 men and four women. All were identified only by their last names. The youngest was a 48-year-old woman, Yin, who died on Monday, more than a month after her symptoms were first recorded. The oldest cases were two 89-year-old men who died on Saturday and Sunday. The median age was 75. Many had underlying conditions like cirrhosis of the liver, hypertension, diabetes and Parkinson’s disease. Most spent more than a week in hospitals, with some undergoing treatment for a month or longer. But two died just four days after they were admitted. While much about the virus remains unknown, medical experts found some positive signs in the fact that the disease did not appear to be killing young and otherwise healthy people. It was a somewhat reassuring sign, Dr. Lipkin wrote, that “the majority of fatal cases are elderly and/or have a chronic disease that would increase their susceptibility to infectious diseases.” The Chinese health commission said more than 570 cases had been confirmed in the country by the end of Wednesday, with 95 in grave condition. The outbreak has happened as China was preparing for the Lunar New Year holiday, the biggest travel period of the year, increasing the likelihood of the coronavirus circulating further beyond Wuhan. Dr. Guan, in his interview with Caixin, was critical of the local government, saying it had not done enough earlier this week to stop the coronavirus in Wuhan. “Even though the central authorities have said in the past two days they were attaching a high degree of importance, local health protections had not been upgraded at all,” he said. “At the time I thought this was going to be a ‘state of war.’ Why hadn’t the alarm been sounded?” Dr. Guan said he was disturbed by the lack of safety measures being put in place. At the airport he saw no disinfection being carried out and only a few random places like a Starbucks had put out liquid hand sanitizer dispensers. The situation was so surprising, “my jaw dropped,” he said. He said he continually ran into obstacles when trying to find researchers to work with on tracing the source of the virus. The seafood and poultry market believed to the source had been thoroughly cleaned, he complained, preventing any effective investigation. “There’s no crime scene,” he said. The path of the coronavirus could prove harder to trace and control than SARS, when a small number of highly infectious superspreaders helped transmit the disease to a large number of people, Dr. Guan said. “I’ve experienced a lot, and I’ve never felt scared, most of these are controllable,” he said, citing previous battles with SARS, avian influenza and other outbreaks. “But this time I’m scared.” 
A second patient in the United States has been found to be infected with the Wuhan coronavirus, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention announced on Friday. The patient is a woman in her 60s who had traveled to Wuhan, China — the epicenter of the outbreak — and returned to Chicago on Jan. 13. She did not become ill until several days after arriving in Chicago, so officials do not think there is much risk to others who were on her flight home. She did not take public transportation, attend any large gatherings or have close contact with anyone outside her home after returning, officials said. Members of her household are being monitored. The woman was taken to a hospital, but she is doing well and is being kept there primarily to keep the infection from spreading, officials said at a news briefing. They declined to name the woman or the hospital. The first known case in the United States, of a man in Washington State who had traveled to Wuhan, was reported on Tuesday. “The immediate risk to the American public is low at this time, but the situation continues to evolve rapidly,” Dr. Nancy Messonnier, the director of the National Center for Immunization and Respiratory Diseases, said at a news briefing held by the C.D.C. More cases are expected in the United States, she said. Sixty-three other people in 22 states are being monitored for possible infection, the C.D.C. said. They are people with respiratory symptoms who may have been exposed to the virus through their own travels or by contact with a patient. So far, 11 of the 63 have tested negative for the infection. The people being tested, called “patients under investigation,” were reported to the C.D.C. by state health officials. Samples from the patients — respiratory fluids and blood — have to be sent to the C.D.C., which tests them for genetic material from the virus. The testing takes four to six hours. The C.D.C. is developing kits that officials will send out to the states so that local authorities can do the testing themselves and get results faster. Following a briefing in Washington by officials from the C.D.C. and the National Institutes of Health on Friday, senators said it was most likely that more cases would be identified in the United States. “The idea is to identify and then contain it,” said Senator John Barrasso, Republican of Wyoming. “We’re trying to stop and prevent anyone from coming to the United States that may have it,” he added. The C.D.C. is sending a team to talk to the patient and her family in Chicago, according to Senators Richard J. Durbin and Tammy Duckworth, both Democrats of Illinois. Coronaviruses are worrying because epidemics caused by other members of the viral family, SARS and MERS, have had high death rates: 10 percent for SARS, and about 35 percent for MERS. It is too soon to know the death rate for the new virus. Although influenza kills more people every year, its overall mortality rate is only about 0.1 percent. The number of the deaths is high because so many people become infected. The death rate of the Spanish flu in 1918 was about 2 percent. Because of the higher death rates, widespread coronavirus epidemics could take a heavy toll, so the health authorities scramble to stamp them out. A major concern is that with both SARS and MERS, a few patients inexplicably became “superspreaders” who infected huge numbers of other people. At a hospital in Seoul, South Korea, in 2015, one man with MERS transmitted it to 82 patients. The C.D.C. now recommends avoiding nonessential travel to Wuhan. Because the disease has spread beyond Wuhan, travelers to other parts of China should avoid contact with people who are sick, stay away from markets that sell live wild animals — believed to be the source of the virus — and wash their hands frequently. Federal health officials are asking people with possible exposure to the virus and who develop symptoms like shortness of breath, cough and fever to call health care providers first, rather than just showing up at a doctor’s office, clinic or emergency room. With advance notice, doctors can take steps to prevent the spread of the virus, like isolating patients and putting masks on themselves and the patients. The woman in Chicago followed those instructions, officials said. There is no antiviral drug to treat coronavirus infection, but a medicine called remdesivir has shown promise in animal studies and would be a good candidate for trials in humans, according to Dr. Mark R. Denison, an infectious disease expert at Vanderbilt University. There is also no vaccine to prevent the disease, but researchers at the National Institutes of Health reported on Thursday that it might be possible to develop one ready for testing in people within a few months. The incubation period of the disease — the time it takes for symptoms to develop after a person has been exposed to the virus — is thought to be about two weeks, Dr. Messonnier said. Nearly 1,300 people are infected in China, and a handful of cases have turned up in at least seven other countries. All were travelers who brought home the infection from China. At least 41 people have died. On Thursday, the World Health Organization declined to declare the outbreak a global emergency, but it “may yet become one,” said Dr. Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, the W.H.O.’s director general. It is certainly an emergency within China, he added. Five major airports in the United States are screening passengers arriving from Wuhan for signs of infection with coronavirus. The screenings are imperfect. The illness may resemble a common cold or the flu. Some infected travelers, like the two who have been found to have the disease, may have arrived in the United States before symptoms were evident or before screenings were implemented. People being screened are also given cards with instructions about what symptoms to look out for and how to seek health care if they develop them. 
This briefing has ended. Read about developments in the coronavirus outbreak here. Fifteen more people have died in the city of Wuhan, the Hubei provincial capital and epicenter of the outbreak, the health authorities in Hubei said. The new figures, announced early Saturday, represented a nearly 60 percent jump from the previous death toll of 26.  Just three of the 41 deaths reported over all have taken place outside of Wuhan: one in another city in Hubei Province, one in Hebei Province, and one in Heilongjiang, near the Russian border. The new victims ranged from 55 to 87 years old. Eleven were male, and four female. Nationwide, more than 400 new cases of the virus were diagnosed, officials said early Saturday, bringing the total number of confirmed cases in China to nearly 1,300.  The authorities on Friday greatly expanded a travel lockdown in central China to include 12 cities near the center of the outbreak, effectively penning in 35 million residents — nearly the population of Canada — in an effort to contain the dangerous coronavirus. The new travel limits — abruptly decreed ahead of the Lunar New Year holiday, China’s busiest travel season — were an extraordinary step that underlined the governing Communist Party’s deepening fears about the outbreak of a little-understood coronavirus. Just one day after China restricted travel in and from the center of the outbreak, Wuhan, a city of 11 million and the capital of Hubei Province, and four nearby towns, the government announced plans to suspend public transportation services covering more than half the population of the province. The rapidly expanding outbreak has overwhelmed the Chinese province’s hospitals and fueled fears of a global pandemic.  All the deaths reported so far have been in China. Most have been older patients, but included a 36-year-old man. On Thursday morning, the authorities imposed a travel lockdown in Wuhan, and airlines canceled hundreds of flights to the city, leaving thousands of people stranded. Later in the day, officials said they would also halt public transportation in the nearby cities of Huanggang, Ezhou, Zhijiang and Chibi, which are together home to more than nine million residents. By Friday, restrictions had been announced in eight other cities. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention announced on Friday that a second case of the coronavirus had been confirmed in the United States: a woman in her 60s in Chicago who had recently traveled to Wuhan, China, the center of the outbreak.  The other case, a man in his 30s, was in Washington State.  The unidentified woman returned to Chicago on Jan. 13, officials said. She became ill days later. As of Friday, she was still hospitalized but was doing better. Officials at a news briefing declined to name the hospital. The C.D.C. told reporters that 63 patients in 22 states were under investigation for the coronavirus; 11 have tested negative.  France became the first country in Europe to report the infections. The Health Ministry reported three confirmed cases — two in Paris and one in Bordeaux. All three people had spent time in China.  Agnès Buzyn, the health minister, told reporters earlier Friday that France reported the first European cases “because we were very quick in establishing the test and identifying the cases.” Australia reported its first confirmed case on Saturday: a man in his 50s visiting from China, who was being treated in a Melbourne hospital. The authorities there said he had been in Wuhan before falling ill, and that he had arrived in Melbourne on Sunday, on a flight from Guangzhou. American officials have announced expanded screenings for the infection at major airports in the United States. In addition to New York, Los Angeles and San Francisco, airports in Atlanta and Chicago began examining passengers arriving from Wuhan for signs of illness. On Chinese social media, people across the country expressed mounting mistrust and resentment of the authorities in Wuhan, whom they blamed for mishandling the outbreak. Some users called for Wuhan leaders to be removed. Others mocked the failure of the Communist Party’s newspapers to treat the epidemic with front-page urgency. Most of those posts were quickly removed by censors. On the Twitter-like platform Weibo, Li Haipeng, a former journalist, wrote: “What is happening in Wuhan is really outrageous. Can it be hollow to this extent, incompetent to this degree?”  His post was shared more than 41,000 times and received more than 5,000 comments. One commenter wrote, “I hope the central government can take over before dawn. It’s almost like anarchy.” Another wrote, “Wuhan’s party secretary and governor cannot soothe the people’s anger.” In another post, a woman whose profile said she worked at a Hubei hospital shared a photo of instant noodles, lamenting that it was the only food she was given after working late on the night before Lunar New Year — traditionally time for a large meal shared with family. The post was shared more than 30,000 times, and received more than 25,000 comments. “The Wuhan government is not worthy of such good medical staff,” one person replied. Still, at least one person was decidedly complimentary: President Trump, who reached a trade truce with China last week and has sought to cool tensions with the Chinese government. “China has been working very hard to contain the Coronavirus,” Mr. Trump wrote on Twitter on Friday. “The United States greatly appreciates their efforts and transparency.”  Mr. Trump especially singled out China’s leader, Xi Jinping: “In particular, on behalf of the American People, I want to thank President Xi!” The Lunar New Year is the most important holiday in the traditional Chinese calendar, and celebrations start on the eve, which this year falls on Friday. Chinese were expected to travel home in time to help wrap dumplings or fry sticky rice cakes for all-important reunion dinners with their extended families. At midnight, families around the country usually set off firecrackers and fireworks. But these celebrations are set to be far more muted this year, particularly in Wuhan and other parts of Hubei Province where the authorities have imposed travel restrictions. In Wuhan, people waited anxiously on Friday outside Hankou Hospital, one of the medical facilities designated to test for the coronavirus, as their relatives sought treatment inside. Several said the Lunar New Year would pass without the usual celebrations or vacation travel. They and other residents said that the city was now also confronting food supply problems because so many shops and markets had closed, adding to the hardships caused by the city shutdown. “We won’t have a new year celebration tonight. There’s no feeling for it, and no food,” Wu Qiang, a resident in his 50s who was waiting outside the hospital entrance for word about his son, told a New York Times correspondent. Mr. Wu said he understood the need to close off the city, but added that city authorities should ensure that enough shops and markets were selling fresh food. He said his son had been sneezing, setting off alarm at home. “I think he’s O.K., but now even an ordinary sneeze makes you worry,” Mr. Wu said. “You start to think every cough or sneeze might be the virus.” Chen Yanming, 47, who said her father might have contracted the coronavirus, said she was melancholic and anxious as the Lunar New Year came. She said her father had suffered a high fever for a few days and was being treated in the hospital. “Today should be the Chinese people’s happiest day,” she said, “but this sickness has destroyed that feeling.” The official death toll from the mysterious coronavirus increased by more than a half-dozen in 24 hours, to 26, while the number of confirmed cases jumped by more than 200. The majority of the deaths have occurred in Hubei Province, in central China, but two deaths have been confirmed outside the center of the outbreak. One patient died in Hebei Province, more than 600 miles north of Wuhan, the authorities announced on Thursday. Another death was confirmed in Heilongjiang, a province near the border with Russia, more than 1,500 miles from Wuhan. The youngest victim of the outbreak so far has been identified as a 36-year-old man identified only as Li. He died on Thursday after being admitted to the hospital on Jan. 9, the Hubei Health Commission said. He suffered a cardiac arrest less than two hours before he died, officials said. The disease has now been detected in Australia, Malaysia, Nepal, Vietnam, Singapore, Japan, South Korea, Taiwan, Thailand, France and the United States.  On Friday, the authorities in Nepal said a student who had returned to the country from China had been confirmed to be infected with the coronavirus. He has already been treated and released. Dr. Anup Bastola, a spokesman for the government-run Sukraraj Tropical and Infectious Diseases Hospital, said a 32-year-old doctoral student was admitted to the hospital on Jan. 13 after having some respiratory problems. Concerned over his symptoms, the doctors sent samples of his blood and sputum for testing. Later, he was found to be infected with the virus that emerged from Wuhan, China. After spending four days in the hospital, the student was discharged on Jan. 17. In the aftermath, Nepal’s Health Ministry has activated health screenings at Tribhuvan International Airport. Dr. Gauden Galea, the representative of the World Health Organization in Beijing, said in an interview on Friday that while much was uncertain, health officials were preparing for an outbreak that could last for months. He said that eventually thousands of people would most likely be infected, citing models produced by public health experts. “My own office is gearing up for a number of months,” Dr. Galea said. “We do not expect it to disappear in a number of days.” He said much would depend on the patterns of infection over the holiday travel season. He said there was little precedent for the travel restrictions imposed by the Chinese authorities but that public health experts were hopeful that they could help contain the virus, along with efforts to expand screening, promote the use of masks and isolate sick patients. Still, he acknowledged, health officials were being forced to improvise. “Part is science and part is hope,” he said. Dr. Galea, who visited Wuhan this week before the lockdown, defended how Chinese officials had handled the outbreak, saying they had been transparent in sharing data. He said the Chinese authorities faced a daunting challenge. “With the number of cases,” he said, “one would expect health systems to be stretched.” As Wuhan residents waited in long lines at hospitals to be checked for possible coronavirus infections, some residents complained they were not able to get the treatment they needed. Xiao Shibing, 51, has had a fever for 15 days and finds it difficult to breathe. When he went to a hospital, he was not tested for the coronavirus, said his daughter, Xiao Hongxia. He was told he had a viral chest infection and was sent home. Mr. Xiao’s family has continued to seek treatment, visiting other hospitals, but has been turned away by at least three because of a shortage of beds, his wife, Feng Xiu, said. “It is like kicking a ball from here to there,” she said. Cai Pei, 41, said his wife began coughing and developed a fever three days ago. He wrote on Weibo that hospitals would not admit her, and he had difficulty finding masks and cold medicine in pharmacies. They still do not know if she is infected with the coronavirus or some more common ailment. “Sometimes I can only hide and cry, but I couldn’t tell her and had to reassure her that it is not the virus,” Mr. Cai said by phone. “It is very scary. If it’s real, we have a child and elderly parents at home. What if we all get sick?” Hospitals and medical workers at the center of the outbreak in Wuhan made urgent appeals for supplies, as stocks of surgical masks and other equipment quickly flew off shelves. “Shortage of medical supplies, request help!!!” the Wuhan Children’s Hospital said on Thursday in a post on Weibo, the Chinese social network. The hospital asked for donations of surgical masks, disposable garments, protective goggles and gloves. Several others, including Hubei General Hospital, Renmin Hospital of Wuhan University and the Central Hospital of Wuhan, posted similar notices. The central government on Thursday acknowledged the severe strain on resources, and the Ministry of Finance announced an urgent allocation of one billion renminbi, about $144 million, for epidemic prevention and control work. State news media also carried reports of people volunteering to help ease the strain on health workers. Young doctors at the Renmin Hospital of Wuhan University volunteered to take on additional shifts or to take over from colleagues with children, the state broadcaster CCTV reported. A team of 30 volunteers in Wuhan mobilized to drive doctors to and from hospitals, while others have offered to help the local Red Cross answer phone calls and publicize requests for help from hospitals, according to a report by the China Business Journal. The American and British governments on Friday urged travelers to avoid the city of Wuhan and the surrounding area amid growing signs that the outbreak of the coronavirus was worsening. The American Embassy in Beijing advised travelers from the United States to avoid Hubei Province, where Wuhan is the capital. It said the State Department had already ordered nonemergency government personnel to leave the city. It further warned that the Chinese government might prevent travelers from arriving or leaving. The State Department notice was a Level 4 advisory, the sternest warning the United States government issues regarding travel. Other Level 4 warnings issued by the State Department cover travel to Syria, North Korea, Afghanistan, Iraq, Venezuela and Yemen, among other places. The warning is a step up from Washington’s earlier cautions. Just a day before, the American government had been advising travelers to “exercise extreme caution” when traveling to the Wuhan area. The British government, in a notice dated Thursday, similarly advised against all but essential travel to Wuhan. The warning came a day before the government’s Cobra committee was to meet in Downing Street to discuss the threat posed by coronavirus to Britain, according to local news reports. Fourteen people in Britain were tested for the disease, and all came back negative, the chief medical officer, Chris Whitty, announced on Friday. But checks on others were continuing. Some British universities have also warned students considering traveling home to China that they could face quarantine on their return. The University of Chester had warned its Chinese students that if they return to their homeland, they would not be readmitted without a quarantine period, The Guardian reported. In a statement on Friday, however, a spokeswoman for the university said in an email: “The University of Chester has a relatively small Chinese student cohort and they are being appropriately supported. All students have been advised they must not interrupt their studies to return to China at this point.” Universities UK, which represents 136 universities in England, Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland, said in an emailed statement on Friday: “U.K. universities have been monitoring the coronavirus situation as it unfolds and universities with students in affected areas are working to identify appropriate actions. Universities will continue to follow the latest FCO advice and to monitor the situation, which is evolving rapidly.” Shanghai Disneyland, one of the biggest tourist attractions in China, will shut down on Saturday as the Chinese authorities and others look for ways to reduce crowds to stop the spread of the coronavirus. In a notice on its website on Friday, Shanghai Disney Resort, the arm of the Walt Disney Company that runs Shanghai Disneyland, blamed the outbreak for the shutdown and said it would reopen at an unspecified date. The shutdown adds to the tourist and cultural attractions closing across China at the beginning of the Lunar New Year holiday, when many families head out of the house to spend quality time together. The authorities operating the Badaling section of the Great Wall of China, a popular tourist destination north of Beijing, said it would temporarily close beginning on Saturday. Shanghai Huangpu River Cruise, the company that operates boat tours along Shanghai’s scenic Bund area, said the same.  Shanghai’s movie theaters will be closed throughout the Lunar New Year holidays, a state media outlet said. Film companies said this week that they would pull new releases planned for the peak film-going period. A prolonged Shanghai Disneyland shutdown could add to the problems in the region for Disney, the American entertainment giant. Attendance at its Hong Kong Disneyland theme park has been battered by anti-Beijing protests that have swept through Hong Kong’s streets in recent months, frightening away many tourists from mainland China. Disney owns a 43 percent stake in Shanghai Disney Resorts, while state-owned Shanghai Shendi Group holds a majority stake. The closings at a peak spending time could come at a considerable cost to the Chinese economy, though it isn’t clear how big that toll might be. The Economist Intelligence Unit projects that the coronavirus could reduce China’s growth by 0.5 percent to 1 percent, compared with its projected growth rate of 5.9 percent before the outbreak, if the disease worsens on the level of SARS, the outbreak that killed hundreds in 2003. That hit would be smaller than the blow from SARS. On the other hand, China’s growth is already slowing, unlike during the SARS outbreak, adding to Beijing’s problems. Many infectious disease specialists say that cheap, disposable masks that cover the nose and mouth can help prevent the spread of infections if they are worn properly and used consistently. But there isn’t much high-quality scientific evidence on their effectiveness outside health care settings, experts say. Dr. Julie Vaishampayan, chairwoman of the public health committee for the Infectious Diseases Society of America, said surgical masks are “the last line of defense.” The masks will, however, block most large respiratory droplets from other people’s sneezes and coughs from entering your mouth and nose, said Dr. Amesh Adalja, an infectious disease physician at the Johns Hopkins Center for Health Security. Coronaviruses are primarily spread through droplets, he said. Dr. Mark Loeb, an infectious disease specialist at McMaster University in Hamilton, Ontario, said a study during an outbreak of the SARS coronavirus found that any type of protection — whether a mask or a respirator — reduced the risk of infections in health care workers by about 85 percent. “The most important message was that the risk was lower if they consistently used any mask,” he said. But washing hands — frequently and before eating — is universally recommended. Hand sanitizer is effective against respiratory viruses. China’s propaganda machine has ramped into overdrive as the authorities fight the spread of the coronavirus, praising the sacrifices of responders and everyday people amid continued criticism online of the government’s efforts to address the disease. Mainstream Chinese news outlets have covered the outbreak closely, though censorship prohibits them from taking a critical look, while official news media like CCTV and The People’s Daily newspaper have played it down. State news media issued herograms to the patriotic Chinese citizens who canceled their trips home to Wuhan and would spend the Lunar New Year holiday alone. It praised doctors heading off to Wuhan. “People of Wuhan are making sacrifices,” Hu Xijin, the editor of The Global Times, a nationalist tabloid controlled by the Communist Party, wrote on Twitter. “No matter how all of this happened, I want to express my sympathy and salute to them.”   On what may be the most watched television show on earth, the Spring Festival Gala, the Chinese government on Friday cheered on Wuhan and praised the country’s leader, Xi Jinping. Each year, on the eve of the Lunar New Year, the state broadcaster China Central Television shows the gala, a four-hour marathon of speeches, skits and song and dance, all conducted at a stately pace to accommodate a graying audience. Watching the gala while making dumplings — or falling asleep in front of it — is a tradition for many families across the country. On Friday night’s broadcast, China’s propaganda minders addressed the coronavirus outbreak head on. During the first half of the broadcast, six prominent CCTV anchors stood onstage and praised the instructions of Mr. Xi and the Communist Party. They showed images of doctors and nurses treating patients, of trucks of supplies festooned with banners that said, roughly translated, “Go, Wuhan!” They cited the example of Wang Qiang, the Chinese tennis player who earlier on Friday upset Serena Williams in the Australian Open. “As long as we’re not afraid and dare to confront challenges,” said Hai Xia, a longtime CCTV anchor, “we will win.” Then they declared that the fight against the coronavirus was open, transparent and a testament to the competence of the government. Ms. Hai cited “the most transparent information disclosure, the strong leadership of the party’s Central Committee, the efforts of the whole nation.” By featuring the response on the gala, the government gave its message a broad platform. The anchors ended their presentation with their own cheer: “Go, Wuhan!” 
WUHAN, China — The Lunar New Year festivities were just hours away, but instead of helping to prepare a joyous family banquet, Chen Yanming stood anxiously outside a hospital where her father was being tested for a dangerous new virus. “Today should be the Chinese people’s happiest day,” Ms. Chen, 47, said here in Wuhan, the riverside city of 11 million in central China where the outbreak began. “But this sickness has destroyed that feeling. It came suddenly and unexpectedly. We should have been better prepared.” The emergence of the mysterious coronavirus could hardly come at a worse time for China, turning its biggest holiday into a time of deepening fear, restrictions and frustration. The pneumonia-like illness linked to the virus has, by official count, stricken nearly 1,300 people in mainland China. At least 41 people have been killed, including 15 new deaths in Wuhan reported by officials on Saturday morning alone. More than 20 other cases have been confirmed elsewhere, including five in Hong Kong, two in the United States, three in France and, on Saturday, one in Australia. Hundreds of millions of people in China travel during the holiday, increasing the risk of spreading the virus. For many migrant workers from the countryside, the Lunar New Year break is the only opportunity to spend extended time with their children. For growing numbers of Chinese people, it is a time for tourism to Beijing and other cities, or to foreign destinations. But this year, desperate to contain the disease, the Chinese authorities have shut down transportation or imposed travel restrictions in 13 cities in Hubei, the province at the center of the outbreak, hemming in 35 million people. The streets across Wuhan were eerily empty on Friday, except near hospitals. The city has been largely shut down: Departures are mostly barred, and subways, buses and ferries within Wuhan are suspended. Many residents lined up at hospitals to check for the illness or stayed indoors, rather than reuniting with family. At the entrance to the hospital where Ms. Chen waited, cars and bicycles arrived with frail older people to be checked. Residents said it had become nearly impossible to find taxis following the ban on public transportation. Doctors and medical workers struggled to cope with the surge of people worried that they had symptoms of the virus. At another hospital taking in possible cases of infection, an old man sat in a wheelchair outside the building. It was too crowded and unhealthy inside, he said. Another patient shuffled across the street, holding a drip in his arm and its stand, so he could stay away from the crowd inside the hospital. “We won’t have a New Year celebration tonight. There’s no mood for it,” said Wu Qiang, a middle-aged Wuhan resident waiting outside a hospital for word about his son, who had a fever. “I think he’s O.K., but now even an ordinary sneeze makes you worry. You start to think every cough or sneeze might be the virus.” For many families in Wuhan, the Lunar New Year holiday now promises to be a week of anxious waiting — for medical resources and clarity about when they will be free of the virus and able to travel. “The government announced there were thousands of beds, but everywhere is crammed with people,” said Xiao Hongxia, a Wuhan resident who said that her father, Xiao Shibing, was not getting full care for what might be illness from the virus. At one hospital, she said, “the doctors were crying that they were helpless to do anything.” Thirty of China’s 31 provinces and regions have confirmed cases, and two deaths have occurred far from the outbreak’s epicenter, one of them nearly 1,500 miles away. Cases have also been detected in Thailand, Vietnam, Singapore, Japan, South Korea, Nepal and Taiwan. Officials at Shanghai Disneyland, one of the biggest tourist attractions in China, and at the Badaling section of the Great Wall of China, a popular tourist destination north of Beijing, said they would temporarily close beginning Saturday. Beijing canceled public events, including two popular temple fairs, and closed the Forbidden City, the capital’s most famous tourist attraction, until further notice. Many cities shuttered movie theaters, bars and cafes in an effort to limit the spread of the virus. Dr. Gauden Galea, the representative of the World Health Organization in Beijing, said in an interview on Friday that thousands of people would likely be infected, and that the outbreak could be long. “My own office is gearing up for a number of months,” Dr. Galea said. “We do not expect it to disappear in a number of days.” Here in Wuhan, supermarkets seemed well stocked, but some residents said that prices had gone up or that fresh vegetables and fruit had become harder to buy because so many local markets had closed. More pressing are shortages of protective gowns, masks, gloves and other equipment to keep medical workers as safe as possible. Supplies have grown scarce in Wuhan under the weight of the epidemic, hospital employees in Wuhan said. Outside the No. 4 Hospital in Wuhan, two medical workers taking boxes of protective gowns from a truck said the gowns did not give maximum protection from the virus, but would have to do because better supplies were lacking. Some doctors and medical workers have bought their own maximum protection masks because hospitals were running short, one of them said. “Shortage of medical supplies, request help!!!” the Wuhan Children’s Hospital said Thursday in a post on Weibo, a Chinese social network. The Wuhan government on Friday ordered that a new hospital be constructed in a matter of days to treat the victims. The hospital, modeled on one constructed in Beijing for the SARS epidemic in 2003, will have room for 1,000 beds and is expected to be finished by Feb. 3, according to a local media report posted to the Wuhan government’s website. Dr. Galea, who visited Wuhan this week before the lockdown, defended how Chinese officials had handled the outbreak, saying they had been transparent in sharing data. “With the number of cases,” he said, “one would expect health systems to be stretched.” But online and in interviews, people around China have been unusually critical of their government, arguing that officials are reluctant to disclose bad news that might sully the Communist Party’s image of triumphant progress. In posts on Chinese social media platforms, some users called for Wuhan leaders to be dismissed. Others mocked the failure of the Communist Party’s flagship media to treat the epidemic with front-page urgency. Most of those posts were quickly removed. In a sign of how far the outbreak has scrambled the Communist Party’s messages, the annual Lunar New Year variety show on the main national broadcaster — which usually gives a cheerful face to the party’s themes — made nods to the crisis. The show broadcast images of doctors and nurses treating patients, of trucks of supplies festooned with banners that said, roughly translated, “Go Wuhan!” The presenters declared that the fight against the coronavirus was open, transparent and a testament to the abilities of the Chinese government. “For Wuhan people, tonight the table should be filled with dishes of fish and meat,” said Ms. Chen. “But with my father sick, we’ll have a few simple dishes.” 
This briefing has ended. Read about developments in the coronavirus outbreak here. China said on Saturday that it would suspend all tour groups and the sale of flight and hotel packages for its citizens headed overseas, starting on Monday. The association for China’s travel agencies said tour groups that were in the middle of their trips could proceed with their itineraries but should closely monitor the health of their travelers. This measure may come as welcome news to countries that have been gearing up to screen travelers from China for fevers and other signs of infection. The Beijing city government also announced on Saturday that it would suspend all inter-province buses from Sunday, effectively limiting road travel into the capital. The measures, taken hundreds of miles from Wuhan, where the outbreak of a novel coronavirus began, were a sign that concerns over the spread of the outbreak have crept close to central government offices and the ruling Communist Party’s seat of power. Wuhan also tightened its restrictions further on Saturday with a ban on vehicle traffic in the city center, to begin at midnight. The local government said some vehicles would be exempted, including shuttle buses and trucks moving supplies. Residents responded with frustration on social media. One woman, who said she was pregnant and near her due date, asked if she was supposed to walk to her gynecologist’s office. All the reported deaths from the outbreak have been in mainland China, but travelers have spread the virus to numerous other places. Cases have been confirmed in Australia, Malaysia, Nepal, Vietnam, Singapore, Japan, South Korea, Taiwan, Hong Kong, Thailand, France and the United States. The authorities in Wuhan said they would also speed up the customs process for donated supplies, as hospitals in the city raise the alarm about a shortage of hospital gowns, surgical masks and other necessities. A notice posted Saturday on the website of the city’s customs agency said that new channels were being put in place to ensure that donations were put to immediate use. Overseas donations will be exempted from tax duties, the notice said. During past crises, the authorities in China have been criticized for their reluctance to accept overseas assistance, apparently preferring to project a sense of control. As China has grown more affluent, it has become a provider of aid rather than a recipient, particularly to regions like Africa. China has made exceptions during some past disasters, including a devastating earthquake centered on Sichuan Province in 2008. On Saturday, Hong Kong’s leader, Carrie Lam, declared a health emergency in the semiautonomous Chinese city and said schools would be closed until mid-February. Two American universities with campuses in China also postponed their start dates. Duke Kunshan University, a partnership between Duke University in North Carolina and Wuhan University, said it would not resume classes until Feb. 17. Classes had originally been scheduled to resume Feb. 3, after the Lunar New Year vacation. (Duke Kunshan University is not in Wuhan, but in Jiangsu Province, more than 400 miles away.) New York University also announced that its Shanghai campus would start its spring semester one week later than planned, at the request of municipal authorities. Schools in Hubei Province, where Wuhan is and where the outbreak has hit the hardest, had already decided to delay the start dates at all schools, from kindergarten through college. China on Sunday morning announced 15 more deaths from the new coronavirus, including one in Shanghai, the first to be reported so far in the metropolis.  Thirteen more deaths were also announced in Hubei Province, where the outbreak began, and one was announced in Henan Province. The latest deaths brought the toll in China to 56. Across the country, 688 cases of the new virus were diagnosed on Saturday, the government said early Sunday.  That brings the total number of confirmed cases to 1,975. Deaths from the coronavirus had previously been reported outside of Hubei, the outbreak’s epicenter.  But the death in Shanghai, which is among China’s most populous cities and a major commercial hub, is likely to add to anxieties about the disease’s spread. Shanghai’s municipal health commission said on Sunday that the patient who died was an 88-year-old man. Travel restrictions in Wuhan and 12 other cities have essentially penned in 35 million people on the country’s biggest holiday, normally a time for traveling to visit family. Though the number of coronavirus cases and deaths is alarming, public health experts have so far warned against mass anxiety. After all, the common flu kills roughly 35,000 people a year and hospitalizes about 200,000 in the United States alone. It is too soon to know the mortality rate of the virus in the new outbreak. But there are signs that this outbreak could be far more serious than the common flu. For one, the virus has been identified as a coronavirus, named for the spikes that protrude from its membrane. Other coronaviruses have far higher mortality rates than the common flu, and have also led to global outbreaks. Chinese citizens are also haunted by the memory of the SARS epidemic in 2002 and 2003, a coronavirus outbreak that also started in China and eventually killed more than 800 people worldwide. During that epidemic, Beijing at first played down the crisis and withheld information, eventually drawing widespread criticism. And conclusive evidence about how the outbreak started is lacking. While officials in Wuhan first traced it to a seafood market, some patients who have fallen ill never visited the market. Researchers have also offered disparate explanations for what animals may have transmitted the virus to humans. The Chinese government has promised far more transparency than in the SARS crisis, and the World Health Organization has praised its cooperation with the scientific community. Still, mistrust of the local and national authorities is evident on Chinese social media. And China’s health system has already struggled under the new virus’s strain, with hospitals in Wuhan issuing urgent requests for help and donations. In a sign of how the spread of the coronavirus has deeply shaken China, the nation’s top leader, Xi Jinping, convened a meeting of the Communist Party leadership on Saturday to begin an offensive to stanch the spread of the outbreak, improve treatment of victims and speed supplies to areas under lockdown. “We’re sure to be able to win in this battle to beat the epidemic through prevention and control,” Mr. Xi said, according to an official summary delivered on Chinese television. Until now, Mr. Xi had said little publicly about the growing crisis, even as confirmed cases of infection with the new and little understood coronavirus multiplied over the past week and Wuhan — the city in central China where the virus first spread — and nearby areas came under a net of travel restrictions intended to contain the outbreak. Mr. Xi issued brief orders about the emerging epidemic five days ago. Now, though, he has ordered mobilization across the country and drastic measures to hold back the virus, which is linked to pneumonia symptoms that can be deadly. The China television report showed Mr. Xi speaking to the six other members of the Politburo Standing Committee, the Communist Party’s topmost decision-making body, and a circle of other grave-faced officials. The leadership meeting took place on the first full day of China’s weeklong Lunar New Year holiday, a time when the entire country, including party leaders, usually take time off for family get-togethers and relaxation. “Confronted with the grave situation of this accelerating spread of pneumonia from infections with the novel coronavirus, we must step up the centralized and united leadership under the party central” leadership, Mr. Xi said. The Communist Party will establish a top-level team, called a leadership small group, to grapple with the crisis, the meeting said, giving efforts to fight the outbreak greater urgency and centralized coordination. Here are some of the other measures and main points announced: In his remarks on Saturday, Mr. Xi also seemed to address Chinese citizens’ growing dissatisfaction with the official response. On Chinese social media, users have asked whether the authorities have accurately reported the number of cases or taken enough steps to rein in their spread. Commenters have especially condemned the perceived absence of the local, provincial and even national authorities in the heart of the outbreak. Mr. Xi had made few public remarks about the disease before Saturday, when he called for officials to “stand at the front line to safeguard social stability.” “Where is that person? He is not on the front line,” one user wrote on Weibo, a Twitterlike platform, an apparent reference to Mr. Xi. The posts were quickly deleted. A professor of infectious diseases in Hong Kong who helped identify SARS, Guan Yi, has accused Chinese authorities of delaying action and of obstructing his efforts to investigate the outbreak. Local officials in China have long had incentives to avoid revealing problems that might invite the wrath of party bosses. But Mr. Xi’s efforts to centralize power in Beijing have further weakened local authorities and increased their incentive to deny problems. It’s part of a longstanding pattern that can make both levels of government slow to acknowledge problems, then blame each other once a problem is revealed. State media has maintained a steady drumbeat of positive news as the outbreak has spread, praising the sacrifices of responders and everyday people. “This is a continuous theme in central-local relations in China. You do not want to be the one to bring bad news,” said Vivienne Shue, a prominent China scholar at Oxford University. The State Department has ordered all American employees at the United States Consulate in Wuhan to leave the city, as a lockdown imposed on central China expanded, the United States Embassy said on Saturday. It said the evacuation of its American staff members and their families was necessary because of the spreading outbreak of the coronavirus, the disruptions caused by the restrictions on transportation in Wuhan and the overwhelming of hospitals. The evacuation order, made on Thursday, according to a statement from the United States Embassy, was a sign that the measures imposed by the Chinese authorities to try to contain the outbreak of the mysterious coronavirus may be escalating alarm and confusion. Lines have formed at hospitals and residents have complained that the traffic restrictions have made it nearly impossible to seek timely medical help. The United States government is arranging a charter flight to evacuate American diplomats and citizens on Sunday, according to a person familiar with the plan. The plane would likely take evacuees to the West Coast of the United States, this person said. Medical staff would be aboard the plane to screen passengers, and evacuees who were not American diplomatic officers would be responsible for the cost of the flight, according to the person briefed on the plan. The French Consulate in Wuhan also told its citizens on Friday that it was considering setting up bus rides for those who wished to leave the city, in cooperation with the Chinese authorities, according to France’s Foreign Ministry. On Saturday, Hong Kong’s leader, Carrie Lam, declared a health emergency in the semiautonomous Chinese city and said schools would be closed until mid-February. The city is treating five coronavirus patients connected to Wuhan, and more than 100 others are suspected of having the viral pneumonia. Hong Kong is also suspending flights and train services to Wuhan and will cancel all Lunar New Year celebrations. The Hong Kong Marathon, originally scheduled for early February, has also been called off. Masks and hand sanitizers have sold out in most pharmacies in the city as residents have stocked up on supplies in a panic since last week.  Yuen Kwok-yung, a leading expert in infectious diseases who discovered the agent causing the coronavirus, had called for schools and universities to remain closed beyond the Lunar New Year holiday in an effort to contain the infection’s reach. Recent cases have shown that people who do not show symptoms could transmit the disease, according to a study published in The Lancet on Friday of which he was a co-author. “If there are local cases in Hong Kong that is not directly connected to Wuhan, this is a big issue,” Dr. Yuen said in a phone interview. “It would mean that this epidemic has reached another level of severity.” The medical journal The Lancet published a study on Friday suggesting that people infected with the coronavirus might be able to spread it even if they do not have flu symptoms. Researchers studied a family of seven in the Chinese city of Shenzhen, five of whom had traveled to Wuhan, the center of the outbreak. Two of them came into contact with an infected relative in a hospital there. Testing conducted days later, after they flew home, found that six members of the family had the coronavirus, including one who had not gone to Wuhan. One infected family member, a child, had no symptoms, suggesting that people with the virus might be spreading it without knowing that they have it, the study found. “It shows this new coronavirus is able to transfer between person to person, in a hospital setting, a family home setting, and also in an intercity setting,” Yuen Kwok-yung, an author of the study, said in an interview. “This is exactly what makes this new disease difficult to control.” Dr. Yuen characterized the disease as “asymptomatic walking pneumonia.” The researchers cautioned that the study was limited to early cases of the virus, and that it was difficult to assess risk factors at this stage. But they stressed the importance of quarantining patients as early as possible, given the early signs of asymptomatic transmission. Another study in The Lancet found that symptoms of early coronavirus cases showed similarities to SARS. Those symptoms included fever, dry cough and shortness of breath. The streets of Wuhan were largely empty on Saturday, the first full day of China’s Lunar New Year holiday. By contrast, the site for a new hospital to treat victims of the coronavirus was a mosh pit of activity. Earthmovers, trucks and hundreds of construction workers dug and scraped to build a new facility that, if completed within days as scheduled, could do more than treat the ailing. The government vowed on Friday that it would finish building the hospital in 10 days, a feat recalling the SARS epidemic of 2003, when Beijing built a hospital with similar speed. Besides treating infected people at the center of the coronavirus outbreak, the facility would also serve as a potent symbol of the government’s drive to do what needs to be done. If Beijing built a hospital in a few short days, in other words, Wuhan can do it too. On Saturday, officials announced that a second hospital was in the works to treat people infected by the virus. It would have a capacity for 1,300 beds. They plan to complete the facility, called Leishenshan Hospital, in 15 days. China is virtually unsurpassed in its capacity to finish in mere months the sort of factories, bridges and other projects that could take many years in other countries. The dozens of earthmovers gouging the soil on the outskirts of Wuhan attested to that strength. But some workers at the site of the first planned hospital, called Huoshenshan, said there was a severe need for skilled workers. Many are at home or elsewhere, to keep from catching the coronavirus. Yuan Banfu, a worker from neighboring Henan Province, said a call had gone out on Chinese social media for volunteers to help at the site. He had proudly signed up. “This is the new Tangshan Hospital,” he said, referring to the hospital that Beijing built in 2003. Mr. Yuan, a wiry 46-year-old, said he had not been able to go home for the Lunar New Year break because the authorities had closed the routes out of Wuhan. “I’m glad to be of help for the people of Wuhan,” he said. “My family is worried, but I told them I’m here anyway and we have to help.” Some workers at the site said they had volunteered, while others said they had received calls from their employers urging them to turn up. Nearly all the workers at the site, an expanse of brown mud in the drizzling rain, wore protective masks. “I’m not too scared,” Mr. Yuan said. “I work outdoors and my heart and lungs are strong Officials in a southern Chinese city said on Saturday that a 2-year-old girl suffering from the coronavirus had been admitted to a hospital and was in stable condition. That would make her the youngest person confirmed to have been infected, according to a social media account run by the People’s Daily newspaper, the mouthpiece of the ruling Communist Party. Health officials in the city of Hechi, in the southern region of Guangxi, said that the girl was surnamed Zhong and lived in Wuhan. She had flown from Wuhan to the city of Nanning, which is also in Guangxi, on Tuesday. From there, she was driven to Hechi. The next day, she developed a fever and began sneezing. She was admitted to Hechi People’s Hospital and put in isolation, officials said. Officials did not disclose who she was traveling with or what condition they might be in. Medical experts are watching closely to see who the coronavirus infects and who might be most vulnerable to it. Most of those killed by the coronavirus so far have been older men, many with chronic health issues. The youngest fatality disclosed so far was 36 years old. State news media reported on Saturday that a doctor had died of a heart failure while tending to patients with the coronavirus in fever wards at a hospital in eastern China. It was unclear whether he had showed signs of the virus. The doctor, Jiang Jianjun, who specialized in infectious diseases, suffered the heart attack on Thursday while making rounds at the fever wards in Jiangsu Taizhou People’s Hospital, according to an online tribute posted on the hospital’s social media account. “He collapsed at his beloved workplace,” the statement read. It has since been deleted, but it said that Dr. Jiang had also treated patients during the outbreaks of the avian flu and swine flu. News of his death, along with that of a retired physician in Wuhan who was suspected of having the virus, drew much sympathy online, even as frustration brewed over the crowds at hospitals and the shortage of supplies. Several internet users questioned whether Dr. Jiang had died of fatigue. As footage and photos appeared to show medical workers in white coats wailing from the stress of working several consecutive shifts, many social media users used forums to accuse the government of failing to provide adequate support to physicians working on the front lines of the outbreak. Many also blamed officials for failing to supply new protective gear and testing kits to hospitals facing shortages. For people in the United States with close ties to China, the outbreak has brought unexpected worry, disappointment and scrutiny. Some in the Chinese-American community have had their Lunar New Year holiday plans waylaid, as travel schedules for the coming week and beyond get interrupted. Some are gearing up for the outbreak to get worse. Hardware stores and pharmacies around the United States are selling out of masks that could help prevent the spread of the disease. In the New York City neighborhood of Flushing, masks have been sold out for much of the week. Chinese-Americans networking with their friends and family in China have scrambled to send aid. One woman in Los Angeles has amassed 20,000 masks to ship overseas. Sean Shi, of Issaquah, Wash., said he shipped several boxes of masks to China in a friend’s luggage, with hopes that the masks could reach friends in the Wuhan area as soon as possible. Later in the day, Mr. Shi was back at a local hardware store, buying another 46 masks for some of his former peers at Wuhan University. “We understand it’s a tough situation over there — the panic, the shortage of equipment,” Mr. Shi said. “We just realized the situation is very serious — more serious than we thought.” 
(Want to get this briefing by email? Here’s the sign-up.) The outbreak that has spread to several continents has killed at least 56 and sickened more than 2,000. And Wuhan, the virus’s epicenter, may have about 1,000 more confirmed cases of the mysterious illness, the city’s mayor said. Here’s the latest. The head of China’s National Health Commission said that people carrying the virus but not showing symptoms could still infect others and warned that the “epidemic is now entering a more serious and complex period.” Measures taken: Hong Kong barred residents from the center of the outbreak and closed major tourist attractions. China banned the wildlife trade nationwide, deployed hundreds of medical workers and assigned dozens of hospitals to focus on treating the virus alone. Scope: Cases have been confirmed in Thailand, Vietnam, Singapore, Japan, South Korea, Nepal, Taiwan, Hong Kong, Malaysia, France, Australia and the U.S. Perspective from Beijing: The Chinese government has stepped up its response to the Wuhan crisis, but the effort has been plagued by bureaucracy and a lack of transparency. For three days, Iranian military officials knew they had shot down a Ukrainian jetliner while the government issued false statements, denying any responsibility. When they finally told President Hassan Rouhani, he told them to come clean or he would resign. Only then did Iran’s supreme leader, Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, step in and order the government to acknowledge its fatal mistake. The Times pieced together a chronology of those three days by interviewing Iranian officials, members of the Islamic Revolutionary Guards Corps and people close to the supreme leader’s inner circle and by examining official public statements and state media reports. Takeaway: There was a behind-the-scenes debate over covering up Iran’s responsibility for the crash, as the Revolutionary Guards effectively sidelined the elected government. Perspective: Since August, at least 16 Iranian students have been turned away at airports, losing their chances to study at prestigious universities. They told us their stories. In a Saturday session, President Trump’s legal team began its aggressive defense in the Senate impeachment trial. They dismissed the House impeachment inquiry as a partisan ploy that ignored the facts to cast Mr. Trump’s actions in the worst possible light. Democrats, they argued, were “asking you to tear up all of the ballots” by convicting Mr. Trump of high crimes and misdemeanors. The president’s legal team used only two of the 24 hours allotted to them to present their defense. Arguments will resume Monday afternoon. Another angle: New evidence became public this weekend: a 2018 recording of Mr. Trump ordering the firing of the U.S. ambassador to Ukraine.  The basketball legend, 41, died in a helicopter crash in Calabasas, Calif., on Sunday. He was among five people traveling in the helicopter. The National Basketball Association sent a confirmation of Bryant’s and his daughter Gianna’s, 13, deaths to all teams and league employees Sunday afternoon, according to two people familiar with the document. The 18-time All-Star and five-time champion retired in 2016, having won Olympic gold medals as a member of Team U.S.A. He was scheduled to headline the 2020 N.B.A. Hall of Fame nominees. Legacy: The crash came a day after the former Los Angeles Lakers superstar congratulated LeBron James, currently on the team, for moving past him on the N.B.A.’s career scoring list. “Continuing to move the game forward @KingJames. Much respect my brother 💪🏾 #33644,” Bryant tweeted. Fans: People were already gathering to pay their respects near the site of the crash. “He’s a figure. He’s a legend. He brought L.A. back. He’s an L.A. icon. He was a competitor. His drive, shooting in the gym at 4 in the morning. He’s what everyone wants to be,” one man said. World leaders and dignitaries will gather for a solemn ceremony at Auschwitz on Monday on the 75th anniversary of the liberation of the Nazi death camp. Our Opinion section published portraits of survivors. Amid a surge of anti-Semitism and a rise in dehumanizing political rhetoric, there is fear that the horrific lessons of the death camp are being lost. Harry and Meghan: As the couple leaves full-time royal life, both have vowed to forgo public funding. But in doing so, they have brought a spotlight to the land holdings that the royal family views as private funding, which contain a generous mixture of public giveaways. North Korea: Kim Kyong-hui, aunt of the leader Kim Jong-un, re-emerged in Pyongyang, the capital, dispelling rumors that she was purged after her powerful husband was executed. Snapshot: Above, Novak Djokovic, who beat Diego Schwartzman this weekend. In a rare interview, the reigning champion said he was no longer playing tennis to prove himself but rather to improve himself and the lives of those around him.  What we’re reading: This Boston Globe investigation of the government’s inaction on E. coli outbreaks. The story of a 2-year-old boy who ate some of his father’s salad and developed the illness is “heartbreaking, terrifying and riveting,” writes our Times Insider editor, Jennifer Krauss. Cook: Slow cooker red beans and rice takes only about 20 minutes to set up in the morning.  Watch: This trailer of “Miss Americana,” a Netflix documentary about Taylor Swift. Read: In her latest comic book endeavor, Roxane Gay adapts a short story, “The Sacrifice of Darkness,” from her 2017 collection “Difficult Women.” Smarter Living: Wirecutter recommends five cheap(ish) things to radically make over your cluttered closet. We asked Peter Baker, our chief White House correspondent, to reflect on a major moment in the lead-up to the last presidential impeachment and compare it to the current trial. He has covered both. Twenty-two years ago this week came a milestone moment in the last presidential impeachment drama. President Bill Clinton was on the defensive after The Washington Post, where I was working then, broke the news that Ken Starr was investigating whether he committed perjury to cover up an affair with a onetime White House intern. Mr. Clinton took to the microphone at the end of an event, glared angrily at the reporters in the room, wagged his finger and, with Hillary Clinton standing behind him, forcefully said, “I did not have sexual relations with that woman, Miss Lewinsky.” We were struck by two things: One, that he seemed to briefly blank on her name, referring to her as “that woman,” before summoning it. But the second was the intensity of his denial. He was white-hot mad. At that time, before the DNA and the grand jury testimony, we didn’t know if the story we were pursuing was bogus or if the president of the United States was lying to us and to the country. Of course, later we found out which it was. Now, as Ken Starr re-emerges as a lawyer for President Trump in the current impeachment trial and the administration’s explanations of what happened continue to fluctuate, it’s hard not to feel déjà vu. 
WUHAN, China — A top Chinese health official warned on Sunday that the spread of the dangerous new coronavirus, already extraordinarily rapid, is accelerating further, deepening global fears about an illness that has sickened more than 2,700 people worldwide and killed at least 80 people in China. The grim diagnosis came amid concerns that China’s efforts to contain the spread of the disease, despite a lockdown of unprecedented scope affecting 56 million people, may not only have come too late but could even make the situation worse, including by exacerbating shortages of medical supplies. Adding to the growing global alarm, people who are carrying the virus but not showing symptoms may still be able to infect others, according to the Chinese official, Ma Xiaowei, the director of China’s National Health Commission. Such asymptomatic transmissions would make the disease much more difficult to control, as seemingly healthy people travel and interact with others. “The epidemic is now entering a more serious and complex period,” Mr. Ma said during a Sunday news conference in Beijing. “It looks like it will continue for some time, and the number of cases may increase.” China’s attempts to curb the disease’s spread — essentially cordoning off the major cities in the province of Hubei, including its capital, Wuhan, a city of 11 million people — are a “public health experiment, the scale of which has not been done before,” said Dr. William Schaffner, an infectious disease expert at Vanderbilt University. “Logistically, it’s stunning, and it was done so quickly.” Whether the lockdowns will succeed in stemming the spread of the virus is a matter of debate by experts in public health and epidemiology. Some said the lockdowns would help, at least in theory. “Anything that is done that increases social distancing can help decrease the spread of the virus,” said Dr. Thomas R. Frieden, a former director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. “If you do it right, it’s not impossible it will have positive impact.” But doing it right at this scale has never been tried before anywhere in the world. “To put a ring around cities of this size and population is unprecedented,” said Dr. Howard Markel, a professor of the history of medicine at the University of Michigan and author of the book “Quarantine.” Maintaining the lockdown will pose tremendous challenges, starting with the provision of food, fuel and medical care to millions of people. “It’s enormously difficult to do effectively, and also difficult to assess the effectiveness,” said Dr. Schaffner. Other experts were skeptical that the travel restrictions would prove at all effective because they had probably come too late and the barriers would prove too permeable. Five million people had left Wuhan before travel out of the city was restricted, said the city’s mayor, Zhou Xianwang. It was a stunning disclosure that intensified questions about the government’s delayed response. “You can’t board up a germ. A novel infection will spread,” said Lawrence O. Gostin, a law professor at Georgetown University and director of the World Health Organization Collaborating Center on National and Global Health Law. “It will get out; it always does.” In China, it was a weekend of grim new warnings about the little-understood virus and a rising tally of infections and deaths. The official number of confirmed infections across China jumped significantly within a span of 24 hours, building to 2,744 by Monday from around 1,975 the day before. Among the most recent announced fatalities from the coronavirus was an 88-year-old man in Shanghai — the first death to be reported in the commercial hub, and one likely to fuel anxieties about the disease’s spread. New cases cropped up in Hong Kong, Taiwan and Orange County, Calif., bringing to five the number of confirmed cases in the United States. The virus had already been found in Thailand, France, Japan, South Korea, Australia and beyond. Epidemiologists at Imperial College London estimated that each case infected an average of between 1.5 and 3.5 other people in the early stages of the crisis. For seasonal flu, it’s about 1.3. That number could drop as the authorities take more stringent measures to halt the spread. But if it holds up, the number of infected could rise sharply. In Wuhan, the city at the center of the outbreak, the streets were eerily quiet as the authorities had ordered people not to drive, forcing some to walk to hospitals. Mr. Zhou, the mayor, said that health officials were likely to confirm an additional 1,000 cases of the illness in the city. He said that the estimate was based on the assumption that around half of the city’s nearly 3,000 suspected cases of the coronavirus would eventually test positive. China’s top leader, Xi Jinping, has promised drastic measures to contain the virus. In a signal of the gravity of the crisis, and its likely disruption to China’s short-term growth, the government announced on Monday that the annual weeklong Lunar New Year Holiday would be extended. For now, at least, many workers will get another three days off, and go back to work on Feb. 3. Even before that notice, Suzhou, a big manufacturing hub in eastern China, declared that factories there should not start back at work any earlier than Feb. 8. The national government on Sunday also banned the wildlife trade until the epidemic passes. The outbreak had drawn fresh attention to China’s animal markets, where the sale of exotic creatures has been linked to epidemiological risks. In Hong Kong — which was badly hit by the SARS coronavirus in 2003, with nearly 300 deaths, more than any city in the world — worries about the spread of infectious diseases run deep. On Sunday, the government said it would bar residents of Hubei Province, which includes Wuhan, and people who had been to the province in the past 14 days from entering Hong Kong until further notice. Six cases of the new coronavirus have been confirmed in the city, already hobbled by months of antigovernment protests. Health officials in the United States, in what could turn out to be a positive development in stemming the disease, said there was no “clear evidence” that asymptomatic transmissions of the disease were happening. “We at the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention don’t have any clear evidence of patients’ being infectious before symptom onset,” Dr. Nancy Messonnier of the National Center for Immunization and Respiratory Diseases said at a news briefing on Sunday. “We are actively investigating that possibility.” Some global health experts said China’s focus, and resources, going forward should not be devoted to closing off cities. Michael T. Osterholm, director of the Center for Infectious Disease Research and Policy at the University of Minnesota, thought China’s approach to the crisis could easily “backfire,” comparing it to the so-called cordons sanitaires that were imposed to seal off swaths of West Africa during the 2014-2016 Ebola epidemic. Those cordons left people starving and spurred violent uprisings. Others routinely found ways to sneak around or through the boundaries. “It was a disaster,” Dr. Osterholm said. Dr. Tom Inglesby, an infectious diseases specialist and director of the Johns Hopkins Center for Health Security, also expressed concern. “If you continue to quarantine more and more places in China, you’re going to start to really break normal societal interaction, normal movement of goods and people and medical supplies and food and medicine,” Dr. Inglesby said. “At a macro level, it seems to me that it’s more likely to be harmful than helpful in controlling the epidemic.” Instead, Dr. Inglesby, Dr. Osterholm and other health experts suggested China should concentrate on traditional public health measures that have stopped other outbreaks, like identifying and monitoring contacts and making sure medical care is available to everyone. Even as the highest echelons of China’s government mobilize to fight the illness, much of the task of preventing contagion still falls on local officials, who can be unsure of how to respond to crises and uneven about following through on policies. On Sunday in Wuhan, for example, police officers were flummoxed by new restrictions on driving within the city limits. First, the city authorities said that most cars should stay off the roads, and that a fleet of 6,000 taxis would be on call to deliver food and medicine. Then, the authorities said drivers would be notified by text message if they had to stay off the roads. Nobody seemed to receive the text messages on Sunday. “My understanding,” one police officer said, “is that you can drive in your district if you don’t get a text message telling you that you can’t. But you should check that with the transport authorities.” In the end, most drivers stayed off the streets. But as the day went on, more ventured out, and the police did not seem to do much about it. For some residents, it was another exasperating fumble by Wuhan officials, who many believe have mishandled the epidemic. Health experts said the government’s ability to keep the trust of the public was a key element in any successful quarantine, and never easy to do. Dr. Inglesby said that previous, much smaller scale lockdown efforts — including closing off the Amoy Gardens housing complex in Hong Kong during the SARS outbreak 17 years ago — show that residents may become fearful and lose confidence in the government. “You need people to willingly present themselves for diagnosis,” he said. “If they don’t understand what the government’s doing or they feel in some way their bond with the government has been broken, that’s another key process that’s being interrupted by the quarantine.” For now, in Wuhan, the restrictions seem to be mostly accepted with the same stoic fortitude that many residents showed over the past several days as the city imposed bans on outbound travel for all but a select few. That mood could shift, however, if, for example, food prices rise.  “Now is not the time for recriminations,” said Li Xiandu, a retired business manager. “The local government wasn’t forthcoming with information and didn’t take vigorous enough measures. But we need to get through this first, and then we can assign blame.” While the government has pledged to build at least two new hospitals with thousands of beds in Wuhan — and to do so in just a few days — the city’s existing hospitals remain intensely crowded, a condition that does not bode well for stopping the disease. “If you wanted to create the perfect mixing vessel for a coronavirus,” Dr. Osterholm said, “you’d create the emergency rooms in Wuhan right now.” 
Before a mysterious respiratory illness emerged in the center of China, spreading with lethal effect through the world’s most populous nation, concerns about the health of the global economy had been easing, replaced by a measure of optimism. The United States and China had achieved a tenuous pause in a trade war that had damaged both sides. The specter of open hostilities between the United States and Iran had reverted to stalemate. Though Europe remained stagnant, Germany — the Continent’s largest economy — had escaped the threat of recession. Now, the world is worrying anew. An outbreak originating in China and reaching beyond its borders has summoned fresh fears, sending markets into a wealth-destroying tailspin. It has provoked alarm that the world economy may be in for another shock, offsetting the benefits of the trade truce and the geopolitical easing, and providing new reason for businesses and households to hunker down.  On Monday, investors dumped stocks on exchanges from Asia to Europe to North America. They entrusted their money to traditional safe havens, pushing up the value of the yen, the dollar and gold. They pushed down the price of oil over fears that weaker economies would spell less demand for fuel. In short, those in control of money took note of a growing crisis in a country of 1.4 billion people, whose consumers and businesses are a primary engine of economic growth around the world, and they chose to reduce their exposure to risk. By late Monday, the virus had killed more than 100 people in China. More than 4,500 had been infected — mostly in mainland China, but also in Hong Kong, Japan, Macau, Malaysia, Nepal, Singapore, South Korea, Taiwan, Thailand and Vietnam, and as far away as Australia, Canada and the United States. The emergence of the virus in China, whose government jails journalists and tightly controls information, left the world uncomfortably short of facts needed to assess the dangers. “It’s the uncertainty of how the global economy is going to respond to the outbreak,” said Philip Shaw, chief economist at Investec, a specialist bank in London. That will depend on the severity, the spread and the duration of the outbreak, he said, and “we don’t really know the answers to any of these questions.” What was left to the imagination resonated as a reason for investors to unload anything less than a sure thing. Stocks in Japan and Europe fell more than 2 percent. In New York, the S&P 500 was down 1.6 percent, with stocks of companies whose sales are dependent on China especially susceptible. Wynn Resorts, which operates casinos in the gambling haven of Macau, a special administrative region of China, dropped more than 8 percent. The virus and its attendant unknowns conjured memories of another deadly illness that began in China, the 2002-3 outbreak of severe acute respiratory syndrome, or SARS, which killed nearly 800 people. “In many ways, it looks similar,” said Nicholas R. Lardy, a China expert and senior fellow at the Peterson Institute for International Economics in Washington. “We are seeing fast increases in the number of cases. The hospitals are overwhelmed and are not even able to test people with symptoms. I’m expecting the cases to go way, way up.” In the end, SARS significantly slowed the Chinese economy, dropping the annual growth rate to 9.1 percent in the second quarter of 2003 from 11.1 percent in the previous quarter, according to Oxford Economics, an independent research institute in London. The episode is coinciding with the Lunar New Year, a major holiday in which hundreds of millions of Chinese journey to their hometowns to visit relatives. With air, rail and road links in central China restricted as the government seeks to block the spread of the virus, hotels, restaurants and other tourism-related businesses are likely to suffer. Some economists assume that those effects will quickly dissipate, leading to a revival in the consumer economy within months. That is how events played out in 2003. “Our baseline is that it will be a fairly big impact but relatively short-lived,” said Louis Kuijs, the Hong Kong-based head of Asia economics at Oxford Economics. In the hopeful view, economic damage will be contained by the Chinese government’s aggressive response in effectively quarantining the outbreak’s center — Wuhan, a city of 11 million people, and much of the surrounding area in Hubei Province. But Wuhan is a hub of industry, sometimes called the Chicago of China, intensifying the quarantine’s implications for the national economy. “This is really unprecedented,” Mr. Lardy said. “The economic effects may be much larger than SARS. Wuhan is a major industrial city, and if you’re basically shutting it down, it’s going to have a major effect.” Already, China’s government has extended the Lunar New Year holiday by three days, through Feb. 2, ensuring that migrant workers will not return to their factory jobs as soon as anticipated, almost certainly disrupting production. Suzhou, a major industrial city near Shanghai, has extended the holiday until at least Feb. 8. Given that China’s economy is the source of roughly one-third of world economic growth, the slowdown could be felt widely. Most directly, China’s neighbors would absorb the effects, especially those dependent on tourists from China — among them Hong Kong, the Philippines, Singapore, Thailand and Vietnam. Over the weekend, China announced that it was barring overseas group tours by its citizens. If China’s factories are hobbled by additional restrictions on transportation that limit factory production, that could become a global event. It could hit iron ore mines in Australia and India that feed raw materials into China’s smelters. It could limit sales of computer chips and glass panel displays made at plants in Malaysia and South Korea. It could trim sales of factory machinery produced in Germany and auto parts made in the Czech Republic, Hungary and Poland. It could even affect the purchases of additional American farm goods that China agreed to under the trade deal signed this month. The shock is hitting just as China contends with its slowest pace of economic growth in decades, reviving fears that its reduced appetite for the goods and services of the world could jeopardize jobs on multiple shores. “China is obviously slowing down in a structural way,” said Silvia Dall’Angelo, senior economist at Hermes Investment Management in London. “The global economy is clearly more shaky, with sluggish growth. It is clearly more vulnerable to shocks.” The SARS outbreak prompted the government to stimulate the Chinese economy by directing surges of credit that financed huge infrastructure projects. But whatever damage China confronts this time, its willingness to respond will be limited by the government’s concerns about mounting public debt. “They are much more constrained now,” said Mr. Lardy, the China expert. “I think people underestimate the conviction that the top leadership has, that they really want to reduce financial risk.” But as global investors try to gauge the outlook, one element is the same as ever in China: Information is scarce. Trust in the authorities is minimal. During the SARS outbreak, the government was slow to acknowledge the existence of the virus as local officials actively covered up cases, allowing the threat to multiply. This time, the government has sought to project the sense that it is forthrightly reckoning with the crisis. President Xi Jinping has publicly acknowledged the threat, while warning local officials not to hide reports of trouble. But in the current moment of agitation, any perceived lack of information tends to weigh in as bad news. “This is, of course, still a government system where transparency is not really held up as an important criterion,” Mr. Kuijs of Oxford Economics said. “This is still an overall system in which discretionary decisions by bureaucrats are driving everything instead of very clear rules.” 
This briefing has ended. Read the latest developments in our live coronavirus outbreak coverage here. An outbreak of a new coronavirus that began in the Chinese city of Wuhan has already killed at least 106 people in China, according to data released early Tuesday. Infections have been confirmed in many other countries. But of the 4,500 people who have so far contracted the virus, the vast majority live in China. ◆ All but a small handful of those deaths were in the central province of Hubei, the center of the outbreak. ◆ Officials in the capital, Beijing, which has a population of about 21 million, announced the first death in the city from coronavirus on Monday. The patient, a 50-year-old man, had traveled to Wuhan on Jan. 8 and developed a fever after returning to Beijing a week later. He was diagnosed on Jan. 22 and died of respiratory failure, the Beijing Municipal Health Commission announced. ◆ Across China there have been more than 4,500 confirmed cases. The youngest confirmed case is a 9-month-old girl in Beijing. ◆ Thailand and Hong Kong have each reported eight cases of infection; the United States, Taiwan, Australia and Macau have five each; Singapore, Japan, South Korea and Malaysia each have reported four; France has three; Canada and Vietnam have two; and Nepal, Cambodia and Germany each have one. ◆ There have been no deaths from the virus reported outside China. Stocks tumbled and oil prices fell on Monday as the virus’s spread worried investors around the globe. The S&P 500 fell 1.6 percent, with shares of airlines and companies dependent on tourism from China particularly hard hit. It was the sharpest decline since Oct. 2, when the trade war was fanning fears of a slowdown. American Airlines dropped more than 4 percent in early trading, and Wynn Resorts, which operates casinos in Macau, a special administrative region of China and a gambling haven for Chinese high rollers, dropped more than 7 percent. Major stock benchmarks in Europe were down more than 2 percent. While many markets in Asia were closed for the holiday, Tokyo’s benchmark Nikkei 225 index also sank 2 percent. The price of oil dropped, on fears that demand could slip. China’s currency also fell, while investors moved into safe havens like gold. China’s economy, which is experiencing its worst slowdown in nearly three decades, is already hurting from the impact of the outbreak, and there are fears that consumer spending will go down as more residents stay home over the Lunar New Year. American health officials in Washington issued new guidance for travelers late Monday afternoon, recommending that they avoid all nonessential trips to China. The warning, from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, notes that transportation in and out of Hubei Province may be restricted and that there is “limited access to adequate medical care in affected areas.” Health officials also counseled travelers in China to avoid contact with sick people, animal markets and uncooked meats, and to talk to their health care provider and wash hands frequently. Some 110 patients in 26 states are being evaluated for infection with the Wuhan coronavirus, officials at the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention said on Monday. Five of the 110 have tested positive so far, and 32 have tested negative. “That is a cumulative number and will only increase,” said Dr. Nancy Messonnier, director of the National Center for Immunization and Respiratory Diseases. At the moment, the risk of infection in the United States is low. But Dr. Messonnier cautioned that information about the outbreak is changing rapidly, and the C.D.C.’s response and guidance are constantly revised. The C.D.C. continues to screen passengers arriving in the United States whose travel originated in Wuhan. Officials are considering broadening the effort and revising official guidance on travel to the region, Dr. Messonnier said. Dr. Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, director-general of the World Health Organization, has arrived in Beijing to “understand the latest developments and strengthen our partnership with China in providing further protection against the outbreak,” he said in a tweet. The city’s top health official, Dr. Oxiris Barbot, said that it was only a matter of time before someone in the city tests positive for the virus. Hospitals have been on the lookout for patients with recent travel involving Wuhan, the Chinese city where the coronavirus is believed to have originated. And they have urged anyone who recently traveled there — or who have been in contact with someone who has — to quickly seek medical care if they have any respiratory or flulike symptoms. So far, of nine patients for whom New York State officials have sought testing from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, four were found not to have the virus, and the tests involving the other five are pending, Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo said Monday in a statement. When the first case in New York does arrive, health officials said, that patient may end up in a biocontainment unit in Bellevue Hospital or sent home to ride out the illness in their bedroom. That will depend largely on how sick they are, public health officials say. Health officials identified a “presumptive” second case of the new virus: the wife of the first identified case, a man who was hospitalized on Jan. 23. The couple had returned to Toronto after visiting Wuhan a day earlier. The woman’s symptoms were not severe enough to require hospitalization, Dr. Barbara Yaffe, the province’s associate chief medical officer of health, said at a news conference. She was in isolation at home. The man is in his 50s and is now in stable condition. Laboratory tests confirmed that he was infected with the new coronavirus, and tests are pending for his wife, officials said. Health officials are now tracking down people who sat near the couple on a flight to Toronto from Guangzhou, and questioning the travel history of people seeking medical help for respiratory problems around Ontario, Dr. Yaffe said. The Chinese government usually keeps a tight grip on what is said, seen and heard about it. But criticism on social media over its handling of the coronavirus outbreak has been difficult to contain. Some critics of the government have found clever ways to dodge censors, such as referring to Xi Jinping as “Trump” or comparing the outbreak to the Chernobyl catastrophe. The vitriol has been most intense in Hubei, the home province of Wuhan. After the provincial governor, Wang Xiaodong, gave a news briefing on Sunday, online commenters mocked Mr. Wang for misstating the number of face masks that the province could produce. They also circulated a photo from the briefing of him and two other officials, pointing out that one of them did not cover his nose with his mask. Another wore his mask upside down, and Mr. Wang did not wear a mask at all. The Chinese health care system strains to serve patients even under normal circumstances. Those weaknesses are most pronounced in the poorer areas of China — like Wuhan, the epicenter of the coronavirus outbreak. Panicked residents of the city are heading to the hospitals if they have any sign of a cold or cough. Videos circulating on Chinese social media show doctors straining to handle the enormous workload and hospital corridors loaded with patients, some of whom appear to be dead. Wuhan hospitals have posted messages online urgently appealing for medical equipment. The situation is even more desperate in nearby rural areas. Yanzhong Huang, a senior fellow for global health at the Council on Foreign Relations, said China had invested a lot in building infrastructure to deal with infectious diseases. “But they apparently didn’t anticipate something so sudden, so acute, and so tremendous,” he said. China’s efforts to contain the spread of the disease by keeping tens of millions of people corralled in the major cities in Hubei Province have drawn skepticism from some experts in public health and epidemiology. The lockdown will pose tremendous challenges, starting with getting food, fuel and medical care to those affected. “At this stage of the outbreak, the things that make the most difference are finding people, diagnosing people, and getting them isolated,” said Dr. Tom Inglesby, an infectious diseases specialist and director of the Johns Hopkins Center for Health Security. “If you isolate the city, then my question and my concern is that you’re making it harder in a number of ways to do those things you need to do,” including getting sick people to the hospital and getting supplies into medical facilities, he said. Other experts said that the travel restrictions had probably come too late and that the barriers would prove too permeable. Five million people had left Wuhan before travel out of the city was restricted, said the city’s mayor, Zhou Xianwang. “You can’t board up a germ,” said Lawrence O. Gostin, a law professor at Georgetown University and director of the O’Neill Institute for National and Global Health Law. “A novel infection will spread.” Some experts, however, said the lockdowns could help, at least in theory. “Anything that is done that increases social distancing can help decrease the spread of the virus,” said Dr. Thomas R. Frieden, a former director of the United States Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. “If you do it right, it’s not impossible it will have positive impact.” Hospital workers in Hong Kong are trying to prepare for an outbreak of coronavirus cases — with memories of the SARS epidemic of the early 2000s still fresh. In the past week, doctors and nurses have drawn straws to determine when they would work in coronavirus isolation wards for six-week shifts. A hospital rearranged its cafeteria so that all tables faced the walls, a precaution from the SARS era to prevent employees from infecting each other during their meals. The SARS outbreak killed eight medical workers in the city. Some still suffer from lung damage 17 years later. Many hospital workers are calling for stricter border checks as Lunar New Year holidays come to a close this week, and a wave of visitors and residents are expected to return from the mainland. A new union, HA Employees Alliance, threatened to go on strike if the government did not close its borders to the mainland. Arisina Ma, the president of the Hong Kong Public Doctors’ Association, called for stricter border checks, and for possibly requiring visitors and residents to stay home for 14 days, the incubation period for the disease, after returning from the mainland. “We are waiting for the worst to come,” she added. “Of course we will try to stop it but I am not sure if our government is efficient and determined enough to stop the worst to come.” At the same time, the city’s hospitals are still reeling from the anti-government protests that flooded their wards with patients over the past seven months. Early Monday morning, hours after protesters set fire to unused public housing units designated to be medical quarantine areas, a handmade bomb exploded inside a hospital toilet cubicle, a police official said. The two small explosions filled the emergency ward with smoke but caused no injuries. Wuhan’s top government and Communist Party officials offered to step down on Monday amid growing criticism in the city that the local authorities’ response to the outbreak was too slow. Mayor Zhou Xianwang said in an interview with the state broadcaster CCTV that he and Ma Guoqiang, the city’s party secretary, would take responsibility for the crisis and resign to “appease public indignation.” “Our names will live in infamy, but as long as it is conducive to the control of the disease and to the people’s lives and safety, Comrade Ma Guoqiang and I will bear any responsibility,” Mr. Zhou said in the interview. Medical workers in the city have accused the local government of reacting too slowly to the crisis, and residents have used social media to complain about a ban on travel that has made it difficult to get access to food and health care. The mayor defended the travel ban, which was enacted last week and effectively cut off the city of 11 million people. He called the restriction “unprecedented in human history.” China’s second-highest ranking official, Premier Li Keqiang, on Monday visited Wuhan to inspect local efforts to contain the disease, the government said. In pictures released by the state-run news media, Mr. Li is seen wearing a face mask and a blue protective gown while posing for photos with health workers. He was also seen speaking with a patient in an isolation ward via video conference. The premier’s visit comes as the central government is under increasing pressure to prove it is adequately coping with the crisis. On Saturday, Xi Jinping, China’s leader, convened a meeting of the Politburo’s standing committee, the senior-most executive body of the Chinese Communist Party, as a demonstration of the government’s hands-on approach to the outbreak. Hospitals in Wuhan have posted messages online urgently appealing for medical equipment. Mr. Li, who has been assigned to oversee the national response to the outbreak, pledged to provide Wuhan’s health centers with 20,000 pairs of safety goggles. Trying to temporarily limit travel, the Chinese government extended the weeklong Lunar New Year holiday by three days, meaning it will go through next Sunday rather than ending on Thursday. Workers will return to work on Feb. 3. The holiday, China’s biggest annual celebration, began on Friday, the eve of the Lunar New Year. Hundreds of millions of Chinese people travel during the holiday, either for tourism or to visit family. The week, known in China as Spring Festival, typically includes large public events, but many festivities have been canceled this year. Many tourist attractions have been shuttered including the Disney theme parks in Shanghai and Hong Kong, along with the Forbidden City and sections of the Great Wall in Beijing. Residents of Wuhan have largely hunkered down to quietly wait out the crisis, mostly staying inside their homes, and venturing out only for supplies and food, medical visits and occasional bursts of exercise away from other people. Cities, towns and even villages have erected checkpoints and roadblocks intended to ward off any outsiders who might carry the coronavirus. On Monday, most shops remained closed, but supermarkets, fresh produce stores and pharmacies remained open — although many pharmacies have run out of protective masks, hand disinfectant and other supplies intended to protect against the virus. Residents with fevers and coughs who worried that they may have contracted the coronavirus continued to line up at clinics and hospitals, but in fewer numbers than on previous days. The streets were mostly free of cars, and many residents walked or rode bicycles to do their shopping. “It’s possible to live, but it’s not a real New Year,” said Qiu Dongjun, 38, a construction worker from rural Hubei Province who was carrying a bagful of shopping, mostly instant noodles and tins of precooked porridge. As health officials race to contain the dangerous virus, social media users in China are responding to the outbreak with dashes of gallows humor. On the messaging platform WeChat, people circulated images of improvised face masks made of plastic water jugs. One video on WeChat and the social platform Weibo showed a group of people playing mah-jongg, the popular tile-based game, while wearing what appeared to be plastic bags over their heads. Another video on WeChat appeared to show a person emerging from an airport baggage claim clad in a full-body space alien costume, complete with green skin and bulging eyes. Masks are a common motif in virus-related memes. They have been added to traditional greetings exchanged for the Lunar New Year, and photoshopped into classic paintings like Vermeer’s “Girl With a Pearl Earring.” They appear in propaganda posters done in the style of the Mao era and updated to reflect the times. A video on Twitter appeared to show a taxi driver wearing goggles and a hazmat suit while taking a woman to the airport. The woman asks the driver whether his outfit might scare off potential fares. He replies serenely: “Safety first, right?” Foreign governments with nationals stranded in Wuhan scrambled to evacuate their citizens from the epicenter of the outbreak, even as China imposed official travel bans. The State Department said it had chartered a flight to take consular staff members and other American citizens to San Francisco from Wuhan on Tuesday. The department said priority would be given to those at greater risk from contracting the virus because of the flight’s “extremely limited” capacity. At least one American, a father of three young children, declined the offer after the United States government said his wife, a Chinese national, would not be offered a seat. France, Japan, Spain and Sri Lanka also said they would bring home nationals. Once in France, evacuated nationals would be required to spend 14 days in quarantine. Russia was in talks with China about evacuating its citizens, local news media reported. Russian tour operators have stopped selling trips to China following recommendations from the country’s tourism watchdog and would work only to evacuate travelers, Reuters reported.   Though the number of coronavirus cases and deaths is alarming, public health experts have so far warned against mass anxiety. After all, the common flu kills roughly 35,000 people a year and hospitalizes about 200,000 in the United States alone. It is too soon to know the mortality rate of the virus in the new outbreak. But there are signs that this outbreak could be far more serious than the common flu. For one, other coronaviruses have far higher mortality rates than the common flu, and have also led to global outbreaks. Chinese citizens are also haunted by the memory of the SARS epidemic in 2002 and 2003, a coronavirus outbreak that also started in China and eventually killed more than 800 people worldwide. During that epidemic, Beijing at first played down the crisis and withheld information, eventually drawing widespread criticism. And conclusive evidence about how the outbreak started is lacking. While officials in Wuhan first traced it to a seafood market, some patients who have fallen ill never visited the market. Researchers have also offered disparate explanations for what animals may have transmitted the virus to humans. The coronavirus outbreak seemed to be a full-blown crisis by the time the first news reports emerged: Dozens of people had been infected, even some abroad. Though China’s initial delay in reporting cases of the new virus may suggest a cover-up, experts see something more worrying: weaknesses at the heart of the Chinese political system. China’s rigid bureaucracy discourages local officials from raising bad news with central bosses, and it silos officials off from one another, making it harder to manage, or even see, a crisis in the making. “That’s why you never really hear about problems emerging on a local scale in China,” said John Yasuda, who studies China’s approach to health crises at Indiana University. “By the time that we hear about it, and that the problem reaches the central government, it’s because it’s become a huge problem.” Those systemic flaws appear to have played a role in the pace at which officials responded to the outbreak, and the country’s inability to address the health risks from its so-called wet markets, which are stuffed with livestock living and dead, domesticated and wild. China is now mobilizing a nationwide response involving hundreds of personnel, one of the system’s strengths. But the country’s political weaknesses can have serious consequences for the world. Disease and pollution don’t respect borders, so a unified national policy is typically needed to prevent or stop them. For any health or environmental regulation to work, Mr. Yasuda said, “you want it to be standardized, you want it to be transparent, you want it to be accountable.” 
After sharp losses around the world, investors on Tuesday continued to assess the long-term economic effects of the coronavirus epidemic. The verdict was mixed. Investors abandoned stocks in Asia, while markets in Europe steadied after the previous day’s sell-off. In the United States, stocks rose at the start of trading, with the S&P 500 up slightly. Investors could be in for a rocky period as the pneumonialike illness spreads, having killed 132 people and sickening nearly 6,000 to date. Health officials in the United States are warning that travelers should avoid nonessential trips to China, while global businesses are restricting travel. The Chinese government extended the Lunar New Year holiday, which could disrupt production and hurt the country’s growth. “The coronavirus is the No. 1 threat to financial markets currently as global investors are becoming jittery on the uncertainty,” said Nigel Green, the founder of the investment group deVere Group. “This is a worrying and serious situation and investors must be vigilant,” he added. The concern is that the fallout could create a major shock for markets, even as worries about geopolitics and global trade have eased. Many Asian stock markets were closed for the Lunar New Year holiday, but those that were open, including Japan’s and South Korea’s, fell and futures trading in China slumped. Money poured into safe-haven assets like gold and pushed up the value of the United States dollar. Most European markets were slightly higher. Japan’s minister of economic and fiscal policy said on Tuesday that the Chinese outbreak would affect the Japanese tourism industry and warned that it could also hurt exports and corporate profits. Chinese tourists traveling to Japan accounted for 30 percent of all tourists in 2019, he said at a news conference. “There are concerns over the impact to the Chinese and global economy from the spread of infection in China, transportation disruptions, cancellation of group tours from China and an extension in the Lunar holiday,” said the minister, Yasutoshi Nishimura. In Tokyo, investors pushed stocks down by 0.6 percent. In Seoul, stocks fell by more than 3 percent. Hong Kong’s stock market will reopen on Wednesday. In China, where authorities have extended the New Year holiday by a week, the major exchanges in Shenzhen and Shanghai said they would remain closed until Feb. 3. China’s securities regulator on Tuesday called for investors to “rationally and objectively analyze the impact of the epidemic,” and to “adhere to the concept of long-term investment.” In Europe, London’s FTSE 100 index gained 0.2 percent in midday trading, while the DAX in Frankfurt was 0.1 percent lower. The price of oil, which tumbled on Monday amid fears that the virus would dampen demand for fuel, drifted slightly lower on Tuesday. China’s appetite for oil has grown at around 5.5 percent annually, making it an important buyer in the global market. The country has already imposed travel restrictions and any extension could further dampen demand. “The question isn’t whether coronavirus will depress global oil demand,” wrote Ryan Sweet, head of monetary policy research at Moody’s Analytics. “Rather, the question is by how much.” 
 As the outbreak of the mysterious new coronavirus rapidly spreads, the Chinese authorities said on Wednesday that the official count of known cases jumped again overnight, with the death toll now exceeding 130. ◆ China said on Wednesday that 132 people had died from the virus, which is believed to have originated in the central city of Wuhan and is spreading across the country. The previous count, on Tuesday, was 106. ◆ The number of confirmed cases increased to 5,974 on Wednesday, up from 4,515 on Tuesday, according to the National Health Commission.  ◆ Most of the confirmed cases have been in the central Chinese province of Hubei, where several cities, including Wuhan, the epicenter of the outbreak, have been placed under what amounts to a lockdown.  ◆ Thailand has reported 14 cases of infection; Hong Kong has eight; the United States, Taiwan, Australia and Macau have five each; Singapore, South Korea and Malaysia each have reported four; Japan has seven; France has four; Canada has three; Vietnam has two; and Nepal, Cambodia and Germany each have one. There have been no deaths outside China. The United States is expanding the screening of travelers arriving from Wuhan — to 20 airports and land crossings, from five airports, federal officials said on Tuesday. “Right now, there is no spread of this virus in our communities at home,” said Dr. Robert Redfield, director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, at a news briefing in Washington. “The coming days and weeks are likely to bring more cases including the possibility of person-to-person spread,” he said. “Our goal is to contain this virus and prevent sustained spread of the virus in our country.” [A plane carrying Americans is leaving from Wuhan. If you know anyone on board, or anyone trying to leave Wuhan, we would like to hear from you for a coming article. Please contact Miriam Jordan at miriam.jordan@nytimes.com to share your story.] Officials also announced that after repeated offers of assistance, Chinese authorities agreed on Tuesday to allow in teams of international experts, coordinated by the World Health Organization, to help with research and containment. “Americans should know this is a potentially very serious public health threat, but at this point Americans should not worry for their own safety,” said Alex M. Azar, secretary of health and human services, at the briefing. Scientists in the United States, Australia and at least three companies are working on vaccine candidates to stop the spread of the coronavirus. Government scientists as well as those working at Johnson & Johnson, Moderna Therapeutics and Inovio Pharmaceuticals are all working quickly to develop a vaccine. The hunt began Jan. 10, when Chinese scientists posted the genetic makeup of the virus on a public database. The next morning, researchers at the National Institutes of Health’s Vaccine Research Center in Maryland went to work. Within hours, they had pinpointed the letters of the genetic code that could be used to make a vaccine. Historically, vaccines have been one of the greatest public health tools to prevent disease. But even as technology, genomics and global coordination have improved, allowing researchers to move at top speed, vaccine development remains an expensive and risky process.  The number of infections and deaths related to the outbreak of a mysterious virus in China keeps rising, but economic analysts have counseled caution, saying it’s too soon to ring alarms about the impact on the global economy. Even so, individually, some American companies with a sizable presence in China are feeling the strain. Starbucks, for example, announced on Tuesday that it was temporarily shuttering half of its locations there. “The magnitude of the impact will depend on the duration of store closures as we work with local authorities to manage the situation and protect our partners and customers,” Pat Grismer, chief financial officer, said during an earnings call. Other companies that closed stores there included McDonald’s and Yum China, the country’s largest restaurant company, which operates the KFC, Pizza Hut and Taco Bell brands in China and also controls its own brands. Travel restrictions in China and screening at airports in other countries have also disrupted plans. United Airlines announced today that it was suspending some flights. American Airlines stock fell more than 5 percent on Tuesday. Hotels and resorts with properties in the affected areas, which include Macau, a special administrative region and gambling mecca, like Wynn Resorts, Las Vegas Sands and MGM Resorts International also saw the value of their shares sink. Marriott, Hyatt and Hilton which have several properties in China also saw their stock prices slide. Other brands that are popular in China, like Estee Lauder, Nike and Tapestry, which sells Coach, Kate Spade and Stuart Weitzman, are likely to see a dent in earnings, bank analysts said. Anxiety about sales spread to Chinese tech companies including Alibaba, JD.com, and Baidu. China is the world’s second largest economy. A charter plane hired by the Japanese government to evacuate citizens from Wuhan landed at a Tokyo airport Wednesday morning.  Outside, tour buses — with drivers in sanitary masks — and some ambulances waited to accept the 206 passengers. Japanese news media reported that one of the passengers had a fever and one was coughing. In a news conference late Tuesday, Japanese authorities said that people who showed symptoms would be transferred directly to a hospital, while those who appeared healthy would be tested for the virus and then asked to quarantine themselves for two weeks. The flight left Tokyo Tuesday night carrying medical supplies requested by the Chinese government to help fight the viral outbreak that has put Wuhan and other cities on lockdown. At another news conference, two of the passengers expressed relief at being back in Japan. Authorities plan to send a second plane Wednesday night to Wuhan, where around 450 Japanese citizens still await evacuation. United Airlines said on Tuesday that it will reduce flights between the United States and Beijing, Hong Kong and Shanghai because of a “significant decline in demand.” United said in a statement that it would cut flights starting Feb. 1, through Feb. 8. The suspension will affect 24 flights. “We will continue to monitor the situation as it develops and will adjust our schedule as needed,” United said.  Delta Air Lines and American Airlines have not yet cut flights to China, but have said they are closely monitoring the situation there as the coronavirus spreads. A fourth case of the new coronavirus was confirmed in France, Jérôme Salomon, an official in the health ministry, announced on Tuesday.  The patient is a tourist from Hubei province, Mr. Salomon said. He was in serious condition in the intensive care unit of a Paris hospital, and the authorities were seeking out anyone who had been in close contact with the man, who is in his eighties.  The previously identified cases affected a 48-year-old man in Bordeaux and a 31-year-old man and 30-year-old woman in Paris. France is also working with China to repatriate French citizens in Wuhan, with a first flight scheduled for later in the week. Agnès Buzyn, France’s health minister, said on Tuesday that about 500 to 1,000 French citizens could qualify. Those who return without any symptoms will be quarantined for 14 days, and those who present possible symptoms will be hospitalized.  Other European countries have also asked France to help bring back some of their own citizens on those flights, Ms. Buzyn said. Health officials on Tuesday reported what appear to be the first known cases of human-to-human transmission of the virus in Europe — specifically, in Germany — and in Japan. Another case was recently reported in Vietnam. The cases show that countries across the world are now faced with the task of limiting the spread of the disease on their own soil, not just seeking to identify and quarantine ailing patients who had traveled from China. Japan’s Ministry of Health, Labor and Welfare said the first Japanese national — and the sixth person in Japan overall — to be diagnosed with the coronavirus was a man in his 60s. He had never been to Wuhan, but he had worked as a bus driver earlier this month for two different group tours from that city, officials said.  The man began experiencing symptoms on Jan. 14, was hospitalized on Saturday and was confirmed to have the coronavirus on Tuesday. The infected German, whose case was also confirmed on Tuesday, is a 33-year-old man from Bavaria who had been in contact with a Chinese woman in Germany, officials said. The woman was diagnosed with the virus after flying home to China. The man was in good condition, German officials said.  “It was to be expected that the virus would come to Germany,” Jens Spahn, Germany’s health minister, said in a statement on Tuesday. “But the Bavarian case shows us that we are well prepared.”  The World Health Organization said on Friday that there appeared to have been a case of human-to-human transmission in Vietnam, where a person who had never been to China, but who had a relative who had visited Wuhan, was confirmed to have the virus. Hong Kong on Tuesday put in place a broad series of restrictions aimed at controlling the spread of the coronavirus by limiting the number of mainland Chinese travelers entering the territory, one of Asia’s busiest travel and financial hubs. The restrictions — which included the suspension of high-speed and other train services between Hong Kong and the mainland, a 50 percent reduction in the number of flights — and a ban on tourism visas for many travelers — were announced by Carrie Lam, the city’s chief executive. The regulations, which apply to some plane, rail, bus and ferry arrivals, will begin on Thursday. They follow days of rising pressure from health care workers, epidemiologists and even pro-Beijing politicians who have traditionally supported Mrs. Lam’s government. Hong Kong has so far recorded eight confirmed cases of the virus. Tibet, the only region in China that has yet to report any cases, has temporarily closed all tourist sites, state news media reported. Major Chinese cities, including Shanghai and Beijing, have suspended long-distance bus services.  The medical faculty of the Chinese University of Hong Kong called for more restrictions on border checkpoints as the virus spreads across China. Workers from Hong Kong’s Hospital Authority have planned a strike for next week to demand a law requiring the wearing of masks in public and banning all visitors from entering the city through the mainland. Numerous African countries are shoring up coronavirus screening efforts at major airports, and samples from at least five potentially infected patients were being tested.  Ethiopia’s state minister of health confirmed on Tuesday that four potential cases were isolated in the capital, Addis Ababa, pending laboratory tests. On Monday, officials in Ivory Coast said they were testing a suspected case related to a female student who had traveled from Beijing to the capital, Abidjan.  The epidemic comes as travel between China and African states has increased at a rapid pace. As Beijing has ramped up its diplomatic, economic and political support for African states, Chinese firms and migrants have been setting up shop in cities from Nairobi to Johannesburg.  Data from the China Africa Research Initiative at Johns Hopkins University put the number of official Chinese workers as of 2017 at over 202,000. African entrepreneurs have moved to Chinese cities, while African students now make up a large percentage of the foreign student body in China.  On Tuesday, Kenya Airways announced that the health authorities had quarantined a passenger who traveled from Guangzhou.  Because of the Chinese New Year celebration, “a good number of African students living in Wuhan or Hubei traveled home before the extent of the virus became clear,” said Hannah Ryder, chief executive of the Beijing-headquartered consultancy Development Reimagined. “It’s unclear how exposed they may have been and if governments have the resources to check on them,” she said.  The World Health Organization revised its global risk assessment for the coronavirus outbreak from “moderate” to “high,” but concealed the change in a footnote buried in a report published on Monday.  The change to the report, which coincided with a visit to China by the organization’s director-general, risked confusing the public about the severity of the outbreak, which has killed more than 100 people in China and been found in at least 14 countries.  In a statement, the organization said the director-general, Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, and Chinese officials “discussed measures to protect the health of Chinese and foreigners in outbreak areas, including possible alternatives to evacuation of foreigners if there are ways to accommodate them and protect their health.” Chinese state-run media reported that Dr. Tedros met with President Xi Jinping of China and spoke highly of Chinese efforts. Mr. Xi urged the health organization to assess the epidemic in an “objective, fair, calm and rational manner.” In Hubei, medical workers have complained about a desperate need for resources to treat thousands of patients who have at times overwhelmed hospitals. The group, which is a United Nations body, was criticized when it refused twice in recent days to declare the outbreak a global emergency, despite its spread. A shortage of medical kits in China needed to quickly diagnose the coronavirus has slowed the country’s ability to respond to the outbreak and fueled concerns that the number of cases has been underreported.  China’s Medical Products Administration said on Sunday that it had approved four new virus detection kits, including one that sequences the genetic makeup of the disease. But China’s three leading medical device manufacturers said they did not have the capacity to quickly produce the products, according to state news media reports. Residents in Wuhan who arrived at hospitals to seek testing were told that medical workers did not have the kits needed to confirm a diagnosis. “For any new emerging virus, most local hospitals or public health laboratories will not able to make a diagnosis” said Yuen Kwok-yung, the chairman of the infectious diseases department at Hong Kong University. “Thus many cases will not be investigated at all if they are mild.” A woman in Wuhan told The South China Morning Post that her uncle learned he had viral pneumonia after a CT scan, but that the doctor could not confirm it was the new virus because no testing kits were available.  China may have to rely on outside technical support as front line responders battle to contain the virus’s spread, experts said. The Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation said Sunday that it would commit $5 million to help China respond to the crisis, including “efforts to identify and confirm cases.” As the outbreak continues to spread, global companies have begun to limit their workers’ travel to mainland China, and China’s biggest companies have urged employees to work from home. On Monday, health officials in the United States urged travelers to avoid any nonessential travel to China, and many companies cited that as justification for internal travel bans. The new guidance, from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, warned that transportation in and out of Hubei Province, the center of the outbreak, is restricted, and that there is “limited access to adequate medical care in affected areas.” Companies with large operations or interest in China, like General Motors, Honeywell, Bloomberg and Facebook, have all warned employees not to travel within mainland China in a flurry of emails in recent days. Honeywell, which has offices and operations across China, said it had restricted travel to certain regions, without specifying them. A spokesperson for General Motors said the company had issued a global ban on travel to China, under which only “business-critical” travel would be allowed. Bloomberg told its employees in Hong Kong and mainland China to work remotely until further notice, and it barred other employees from traveling to either place for the next 30 days, according to an email seen by The New York Times. Facebook said it asked all employees to suspend nonessential travel and asked those who had recently been in China to work from home for a period of time. The authorities in China have extended the Lunar New Year holiday to Feb. 3, and some of China’s biggest cities have gone further, telling businesses not to open until the next week. The country’s biggest technology companies, including Alibaba, Tencent, Bytedance, Sina, Maimai, Netease and Didi, told employees to work from home from Feb. 3 to Feb. 10. Netease, an internet and entertainment platform, asked employees returning from another city within China to quarantine themselves for 14 days. After sharp losses around the world on Monday, investors on Tuesday continued to assess the long-term economic effects of the coronavirus epidemic.  The verdict was mixed. Investors abandoned stocks in Asia, while markets in Europe steadied. In the United States, the S&P 500 was up more than 1 percent on Tuesday. Many of Asia’s stock markets were closed for the Lunar New Year holiday, but those that were open — Japan’s and South Korea’s — fell as futures trading in China slumped. Money poured into safe-haven assets like gold and pushed up the value of the United States dollar.      Hong Kong’s stock market will reopen on Wednesday. In China, where authorities have extended the New Year holiday by a week, the major exchanges in Shenzhen and Shanghai said they would remain closed until Feb. 3.  “The coronavirus is the No. 1 threat to financial markets currently as global investors are becoming jittery on the uncertainty,” said Nigel Gre, the founder of the investment group deVere Group.  Some of the last passengers who arrived at Kennedy International Airport before direct flights from Wuhan were canceled have quarantined themselves at home.  Scott Liu, 56, who leads an association for immigrants from Hubei, said he confined himself to his house in Queens. He said he and his fellow passengers on the Wuhan flight learned of the lockdown in that city mid-flight. He said he has not felt sick, but is taking precautions because he knows symptoms take time to appear. His friends have dropped off on his doorstep traditional Lunar New Year dishes like lotus root and pork rib soup, salted fish and dumplings. Last year, they were host to a big New Year celebration at a banquet hall in Flushing. This year, Mr. Liu said, “all the events here are canceled.”  “Everybody is in a state of panic,” he added.  
HONG KONG — Countries, cities and businesses across the globe issued new travel warnings on Tuesday, vastly expanding a cordon intended to control the flow of people to and from China, where the authorities are struggling to contain the outbreak of the new coronavirus. In the most drastic measure to limit travel, the Hong Kong authorities reduced by half the number of flights and shut down rail service to mainland China, and they also limited visas — moves that could inspire other governments to follow suit. Measures to contain the outbreak of the virus to its epicenter in Hubei Province appear to have failed to stop the contagion. On Wednesday morning, Chinese officials said the number of cases had increased by nearly a third overnight. Experts warned that the actual number of cases could be significantly higher and growing quickly. The number of deaths attributed to the virus also continued to grow. The new travel restrictions put a deeper freeze on China’s contact with the world, cutting off business and tourism as China’s economy faces a potential slowdown. With China’s Lunar New Year holiday nearing its end, companies ordered workers to stay home and avoid travel. The economic impact of such measures pointed to a deeper political crisis, with many people accusing the Chinese authorities online of failing to act quickly to contain the virus, even as the government continues to struggle to control its spread. The travel advisories and bans came as the virus showed early signs of spreading outside China, with cases of transmission to people who had not recently traveled to China reported in Japan, Germany and Vietnam. Countries across the world may now be faced with the task of limiting the spread of the disease on their own soil, not simply seeking to identify and quarantine infected people who had been in China. Officials at the United States Centers for Disease Control and Prevention warned against nonessential travel to China, noting that there is “limited access to adequate medical care in affected areas.” The United States is expanding the screening of travelers arriving from Wuhan to 20 airports and other ports of entry, from five, federal officials said on Tuesday. [Read: U.K. businessman linked to coronavirus cluster comes forward.] The World Health Organization revised its global risk assessment for the outbreak from “moderate” to “high,” although it noted this shift in a footnote buried in a report published on Monday. The change in the risk assessment, which coincided with a visit to China by the organization’s director general, risked confusing the public about the severity of the outbreak, which has killed more than 130 people in China and been diagnosed in at least 14 countries. The World Health Organization was criticized after it refused twice in recent days to declare the outbreak a global emergency, despite its spread. With other countries scrambling to evacuate their citizens from the locked-down epicenter of the outbreak in central China, the WHO said its director general, Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, had discussed with Chinese officials “possible alternatives to evacuation of foreigners if there are ways to accommodate them and protect their health.” Although Chinese medical workers have described a desperate need for more resources to treat thousands of new patients, state-run Chinese media reported that Dr. Tedros had spoken highly of the Chinese efforts to contain the virus. The Chinese authorities agreed on Tuesday to allow in teams of international experts, coordinated by the World Health Organization, to help with research and containment. Chinese officials said Wednesday that 132 people had died from the virus, up from 106 the day before. The total number of confirmed cases rose sharply as well, to 5,974 on Wednesday, according to the National Health Commission. The youngest confirmed patient is a 9-month-old girl in Beijing. While the majority of confirmed cases were in Hubei, where a number of cities have been put under effective lockdown, an additional 1,800 cases have been diagnosed outside the province, the authorities said. In Wuhan, medical workers have cited a lack of masks and kits to test for the virus. China’s medical products administration said on Sunday it had approved new virus detection kits to speed detection, but three Chinese medical companies said they did not have the capacity to produce enough of them, according to local news media reports. Many in Wuhan with symptoms of the virus have not been tested or have been told the hospitals did not have enough test kits, some local residents said. During a visit to Wuhan on Monday, the Chinese premier, Li Keqiang, promised to provide more equipment, and the local government has begun building new hospitals that it hopes to open in a matter of weeks. But online, many people mocked the government’s efforts. In indications of the virus’s spread beyond China’s borders, Thailand reported 14 cases of infection, while the United States and Australia have each confirmed five cases. Singapore, South Korea and Malaysia each said they had confirmed four cases. Japan’s Ministry of Health, Labor and Welfare, which has now confirmed six cases, said that the virus had been found in the first Japanese citizen. The ministry said he had worked as a bus driver for two different tour groups from Wuhan. He had no history of traveling to Wuhan. The man, who had driven for the tours earlier this month, first reported experiencing chills, a cough and joint pain on Jan. 14. He visited a clinic three days later, but was sent home. On Jan. 22, his joint pain and cough grew worse, and he returned to a health clinic on Saturday, when a chest X-ray showed abnormalities and he was admitted to a hospital. A test confirmed the coronavirus on Tuesday. German officials said Tuesday that they had identified what they believed was the first instance of the virus spreading within Europe. They said a man from Starnberg in Bavaria was infected and was being treated and kept in isolation. The health ministry described him as being in “good condition” medically and said it was also monitoring his family and other people who might have been exposed, including in his children’s day care center. “It was to be expected that the virus would come to Germany,” Jens Spahn, Germany’s health minister, said in a statement on Tuesday. “But the Bavarian case shows us that we are well prepared.” He said the risk to Germans remained low. Japan planned to send a chartered plane to Wuhan on Tuesday night to bring back the first Japanese citizens who wish to be repatriated. At least 13 countries have said they would evacuate their citizens from Wuhan, where the virus is believed to have been transmitted from animals to humans. Businesses that operate in China have issued warnings of their own. In a flurry of emails sent in recent days, General Motors, Honeywell, Bloomberg, Facebook and other companies have warned employees not to travel within mainland China. Honeywell, which has offices and operations across China, said it had restricted travel to some regions, but did not specify which ones. A spokesman for General Motors said the company had issued a global travel ban to China, with only “business-critical” travel allowed and only after clearance from a doctor. Bloomberg told its employees in Hong Kong and mainland China to work remotely until further notice and it restricted travel to China and Hong Kong over the next 30 days, according to an email seen by The New York Times. The Chinese government has extended the Lunar New Year holiday until Feb. 3, with some of China’s biggest cities telling businesses not to open until the following week. China’s biggest technology companies went further, notifying employees to work from home until Feb. 10. NetEase, an internet and entertainment platform, asked employees who were returning from another city to quarantine themselves for 14 days. Investors in Asia were gripped on Tuesday with fear about the health of the global economy for a second day, with a widespread sell-off continuing in the markets. Investors dumped stocks in companies thought to be most vulnerable to the effects of the virus. “The coronavirus is the No. 1 threat to financial markets currently as global investors are becoming jittery on the uncertainty,” said Nigel Green, founder of an investment company, the deVere Group. In Hong Kong, medical professionals called for additional border checkpoints. “The next week or two will be a critical time for the development of the epidemic,” the faculty at the Chinese University of Hong Kong wrote on its Facebook page. “We must closely monitor whether there is a community outbreak outside Hubei Province, especially in Hong Kong’s neighboring regions.” 
Australians flown home from Wuhan, China, will be quarantined on an island for two weeks. Americans, also evacuated from Wuhan, will be “temporarily housed” on an air base in California. And in South Korea, the police have been empowered to detain people who refuse to be quarantined. For countries outside China, the time to prevent an epidemic is now, when cases are few and can be isolated. They are trying to seize the moment to protect themselves against the coronavirus outbreak, which has reached every province in China, sickening more than 7,700 people and killing 170. More than a dozen nations with a handful of cases — including the United States — are isolating patients and monitoring their contacts, as well as screening travelers from China and urging people to postpone trips there. But whether this virus can be contained depends on factors still unknown, like just how contagious it is and when in the course of the infection the virus starts to spread. China, with nearly 1.4 billion people, is the most populous nation on Earth, and it has taken extreme measures to try to stop the disease, first reported in December in Wuhan, a city of 11 million. The government has stopped travel in and out of that city and surrounding ones, effectively locking down tens of millions of people. “The fact that to date we have only seen 68 cases outside China and no deaths is due in no small part to the extraordinary steps the government has taken to prevent the export of cases,” Dr. Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, the director-general of the World Health Organization, said at a news briefing on Wednesday. But the disease has spread far and wide inside China and, with extensive worldwide travel by its citizens, especially during the celebration of the Lunar New Year, countries everywhere are bracing for the arrival of more new cases. Person-to-person transmission is occurring, and cases have turned up in several countries with people who have not visited China. Mentioning those cases, Dr. Tedros said the potential for further global spread was one of the reasons he had called on the W.H.O.’s emergency committee to meet again on Thursday to decide whether to declare the epidemic a public health emergency of international concern. The committee met twice last week but was split about whether to declare an emergency, saying it did not have enough information to decide. “I think things are going to get worse before they get better,” Dr. Anthony Fauci, director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases in the United States, said in a podcast posted on Tuesday by the medical journal JAMA. If China can somehow contain its outbreak, and if other countries with cases can prevent sustained transmission, Dr. Fauci said that it might be possible to end the outbreak, just as the coronavirus that caused the SARS epidemic in 2003 was stamped out. “But it’s going to be a real kind of tightrope walk, because if it gets so expansive then it’s not going to just disappear the way SARS did,” he said. “I think the next four to five weeks are going to be critical. It’s either going to start peaking and go into a downturn, or it’s going to explode into a global outbreak.” Dr. Thomas R. Frieden, a former director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, said in an interview that he thought it would become clear in a few days whether the outbreak could be contained. “If we’re seeing widespread transmission, thousands or tens of thousands of infections in the community, I don’t see how this gets controlled,” Dr. Frieden said. “On the other hand, if we see a SARS-like situation, where with incredible effort they were able to isolate people, tamp down the spread, then we’re in a containment situation.” A particular concern is the possibility that the virus could wreak havoc in Africa, where possible cases are being investigated. “We are very concerned about Africa because some of the least prepared countries for outbreaks are in Africa,” Dr. Frieden said, adding, “We know the systems there to find it and stop it are weaker there than elsewhere.” If efforts to contain an outbreak fail, public health authorities will focus on “mitigation”— dealing with the disease and trying to minimize the harm it does to people and communities. “It’s a worrisome situation in China,” Dr. Nancy Messonnier, director of the National Center for Immunization and Respiratory Diseases, said in an interview on Wednesday. “It seems like more of a mitigation strategy than a control strategy that China has moved to.” The United States still has a chance to avoid China’s fate, she said. “We still only have five cases, and we can really do aggressive measures around those cases,” Dr. Messonnier said. “We’re trying to contain the disease, and by being aggressive we’re hoping to learn more about what it takes to contain it.” The five patients have hundreds of contacts. Some are being tested for the virus, and the results may help researchers understand how the disease is transmitted. The C.D.C. is also monitoring more than 100 “patients under investigation” — some with cough or fever who have been to Wuhan, or have had contact with a patient. But if the case count were to increase exponentially, Dr. Messonnier said, it would be hard to continue the concerted containment efforts. The C.D.C. is already gearing up should the approach need to evolve to mitigation strategies like closing schools, preventing public gatherings and helping hospitals prepare for a surge of cases. One troubling question is whether infected people can start spreading the virus before they themselves get sick. Chinese health officials have said they believe such transmission has taken place. If it happened often, it could make stopping an outbreak much harder. The reason is that the first step in halting outbreaks has traditionally been to identify people who are ill and then stop them from infecting others, usually by isolating them. But that approach will not work as well if people without any symptoms are already transmitting the disease. Health officials in the United States said they had not seen data from China to support that claim, nor any evidence that people without symptoms had spread the disease in the United States. The five patients in the United States had all visited Wuhan, and so far none of their contacts have become ill or tested positive for the virus. [Like the Science Times page on Facebook. | Sign up for the Science Times newsletter.] Dr. Fauci said that epidemics are fueled by people with symptoms — like sneezing and coughing, which help spray the virus around — and not by those without symptoms, even if some of them can spread the virus. Dr. Frieden said if asymptomatic people do transmit some virus, sick patients are likely to spread a lot more. People with colds or flu can spread viruses for a day or two before they become ill, but how big a role that plays in outbreaks is not known, researchers say. In any case, flu spreads worldwide every year, infecting tens of millions of people. And the spread of the new coronavirus is starting to resemble that of seasonal flu, said Dr. Michael T. Osterholm, director of the Center for Infectious Disease Research and Policy at the University of Minnesota. “I think we have to revisit which model we’re really using, and I think we really over the past week and a half have come closer to the influenza model,” Dr. Osterholm said. “Trying to stop influenza in a community without vaccine is like trying to stop the wind. I don’t know how we’re going to stop this.” He added, “The only thing operating in our favor is at least it doesn’t appear to be as severe as SARS or as MERS.” Among patients with the Wuhan coronavirus, about 20 percent have become seriously ill, and the rest have a mild illness, the W.H.O. said at a news briefing on Wednesday. So far, the death rate appears to be about 2 percent, but that is not certain yet. Those who die tend to be older people with underlying ailments. The median age of the first 425 patients in China was 59, and a little more than half were male, according to a report published in The New England Journal of Medicine on Wednesday. Diseases caused by related coronaviruses are deadlier: SARS killed 10 percent, and MERS about 35 percent. But if the new virus were to spread even more widely and a 2 percent mortality rate continued, the death toll could be considerable. Seasonal flu, with a much lower overall death rate of 0.1 percent, kills more than half a million people worldwide every year. At least 8,200 people in the United States have died during this flu season, according to estimates from the C.D.C. 
Mainland China now has more cases of coronavirus than it had of SARS, a respiratory infection that spread across China in 2002 and 2003 and killed 774 people in 17 countries. During the SARS outbreak, China had 5,327 cases and 349 deaths, according to the World Health Organization. The number of confirmed cases increased to more than 7,700 worldwide by early Thursday, according to Chinese officials and the World Health Organization, with all but 68 of the infections taking place in mainland China. On Wednesday, there were about 6,000 infections worldwide.  In China, a total of 170 people have now died from the mysterious new coronavirus, according to official Chinese statistics, but the real number is likely much higher. A dearth of test kits has hindered health officials ability to accurately diagnose and track the illness.  Here’s what we know about how the disease has spread:  ◆ China said early Thursday that 38 more people had died from the virus, which is believed to have originated in the central city of Wuhan and is spreading across the country. The previous count, on Wednesday, was 132.  ◆ Tibet reported its first confirmed case. ◆ Thailand has reported 14 cases of infection; Hong Kong has 10; the United States, Taiwan, Australia and Macau have five each; Singapore, South Korea and Malaysia each have reported four; Japan has 11; France has five; Germany has four; Canada has three; Vietnam has two; and Nepal, Cambodia, and the United Arab Emirates each have one.  ◆ Cases recorded in Taiwan, Germany, Vietnam and Japan involved patients who had not been to China. There have been no reported deaths outside China. The 195 Americans who were evacuated from Wuhan, the epicenter of the virus, have been instructed by federal health authorities to remain for three days on the air force base in Southern California where they landed on Wednesday. The passengers on the flight, which was chartered by the State Department, will be fully evaluated during those three days, according to Christopher R. Braden, a deputy director of the Centers for Disease Control. Once cleared, the passengers will be allowed to fly home, where they will be monitored for 14 days by medical teams in their area. “We think we can do the full evaluation in three days. Some of that evaluation is taking tests and flying samples to C.D.C. in Atlanta,” Dr. Braden told a news conference in Riverside, California.   “The reason we want to do active monitoring for 14 days is to determine if they can become ill during that period,” Dr. Braden added. “That is the basic public health premise of our action.“  The flight carrying the evacuated Americans landed in Southern California, at March Air Reserve Base, shortly after 8 a.m. local time on Wednesday. The flight had stopped in Anchorage for several hours, where the passengers were checked by a team from the Centers for Disease Control.  “The whole plane erupted in cheers when the crew said, ‘Welcome home to the United States,’” said Anne Zink, Alaska’s chief medical officer. [For a coming article, The New York Times would like to hear from Americans who flew on the chartered flight from China or their family members. Please contact miriam.jordan@nytimes.com to share your story.] The evacuees — consisting mainly of consular officials and their families but also including some other Americans who were in China — will be accommodated at the base during the three-day period. But they will not have contact with any military personnel on the base. The evacuees will undergo a battery of tests. If their results, from the lab of the Centers for Disease Control, come back negative, they will be allowed to travel onward. During a news conference, Dr. Braden was peppered with questions about the wisdom of releasing the former residents of Wuhan into communities across the country. He said that if a person deemed a danger to the community insisted on leaving before the 72-hour period expired, “we can institute an individual quarantine for that person and we will.”    Other countries that have evacuated or plan to evacuate their citizens from Wuhan include France, South Korea, Japan, Morocco, Germany, Kazakhstan, Britain, Canada, Russia, the Netherlands, Myanmar and Australia.  Researchers at the Peter Doherty Institute for Infection and Immunity in Melbourne, Australia, say they have grown the Wuhan coronavirus in a laboratory.  Scientists in China and other researchers have managed to do so as well, officials at the World Health Organization said on Wednesday. Isolating and growing viral samples is standard procedure during the outbreak of a novel pathogen, said Dr. Peter J. Hotez, co-director of the Texas Children’s Hospital Center for Vaccine Development at Baylor College of Medicine in Houston. “Early on in an outbreak, you still need to understand the biology of the new organism that’s causing infections,” Dr. Hotez said. Scientists collect samples from fluids obtained from the lungs or nasal passages of infected patients. Researchers may use the lab-grown virus to test antiviral drugs or develop experimental vaccines, Dr. Hotez said. By growing the novel coronavirus in controlled conditions, researchers also may get a better understanding of why the virus seems to be transmitted more easily than the SARS coronavirus, yet so far seems to have a lower mortality rate. Scientists at the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention also are trying to grow the coronavirus from patient samples collected in the United States. Once they’ve succeeded, the agency will make samples available to infectious disease researchers through a public repository. Chinese and Australian researchers have already offered to distribute samples. Scientists are also working quickly to develop a vaccine capable of stopping the new coronavirus. Government scientists in China, the United States and Australia, as well as those working at Johnson & Johnson, Moderna Therapeutics and Inovio Pharmaceuticals are all engaged.  Researchers at the National Institutes of Health’s Vaccine Research Center in Maryland have pinpointed the parts of the genetic code that could be used to make a vaccine. But a vaccine could take months, if not years, to develop. Three Japanese citizens who returned on a government-sponsored charter plane from Wuhan on Wednesday morning tested positive for the coronavirus, bringing the number of confirmed cases in Japan to 11. Katsunobu Kato, the country’s Health, Labor and Welfare minister, told a session of Parliament on Thursday morning that the two men and one woman who landed in Tokyo on Wednesday had tested positive for the virus. On Wednesday, 206 Japanese citizens landed at Haneda airport. All except two agreed to be tested for the virus, and 12 were sent immediately to a hospital for monitoring. The majority of the passengers — 191 — were asymptomatic but are quarantined in a hotel awaiting the results of virus tests. Of the three who tested positive, one exhibited symptoms, while two others were not yet showing symptoms. Another Japanese chartered flight from Wuhan landed on Thursday morning with 210 passengers aboard. The World Health Organization will convene a meeting of experts on Thursday in Geneva to vote again on whether to declare the coronavirus epidemic a global health emergency, officials said on Wednesday.  At a news conference in Geneva on Wednesday, W.H.O. officials said they were particularly concerned about recent cases of person-to-person transmission that have been reported among people who have never been to China. On Jan. 23, when there were about 800 confirmed cases and all 25 deaths were in China, the same committee recommended that an emergency not be declared at that time. Since then, the infection has spread to people in four countries who have never been to China. Most patients infected with the virus develop mild symptoms, but about 20 percent become severely ill. The death rate seems to be 2 percent, W.H.O. officials said, though they cautioned that there are many unknown variables. “This number may change,” said Dr. Maria Van Kerkhove, acting head of emerging diseases at the W.H.O. “It’s early to put a percentage on that.” The director general of the W.H.O., Dr. Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, praised China’s response to the crisis.  “The fact that to date we have only seen 68 cases outside China and no deaths is due in no small part to the extraordinary steps the government has taken to prevent the export of cases,” he said. Health officials in China alerted Germany when a Chinese woman returning from Germany developed symptoms and tested positive for the coronavirus. Because of the shared information, at least one infection in Germany was discovered. “This example is a good illustration of how China is engaging” with the W.H.O. and other countries, Dr. Tedros said.  But some Chinese social media users have strongly criticized the government’s handling of the outbreak, posting harrowing descriptions of untreated family members and images of hospital corridors loaded with patients.  The sheer amount of complaints — and some of the clever ways users have dodged censors, like referring to President Xi Jinping as “Trump” — have made it difficult for the Chinese government to maintain its tight grip on what is said, seen and heard about it. Some international sports events have been postponed or even canceled in China because of the coronavirus outbreak. The biggest casualty so far is the indoor world athletics championships in Nanjing, which were postponed by a full year on Wednesday. The international ski federation has canceled the first World Cup races planned for the mountain venue where the sport will be held during the 2022 Beijing Olympics, The Associated Press reported. The governing body of athletics said the indoor championships will now be held in March 2021 instead of March 13-15 this year. Nanjing is about 330 miles from Wuhan, where the outbreak started. Qualifying tournaments for this summers’ Tokyo Olympics have also been affected. Women’s soccer and women’s basketball games were moved to Australia and Serbia. The soccer games had initially been moved from Wuhan to Nanjing. Boxing tournaments for the Asia and Oceania regions will be held in Jordan in March. British Airways has indefinitely suspended all flights to and from China, the airline said on Wednesday, citing advice from Britain’s Foreign Office that cautioned against all nonessential travel to China. “We apologize to customers for the inconvenience, but the safety of our customers and crew is always our priority,” the company said in an emailed statement. Other airlines have begun to scale back flights to China as the death toll and number of cases rises, but the British flag carrier, one of the world’s largest international airlines, is the first to cancel all its scheduled flights.  The airline, based in London, makes multiple flights a week to Beijing and Shanghai.  Air Canada said on Wednesday that it was also suspending all flights to China, from Thursday until Feb. 29. And Delta announced that it was temporarily reducing its weekly flights between the United States and China, because of declining demand. From Feb. 6 through April 30, the airline will go down to 21 weekly flights, or three to four weekly flights per route. The low-cost Indonesian carrier Lion Air and Seoul Air of South Korea also suspended all their flights to China, The Associated Press reported.  United Airlines and Air Canada said on Tuesday that they would reduce flights to China, canceling dozens of scheduled trips over the coming days and weeks because of a sudden drop in demand. Health officials in the United States have also warned against all nonessential travel to China. In Hong Kong, the authorities have reduced by half the number of flights coming into the semiautonomous region from mainland China and have also shut down rail services to the mainland. Hong Kong’s flagship carrier, Cathay Pacific, has also suspended all flights to and from Wuhan through March. The new coronavirus that was first discovered in China last month is showing early signs of spreading abroad, with people who never visited China during the outbreak falling ill in Germany, Japan, Taiwan and Vietnam. The overseas cases highlight the ability of the mysterious disease, which is believed to have originated in wild animals, to be transmitted from one person to another, increasing its chances of spreading. “These reports are concerning, if they stand up to scrutiny, which they certainly sound credible,” said Dr. Arthur Reingold, a professor of epidemiology at the University of California, Berkeley. Some cases that have spread outside China appear to have been spread between family members, who are at greater risk while caring for sick relatives. Other cases, however, appear to have spread between people with different connections. In Japan, a tour bus driver in his 60s who had driven two different groups from Wuhan, China, was confirmed to have the coronavirus, officials said on Tuesday. The driver had no history of traveling to Wuhan, the epicenter of the outbreak. “I think what that says is, if we can get transmission in such a setting, then we can certainly get it in the waiting room of a clinic or a hospital,” Professor Reingold said. “That’s very concerning.” German officials said on Tuesday that a 33-year-old man from Starnberg in Bavaria was apparently infected with the coronavirus after a Jan. 21 training event with a Chinese colleague. The Chinese colleague flew home two days later. The German man was being treated under isolation while officials identified other people with whom he might have been in contact. Late Tuesday, health officials in Germany said three more people from the same company in Bavaria were also infected. The three were admitted to a clinic in Munich, where they were to be isolated and treated. An additional 40 people with close contact to those infected would be tested on Wednesday, officials said. Taiwan said on Tuesday that a man had become infected after his wife had contracted the virus while working in Wuhan. He became Taiwan’s eighth case and the first known to be transmitted locally. In an article published by The New England Journal of Medicine on Tuesday, Vietnamese physicians reported that a 65-year-old man from Wuhan appeared to have transmitted the coronavirus to his son, 27, who was living in Long An Province, southwest of Ho Chi Minh City. The father developed a fever on Jan. 17, four days after flying to Hanoi, Vietnam, from Wuhan. The son met his father on Jan. 17, and by Jan. 20 he had a dry cough and fever. The father’s condition has improved, and the son is stable, the doctors wrote. None of their 28 identified close contacts, including the father’s wife, have developed symptoms of respiratory infection, they said. With demand for surgical masks on the rise in China, a drugstore in Beijing has been fined more than $400,000 by the government for charging customers roughly six times what the masks are being sold for online. State-run media said that the store was charging customers 850 yuan, or $122, for the masks, while they were being sold online for 143 yuan. Infectious disease specialists say the disposable masks, which cover the nose and mouth, can help prevent the spread of infections if they are worn properly and used consistently. The masks have become ubiquitous in cities across China. In Hong Kong, where the outbreak has brought back painful memories of the SARS epidemic in 2002-03, officials said that customs authorities were examining surgical masks being sold in the city for counterfeit labeling and not meeting safety standards. In announcing the fine against the Beijing drugstore, a government notice warned that the authorities would “continue to step up enforcement and make every effort to curb the excessive and rapid rise in protective enforcement prices.”  Surgical masks have become so much in demand that a website advertising more fashionable versions of them warns that deliveries are at risk of being delayed.          
LOS ANGELES — About 200 Americans evacuated from Wuhan, China, landed at a military base in Southern California on Wednesday, as countries around the world began pulling their citizens from the epicenter of the coronavirus outbreak. “The whole plane erupted in cheers when the crew said, ‘Welcome home to the United States,’” said Dr. Anne Zink, the chief medical officer for Alaska, where the plane stopped en route to California. But “home” was not immediately in the cards for the evacuees. Upon landing at the March Air Reserve Base in Riverside, the passengers were met on the tarmac by personnel in biohazard suits, loaded onto waiting buses and instructed to remain on the base for three days of medical screening. Only when they are cleared will they be allowed to continue on home. The authorities, however, were at pains to to say it was not a quarantine. “We are respecting the rights of them as individuals,” said Dr. Nancy Knight, a senior official with the federal Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. “We are doing that in a way that protects their health, the health of uniformed service members and the health of the community.” The passengers, mostly American consular officials and their families, returned to the United States as the coronavirus continued to spread around the globe, with the number of cases spiking dramatically and two major airlines canceling all flights to and from China. By early Thursday, there were confirmed reports of infection in at least 16 countries, with more than 7,700 cases in China alone — topping the SARS outbreak there in 2002 and 2003. The official death toll there stood at 170, but the real number is believed to be much higher. On Thursday, the World Health Organization will again take up the question of whether to declare a global health emergency. As governments around the world struggle to detect and prevent infection, it was clear on Wednesday that there was no international consensus on the best way to proceed. However carefully the health authorities chose their words, the evacuees in the United States, for example, appeared to be, for all practical purposes, quarantined. They will also be monitored for 14 days by medical teams in their own communities when they go home. In Australia, Prime Minister Scott Morrison said citizens evacuated from Wuhan would be held for a two-week quarantine on Christmas Island, also the site of an Australian immigration detention center. And South Korea’s National Police Agency said that it had instructed its officers that they have the power to detain people who are suspected of carrying the coronavirus and refuse to be quarantined. But other countries were taking a less strict approach. Japan, for example, also evacuated citizens from China, but acquiesced when two evacuees who did not have symptoms declined to see a doctor. A third evacuee who did show symptoms was allowed to wait for test results at home. As it spreads globally, the new coronavirus, which was first discovered in China last month, has begun to infect people who never visited China. Some have fallen ill in Germany, Japan, Taiwan and Vietnam. “We’ve seen it spread between people in Wuhan, in other parts of China, and now these countries,” said Benjamin Cowling, a professor of epidemiology at the University of Hong Kong. “What we don’t know is how quickly it spreads,” Dr. Cowling said. “We’ve seen small clusters, but we don’t know if those turn into chains of transmission that grow from two to four to eight to 16 — or if it can be controlled and won’t be further transmitted.” As countries evacuated their citizens from Wuhan — among them France, South Korea, Morocco, Germany, Kazakhstan, Britain, Canada, Russia, the Netherlands and Myanmar — commercial airlines curtailed service to China. British Airways and Air Canada suspended flights altogether. The Americans who were repatriated on Wednesday landed at the air base shortly after 8 a.m. after the State Department-chartered flight stopped in Anchorage to refuel and for the passengers to be screened — twice — for the virus. At a news conference later in Riverside, Christopher R. Braden, a deputy director of the disease control centers, said the Americans would be “fully evaluated.” “We think we can do the full evaluation in three days,” Dr. Braden said. “Some of that evaluation is taking tests and flying samples to the C.D.C. in Atlanta.” The agency has the country’s only laboratory that can test for the coronavirus. At a raucous, packed news conference, Dr. Braden and Dr. Knight were peppered with questions about the wisdom of releasing the former Wuhan residents into communities across the country. Dr. Braden said that if an evacuee deemed a danger to the community insisted on leaving before the 72-hour period expired, “we can institute an individual quarantine for that person — and we will.” But he also said there was no indication that anyone wanted to leave right away. Some Americans remained stranded in Wuhan, unable to secure a seat on the plane. Family members were incensed to learn that the Boeing 747 had taken off with empty seats. Some passengers lacked the proper documentation, and others did not show up, Dr. Braden said. In the end, around 200 passengers were evacuated, not the expected 240, he said. “I don’t even know what to say to those numbers,” said Jiacheng Yu of Dallas, whose mother, Ying Cheng, a 61-year-old American citizen, was visiting her own mother in Wuhan for the Lunar New Year and could not get a seat. When asked whether other flights were planned, a State Department official said its embassy in Beijing “continues to work with the Chinese authorities on other options for U.S. citizens in Wuhan to depart Wuhan and/or China.” At least one American chose not to try to board Wednesday’s flight. Winifred Conrad, a 27-year-old English teacher, had a lingering cough and was afraid she would instead be handed over to Chinese officials, said her mother, Anastasia Coles of Lubbock, Texas. But there was another reason: Ms. Conrad’s cat, Lulu. In text message to her mother, she said: “Don’t freak out. I was offered a seat and I surrendered it to a 10-year-old girl.” She added, “I was told I can’t bring an animal.” The number of confirmed cases in China increased by nearly 30 percent from Wednesday to Thursday, according to the country’s National Health Commission. The Chinese health authorities said Thursday that 170 people had died from the virus in the country. The previous count, on Wednesday, was 132. Wang Xiaodong, the governor of Hubei, the home of province of Wuhan, said Wednesday evening that the fight against the virus was at a crucial point, and that medical supplies were severely insufficient. As cases emerged outside China, some appeared to involve infections between family members, who are at greater risk while caring for sick relatives. Others, however, appear to have spread between people with less intimate connections. A Japanese tour bus driver in his 60s who had driven two tour groups visiting Japan from Wuhan was confirmed to have the virus, officials said on Tuesday. He had no history of traveling to Wuhan. “I think what that says is, if we can get transmission in such a setting, then we can certainly get it in the waiting room of a clinic or a hospital,” said Dr. Arthur Reingold, a professor of epidemiology at the University of California, Berkeley. “That’s very concerning.” On Tuesday, German officials said a 33-year-old man from Starnberg, a town near Munich, was apparently infected with the virus after attending a training event with a Chinese colleague on Jan. 21. The colleague flew home two days later. The German man was being treated in isolation and officials were tracing people who had been in contact with him. Late Tuesday, health officials in Germany said three more people from the same company had also been infected. They were admitted to a clinic in Munich, where they, too, were to be isolated. Forty other people who came into close contact with the company employees were to be tested on Wednesday, officials said. The outbreak and the travel restrictions it has led to have already had a big impact on businesses, some of which are temporarily halting operations in parts of China. Starbucks, for example, said it was temporarily closing half of its stores in the country. Closing were also announced by McDonald’s and Yum China, which operates the KFC, Pizza Hut and Taco Bell brands in China. And Apple said the outbreak could disrupt suppliers and its revenues.  
Read the latest developments in the coronavirus outbreak here.  The State Department on Thursday night issued a travel advisory telling Americans not to travel to China because of the public health threat posed by the coronavirus. Secretary of State Mike Pompeo confirmed the travel advisory on Twitter. The department set the new advisory at Level 4, or Red, its highest caution, which is reserved for the most dangerous situations. The World Health Organization declared on Thursday that the new coronavirus outbreak was a global health emergency, acknowledging that the disease represents a risk outside of China, where it emerged last month. The declaration — officially called a Public Health Emergency of International Concern — serves notice to all United Nations member states that the world’s top health advisory body rates the situation as serious.  Countries can then decide whether to close their borders, cancel flights, screen people arriving at airports or take other measures. The decision came as cases have begun to appear in people who had not traveled to China during the outbreak.  Prime Minister Giuseppe Conte announced in a Thursday night news conference that Italy had blocked all flights to and from China as the country confirmed its first cases of the coronavirus. The government announced the country’s first two confirmed cases during the news conference. Officials said they would investigate the movements of the two people, Chinese tourists, and try to identify those they may have been in contact with. The news capped a tense day in Italy, after thousands of passengers had been blocked from leaving a cruise ship that docked at an Italian port for more than 12 hours over concerns that someone aboard might have had the virus. That episode was ultimately a false alarm. A Chinese national with a fever later tested negative for the coronavirus and the Italian authorities said that passengers were allowed to disembark.      The American Airlines pilots’ union said on Thursday that it was suing the airline in an attempt to halt all service between the United States and China, citing “a threat to the safety of passengers and flight crew.” In a statement, the union, the Allied Pilots Association, said it was instructing its members to turn down requests to fly to China.  The airline had previously announced that, because of declining demand, it would suspend flights from Los Angeles to Beijing and Shanghai starting on Feb. 9. Service from Dallas to those cities is expected to continue. In another development, United Airlines on Thursday announced a new wave of cancellations affecting hundreds of flights through the end of March. The cutback, a response to declining demand, will reduce the number of daily flights from 12 to four from its United States hubs to Beijing, Hong Kong and Shanghai. In all, the reduction includes 332 round trip cancellations between Feb. 9 and March 28.  Health officials on Thursday reported the first case of person-to-person transmission of the new coronavirus in the United States.  The patient is the husband of a woman who was the first reported case in Chicago, officials said at a news briefing. The woman, who is in her 60s, had returned from Wuhan, China, the epicenter of the virus. She was hospitalized but appears to be doing well, said Dr. Jennifer Layden, an epidemiologist at the Illinois Department of Public Health.  Her husband, who had not traveled to China, recently began showing symptoms and was immediately isolated in the hospital. Lab tests have now confirmed that he was infected with the coronavirus, Dr. Layden said. Health officials are tracking the places visited by both patients and identifying all close contacts to monitor them. The public is at low risk, officials said.  Person-to-person transmission may occur if someone who is sick breathes, talks, coughs or sneezes in the vicinity of others. Respiratory droplets carrying the virus may then travel from the sick person to other people or surfaces. Based on the transmission patterns seen in China and other countries, experts have expected to see some person-to-person spread in the United States, said Dr. Robert Redfield, director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. “We understand that this may be concerning,” Dr. Redfield said. “But our assessment remains that the immediate risk to the American public is low.” The disease is not spreading widely in the U.S. and people who have not had close contact with someone who recently traveled to China are unlikely to get infected. ◆ Forty-three more deaths in China were announced early Friday, bringing the toll to 213.  ◆ Nearly 2,000 new cases were recorded in China in the past 24 hours, raising the worldwide total to nearly 9,800, according to Chinese and World Health Organization data. The vast majority of the cases are inside China; 98 cases have been confirmed in 18 other countries.  ◆ Tibet has reported its first confirmed case. This means that all of China’s provinces and territories have now been touched by the outbreak. ◆ Thailand has reported 14 cases of infection; Japan has 11; Hong Kong and Singapore have 10; Taiwan has eight; Australia, Malaysia and Macau each have seven; France and the United States have six; South Korea, Germany and the United Arab Emirates each have 4; Canada has three; Vietnam and Italy each have two; and India, the Philippines, Nepal, Cambodia, Sri Lanka and Finland each have one. ◆ Confirming India’s first case, the government said the patient, in the southern state of Kerala, was a student at Wuhan University. It said arriving passengers with a history of travel to China were being screened at 20 airports, up from seven earlier in the week. ◆ Cases recorded in Taiwan, Germany, Vietnam, Japan and France involved patients who had not been to China. There have been no reported deaths outside China. The rapid spread of the coronavirus has unleashed a wave of panic and, in some cases, outright anti-Chinese sentiment across the globe. In Japan, the hashtag #ChineseDon’tComeToJapan has been trending on Twitter. In Singapore, tens of thousands of residents have signed a petition calling for the government to ban Chinese nationals from entering the country. In Hong Kong, South Korea and Vietnam, businesses have posted signs saying that mainland Chinese customers are not welcome. And in France, a front-page headline in a regional newspaper warned of a “Yellow Alert.” At a time when China’s rise as a global economic and military power has unsettled its neighbors in Asia as well as its rivals in the West, the coronavirus is feeding into latent bigotry against the people of mainland China. “Some of the xenophobia is likely undergirded by broader political and economic tensions and anxieties related to China, which are interacting with more recent fears of contagion,” said Kristi Govella, an assistant professor of Asian studies at the University of Hawaii, Manoa. With China’s emergence as a major cultural market in recent years, the effects of the coronavirus outbreak quickly rippled through the arts world. The Boston Symphony Orchestra announced Thursday morning that it was canceling a tour of Asia that had been scheduled to begin next week. The Hong Kong Philharmonic called off a pair of Beethoven concerts this weekend under the baton of its music director, Jaap van Zweden, who holds the same post at the New York Philharmonic, after its venue was closed. Film shoots were shut down; movie premieres postponed; a dozen concerts by the Cantopop star Andy Lau were canceled; and some prominent galleries were calling for Art Basel Hong Kong, the prestigious international art fair scheduled for March, to be canceled. The Boston Symphony called off its tour, which was to have featured the pianist Yefim Bronfman, after learning that one of the halls it planned to play at, the Shanghai Oriental Art Center, had canceled its performances, and amid rising concerns about the spread of the virus. Tours are hugely expensive undertakings for large symphony orchestras, and the Boston Symphony, which does not carry insurance for tour concert interruptions, will now begin discussions about costs with various vendors — including for its flights, cargo, and hotels — as well as with the concert presenters. The National Symphony Orchestra, of Washington, is scheduled to perform in Beijing and Shanghai with its music director, Gianandrea Noseda, after several dates in Japan. Gary Ginstling, the orchestra’s executive director, said that the orchestra had been conferring with government officials, presenters and medical experts as it monitors the situation.  Commerce Secretary Wilbur Ross said on Thursday that China’s loss might be America’s gain, because the coronavirus outbreak could prompt employers to move jobs to the United States. “I don’t want to talk about a victory lap over a very unfortunate, very malignant disease,” Mr. Ross said in an interview on Fox Business. “I think it will help to accelerate the return of jobs to North America. Some to the U.S., probably some to Mexico as well.” Mr. Ross cited previous disease outbreaks in China, suggesting that a prevalence of diseases there would become a factor in businesses leaving the country and relocating to North America. “You had SARS, you have the African swine virus there, now you have this,” Mr. Ross said. His remarks may be seen as insensitive to a country in crisis, and he has faced such criticism in the past. During the government shutdown in early 2019, Mr. Ross suggested that furloughed workers should take out loans while they went without pay for more than a month.  Russia prepared for a partial closure of its 2,600-mile border with China as fears about the coronavirus outbreak mounted in Moscow. Prime Minister Mikhail Mishustin on Thursday ordered 16 of the approximately 25 crossing points that Russia operates on the Chinese border to be closed as of midnight local time. He said the closures would be part of a new raft of measures to stop the infection from spreading to the country from Russia’s southeastern neighbor. Russia’s Foreign Ministry urged Russians to postpone all travel to China and suspended the issuance of electronic visas for Chinese citizens. Russian officials say that no cases of coronavirus infection have been confirmed in Russia. “We have to do everything to protect our people,” Mr. Mishustin said in televised remarks at a cabinet meeting. “We will inform everyone about the relevant actions being taken to close the border in the Far Eastern region and other measures being taken by the government.” Anger and frustration have escalated in Wuhan, the center of the outbreak, as the city’s overwhelmed hospitals pleaded for urgent help to replenish diminishing supplies. A relative of a coronavirus patient assaulted a doctor at a hospital in Wuhan, pulling and damaging the doctor’s mask and protective clothing, the state broadcaster CCTV reported on Thursday, citing the local police. The Beijing Youth Daily, a state-owned newspaper, reported that two doctors had been attacked at the hospital, including one who was threatened and had his protective gown torn off. In the face of rising public anger, the central government has sought to present itself as intervening to hold accountable local officials in areas that have been hit hard by the epidemic. CCTV aired footage on Thursday showing a central government inspection team grilling officials in Huanggang, a city about 50 miles from Wuhan, about the number of beds they had set aside for coronavirus patients. As the two local health officials fumbled their responses to seemingly basic questions, the visiting inspectors’ questions took on a more impatient tone. Unusual in its blunt portrayal of inadequate government response, the report was quickly shared on Chinese social media sites with the hashtag “one question, three don’t knows.” Officials say medical supplies are running dangerously low in central China, despite gear being delivered in bulk from around the world. The Huazhong University of Science and Technology in Wuhan wrote on Weibo, a social media platform, that the city had received 240,000 masks, 25,000 protective gowns and 4,000 pairs of medical goggles from its alumni group in Germany. The Chinese community in Singapore sent 75,000 medical masks. Photographs posted online showed hospital workers, many still in protective gear, slumped over their desks and on the floors in exhaustion. From Chris Buckley, our chief China correspondent, on the ground in Wuhan: Since the central Chinese city of Wuhan went under official lockdown last week, most shops have shut, few cars venture onto the roads and fear has kept most people in their homes. When Wuhan residents do step outside, it’s mostly to the supermarkets, food stores and pharmacies that have stayed open as part of a government effort to sustain the city. Senior officials have promised that residents need not worry about supplies of vegetables, fruit or other staples, even as large swaths of the province, Hubei, are also locked down to curtail the outbreak. Yet Wuhan residents complained about price hikes, and expressed fear that a prolonged shutdown might choke off food supplies. Poorer people, both in urban Wuhan and in the countryside, would suffer more acutely from tightening supplies. “If we can’t bring in produce, it will become more expensive, or we might even have to close up,” said Zuo Qichao, who was selling piles of cucumbers, turnips and tomatoes. As he spoke, a woman accused him of unfairly raising the turnips’ price. “Every county, every village around here is now putting up barriers, worried about that disease,” Mr. Zuo said. “Even if the government says it wants food guaranteed, it won’t be easy — all those road checks.”  In Taiwan, anger has been growing over China’s refusal this week to let Taiwan evacuate about 300 of its people from Wuhan, even as it has given the United States, Japan and other countries permission to do so. China’s ruling Communist Party considers Taiwan, a democratically governed island, to be part of China, and the two sides have no formal ties. Referring to the rebuffed evacuation request on Tuesday, Ma Xiaoguang, a spokesman for China’s Taiwan Affairs Office, said in a statement that Taiwanese people in Hubei Province, which includes Wuhan, were receiving “appropriate care.” Kolas Yotaka, a spokeswoman for Taiwan’s government, said China was prioritizing politics over lives. Many of the Taiwanese seeking evacuation from Wuhan were tourists or on business trips, while others were residents of the city who suffered from chronic diseases, Ms. Kolas said. “We call on the Chinese government to demonstrate basic humanity and agree to our request as soon as possible,” she said. As part of its campaign to isolate Taiwan diplomatically, China has blocked it from participating in international bodies like the World Health Organization — a fact that has also angered Taiwanese people this week, as they try to prepare along with the rest of the world for the possibility of a worsening epidemic.   Fears that a fast-moving virus in China could impact the global economy drove investors in Asia to dump stocks on Thursday. Money fled riskier assets like stocks and oil and flowed instead into investments that are considered safe havens, like gold, as growing numbers of policymakers, economists and corporate executives sounded alarms. Major benchmarks across the region fell by more than 1 percent. China’s markets remain closed for an extended holiday until Feb. 3. Brent crude oil, the international benchmark, hit its lowest price this year before paring some of its losses. It was trading at about $59 a barrel.  European markets finished higher, and the S&P 500 closed up 0.3 percent.    A growing number of companies have warned they will have to close or shift operations and could take a financial hit from widespread business disruptions in China.      
In Japan, the hashtag #ChineseDon’tComeToJapan has been trending on Twitter. In Singapore, tens of thousands of residents have signed a petition calling for the government to ban Chinese nationals from entering the country. In Hong Kong, South Korea and Vietnam, businesses have posted signs saying that mainland Chinese customers are not welcome. In France, a front-page headline in a regional newspaper warned of a “Yellow Alert.” And in a suburb of Toronto, parents demanded that a school district keep children of a family that had recently returned from China out of classes for 17 days. The rapid spread of the coronavirus that has sickened about 9,800 people — the overwhelming majority in China, with all of the 213 deaths there — has unleashed a wave of panic and, in some cases, outright anti-Chinese sentiment across the globe. While officials scramble to contain the crisis — the World Health Organization declared a global health emergency and the State Department issued a “do not travel” to China advisory — fears over the dangerous outbreak have fueled xenophobia. And the wave of spreading panic has, at times, far outstripped practical concerns. At a time when China’s rise as a global economic and military power has unsettled its neighbors in Asia as well as its rivals in the West, the coronavirus is feeding into latent bigotry against the people of mainland China. “Some of the xenophobia is likely undergirded by broader political and economic tensions and anxieties related to China, which are interacting with more recent fears of contagion,” said Kristi Govella, an assistant professor of Asian studies at the University of Hawaii, Manoa. [Read: Coronavirus is forcing foreign students in China to choose: stay or go.] Some of the response to the outbreak can be seen as a rational calculation based on the risk of infection: Airlines are canceling flights to Wuhan, the center of the epidemic, and other Chinese cities, and conference organizers are asking Chinese delegations not to attend.  Late Thursday, Italy’s prime minister said that his country had blocked all flights to and from China. And countries like Malaysia, the Philippines, Russia and Vietnam have temporarily stopped issuing certain classes of visas to travelers from Hubei Province, where Wuhan is situated, or China altogether. “I think it is time to put a temporary ‘do not enter’ sign on our doorstep for visitors from China,” said Ralph Recto, a lawmaker in the Philippines. Bangkok residents are avoiding malls that are particularly popular with Chinese tourists. A plastic surgery office in the wealthy Gangnam neighborhood of Seoul has instructed employees that they can see Chinese customers only if they can prove that they have been in South Korea for 14 days or more, the potential period that the virus can lie dormant. At a sushi restaurant in the neighborhood that once housed the Tsukiji fish market in Tokyo, where about 90 percent of the customers are Chinese, Yaeko Suenaga, 70, a server, said she understood why some stores might want to reject visitors from China. “I don’t think this fear comes from discrimination,” Ms. Suenaga said, “but from the true fear that humans have of getting infected with a virus that may lead to death.” Ms. Suenaga said that her restaurant would continue to welcome all customers, but that workers would wear masks. It is not always easy to discern the boundary between understandable fear and unmistakable discrimination. But some protective measures have effectively amounted to racial or ethnic profiling. At Bread Box, a banh mi restaurant in central Hoi An, a popular tourist outpost in Vietnam, the owners posted a makeshift sign outside their storefront this month reading, “We can’t service for Chinese, SORRY!” Up the coast, the Danang Riverside Hotel announced on Saturday that it would not accept any Chinese guests because of the virus. Kwong Wing Catering, a small restaurant chain in Hong Kong, announced in a Facebook post on Wednesday that it would serve only patrons speaking English or Cantonese, the city’s native language — a tongue distinct from the Mandarin spoken on the mainland. The business has been a vocal supporter of the Hong Kong democracy movement that has risen up in defiance of Beijing. Public health experts said they understood some of the impulses. “In a sense, it’s a natural reaction to try to distance yourself from a potential cause of illness, particularly when there’s no known cure,” said Karen Eggleston, director of the Asia health policy program at the Shorenstein Asia-Pacific Research Center at Stanford University. But examples in both mass and social media have clearly crossed a line. In Australia, The Herald Sun, a Murdoch-owned newspaper, published the words “China Virus Panda-monium” over an image of a red mask. More than 46,000 people from the resident Chinese community in Australia signed a petition that called the headline “unacceptable race discrimination.” Le Courrier Picard, a regional newspaper in northern France, caused outrage with its “Yellow Alert” headline this month. The newspaper later apologized. On Twitter in Japan, where there has long been unease about the conduct of Chinese tourists, commenters have labeled them “dirty” and “insensitive” and have called them “bioterrorists.” Disinformation is also running high. A much-viewed YouTube video in South Korea claims that a biochemical weapons facility in China leaked the coronavirus, a theory that has gained currency in other corners of the globe. In Australia, a fake post circulating on Instagram warned that shops in Sydney containing items like fortune cookies, rice and “Chinese Red Bull” were contaminated. The episodes of racism have swept up other people of Asian descent. In France, one Vietnamese woman told the newspaper Le Monde that she had been insulted by a car driver who shouted “Keep your virus, dirty Chinese!” and “You are not welcome in France” as he sped away through a puddle, splashing her. In Australia, Andy Miao, 24, an ethnic Chinese Australian who returned this month from a trip to China, said that passengers on public transport gave him odd looks if he was not wearing a face mask. “It makes people like me who are very, very Australian feel like outsiders,” Mr. Miao said. “It’s definitely invoking a lot of past racial stereotypes.” The Chinese — and Asians in general — were subjected to similar xenophobic reactions during the SARS epidemic of 2003. But now far more Chinese are traveling abroad: According to the Ministry of Culture and Tourism, Chinese travelers made about 150 million overseas trips in 2018, up more than 14 percent from the previous year. China’s lockdown of tens of millions of people, intended to curb the spread of the virus, may be spurring other governments to overreact, said Koichi Nakano, a political scientist at Sophia University in Tokyo. “The fact that the Chinese government itself is treating people like that would in some ways enable or encourage some of the other people or governments to take equally draconian measures,” Mr. Nakano said. Some governments are trying to ease the panic. In Toronto, politicians, a school board and some community groups have issued public appeals to avoid a repetition of the racism that swept the city in 2003, when SARS killed 44 people there. “While the virus can be traced to a province in China, we have to be cautious that this not be seen as a Chinese virus,” the school board in the York Region, a suburb with many Asian residents, said in a statement issued on Monday. “At times such as this, we must come together as Canadians and avoid any hint of xenophobia, which in this case can victimize our East Asian Chinese community.” Although Indonesia has suspended flights from Wuhan, the governor of West Sumatra, Irwan Prayitno, ignored a plea from a citizens group to reject all Chinese tourists. On Sunday, he went to the airport to welcome 174 Chinese visitors from the southwestern city of Kunming. In the Ginza shopping district of Tokyo, which is often thronged with Chinese tourists, Michiko Kubota, who runs a clothing boutique, said she hoped the Japanese government might do more to help China, such as by sending masks or other medical supplies. “Japan and China may be critical of each other sometimes, but the kindness is mutual,” Ms. Kubota said. “I hope we could do more to help eradicate fear in China as well.” 
[This briefing has ended. Read about the latest developments in the coronavirus outbreak here.] The Trump administration is imposing temporary travel restrictions that bar entry into the United States by any foreign national who has traveled to China in the past 14 days, officials said Friday. The restrictions, a reaction to the coronavirus that has been declared a public health emergency by the World Health Organization, will be put into place at 5 p.m. on Sunday. The United States on Friday also declared the coronavirus, which has sickened nearly 12,000 people and has spread to the United States and other countries, a public health emergency. Friday’s action exempts immediate family members of American citizens and permanent residents. In addition, officials said, any United States citizen returning home who has been in the Hubei province of China within the past 14 days will be quarantined for up to 14 days. Wuhan, the epicenter of the outbreak, is in Hubei. Those who have been to other parts of China within the past 14 days will be subject to “proactive entry screening” and up to 14 days of monitoring and self quarantine. The United States will also funnel all flights from China to just a few airports, including Kennedy Airport, Chicago’s O’Hare and San Francisco International Airport. The travel restrictions were announced Friday by Alex Azar, the secretary of health and human services, who declared that the coronavirus posed “a public health emergency in the United States.” Dr. Anthony S. Fauci, the director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, said the actions were being taken because there were “a lot of unknowns” surrounding the virus and its transmission path. “The number of cases have steeply inclined with every day,” Dr. Fauci said. The broadening outbreak has roiled stock markets and raised alarms about possible harm to global economic growth. The S&P 500 suffered its sharpest decline of the year on Friday after major airlines in the United States said they would cancel flights to and from mainland China. It was the worst daily decline since October, and pushed the markets into negative territory for the year. The cancellations by Delta Air Lines, American Airlines and United Airlines were the latest example of economic disruption wrought by the coronavirus, just as the global economy had begun to recover from the trade war tensions that dominated 2019. Companies have restricted travel to the region, shut stores in China and warned of the possible financial impact. Economists seem certain that the travel shutdowns, factory closures and quarantines in mainland China will dampen economic activity there, but have said it is too soon to know the impact elsewhere. “It is a wild card — I think even the experts would confirm that it’s too soon to tell,” said Richard Clarida, the vice chair of the Federal Reserve, during an interview on Friday on Bloomberg Television. The Fed is “monitoring closely,” he said. Concerns about global growth sent oil prices down below $52 a barrel. That pushed shares of energy companies down: Exxon Mobil and Chevron dropped by roughly 4 percent. Tech stocks also suffered, with particular weakness in the semiconductor sector, which is closely linked to supply chains based in and around China. Economists have only begun to sketch out estimates on the potential effects of the outbreak. Many have taken comfort from the economic record of the SARS outbreak in China in 2002 and 2003, which suggests that any downturn might be limited in scope. SARS coincided with a relatively brief slowdown of global growth in early 2003, that was followed by a sharp rebound. SARS, however, is an imperfect comparison. Some economists have suggested the ripple effects could be larger this time. At the time of the SARS outbreak, China represented just 5 percent of the global economy. In 2019, that number was 18 percent, according to JPMorgan economists. Delta Air Lines, United Airlines and American Airlines all said on Friday that they were suspending all service to mainland China as concerns about the coronavirus spread internationally. American said it was suspending all flights to and from mainland China immediately through March 27. American and United will continue flights to Hong Kong. Delta and United said they would suspend service starting on Feb. 6. United said it expected to resume operations on March 28. Delta, which does not fly to Hong Kong, said it would suspend service through April 30. Delta said in a statement that its last flight to mainland China from the United States would depart on Monday, and that its last flight to the United States from mainland China would leave on Wednesday. Delta was the first American airline to completely suspend service to China because of the virus. United Airlines had already reduced its service to the country this week. Share prices in all three airlines had fallen by midday. Airlines outside the United States are also clamping down on travel. In Rwanda and Kenya, RwandAir and Kenya Airways said they would cancel all flights to and from Guangzhou, the southern Chinese metropolis, until further notice. There have been no confirmed cases in Africa. Poland’s national airline, LOT Polish Airlines, has suspended flights to China until Feb. 9, a deputy prime minister said on Twitter. More than a dozen people suspected of having the coronavirus are hospitalized in Poland, and over 500 people are being monitored by health services. Iran has suspended all flights to China because of the coronavirus outbreak, according to Reuters. Iran’s semiofficial Tasnim news agency reported on Friday that all flights from China to the Islamic Republic have also been banned. Several Canadian companies have suspended employee travel to China after Air Canada’s decision on Wednesday to suspend service to Shanghai and Beijing. The Montreal-based carrier normally operates 33 flights a week to and from the two Chinese cities. The United States government has imposed a federal quarantine on 195 people who were evacuated on Wednesday from Wuhan, China, to a California military base, officials said on Friday. The group will be held at March Air Reserve Base in Riverside, Calif., for 14 days, to ensure that they are not infected with the coronavirus that has sickened more than 9,800 people in China and killed more than 200 people. Chinese officials on Saturday reported the highest death toll so far in a 24-hour period. ◆ The 46 new deaths in China raised the toll to 259. ◆ About 2,100 new cases were also recorded in the country in the past 24 hours, raising the worldwide total to nearly 12,000, according to Chinese and World Health Organization data. The vast majority of the cases are inside China; about 100 cases have been confirmed in 21 other countries. ◆ All of China’s provinces and territories have now been touched by the outbreak. ◆ Countries and territories that have confirmed cases: Thailand, Japan, Hong Kong, Singapore, Taiwan, Australia, Malaysia, Macau, Russia, France, the United States, South Korea, Germany, the United Arab Emirates, Canada, Britain, Vietnam, Italy, India, the Philippines, Nepal, Cambodia, Sri Lanka and Finland. ◆ Cases recorded in Thailand, Taiwan, Germany, Vietnam, Japan, France and the United States involved patients who had not been to China. ◆ No deaths have been reported outside China. A call has been issued for classes to be canceled at Arizona State University. Basketball games were postponed at Miami University in Ohio. And at the University of Wisconsin-Platteville, two students from Wuhan were moved to a special dorm. On college campuses across the United States, the global alarm over coronavirus is particularly intense. Hundreds of students are being screened for the virus. Suspected cases at many colleges — Baylor, Wesleyan and Tennessee Tech — have turned out to be false alarms, but the anxiety continues. At A.S.U., where there is one confirmed case of coronavirus, a cough in the back of a classroom now brings nervous glances. Students who had planned to study abroad this semester are furiously adjusting schedules. Carolyn Kleve, 20, a junior at Arizona State who is 13 weeks pregnant, is afraid. “We’re trapped in a room of 20 to 30 people and I don’t know who has what illness,” Ms. Kleve said of her classes. “Have I already come into contact with it? Who knows?” A high-ranking Chinese official said on Friday that he felt responsible for the spread of the coronavirus, offering his most direct expression of responsibility for the crisis. Many residents and experts have said that the reluctance by the government in Wuhan to warn the public about the spreading disease created dangerous complacency. “Above all, I feel guilty and remorseful and I reproach myself,” said Ma Guoqiang, the Communist Party secretary of Wuhan. “I’ve been constantly thinking that if I’d made the decision earlier to take the kind of strict controls we have in place now, the outcome would have been much better than now.” Mr. Ma was asked about his feelings in an interview on China’s main television network, CCTV. Wuhan’s mayor, Zhou Xianwang, who is less powerful than Mr. Ma, said the government’s own laws hindered faster public disclosure. The State Department on Thursday night issued a travel advisory telling Americans not to travel to China because of the public health threat posed by the dangerous new coronavirus. The department set the new advisory at Level 4, or red — its highest alert, reserved for the most perilous situations. “Travelers should be prepared for travel restrictions to be put into effect with little or no advance notice,” the State Department said. “Commercial carriers have reduced or suspended routes to and from China.” A spokeswoman for the Chinese foreign ministry, Hua Chunying, called the advisory an unfriendly act at a difficult time for China. “True feeling shines through in hardship,” Ms. Hua said on Friday. “Many countries have shown their support and help for China’s fight against the epidemic. By contrast, the United States’ words and deeds are not in keeping with the facts and less are they in keeping with friendship.” The World Health Organization on Thursday declared the outbreak a global emergency after cases were discovered in more than a dozen countries. Singapore on Friday announced a sweeping ban on Chinese visitors and other foreigners who had been to China in the past 14 days, in an escalation of travel restrictions by the Southeast Asian transportation hub. The city-state will also stop issuing all forms of visas to people holding Chinese passports, Lawrence Wong, the minister for national development, said on Friday. Singapore has 13 confirmed cases of the coronavirus. The outbreak and the entry shutdown will be another blow to its economy, which was already hit by the fallout from the United States-China trade war. Regional neighbors and airlines from countries that have not had any confirmed cases are also taking extra precautions to cope with the rapidly spreading epidemic. The government of Mongolia said on Friday that it would close its border with China until March 2. The authorities said they would work to bring home 30 Mongolian nationals from Wuhan, and its citizens in China would have until Feb. 6 to return. Non-Chinese foreigners visiting Mongolia will also not be able to enter through China. Russia, which shares a 2,600-mile border with China, has also been racing to prevent the spread of the disease. The country reported its first two coronavirus cases on Friday, both in Siberia and among Chinese nationals who had recently traveled to China. Russia closed the border to pedestrians and cars on Thursday, and Deputy Prime Minister Tatyana A. Golikova said that Russia’s border with Mongolia would be closed to Chinese citizens. Russia will also temporarily stop issuing work visas to Chinese citizens, she added. On Friday, Britain’s chief medical officer, Chris Whitty, said two residents had tested positive for coronavirus, the first known cases in the country. In a statement, Mr. Whitty said the patients were members of the same family. The announcement came as a flight carrying 83 British and 27 foreign nationals from Wuhan landed in Britain on Friday afternoon. The Britons were to be quarantined at Arrowe Park Hospital in Wirral, in northwest England, according to the BBC. The others will be flown on to Spain. The Italian government declared a six-month state of emergency on Friday after the first two cases of coronavirus were confirmed in Rome, according to a government official. In a statement, the government said that it had allocated the “necessary funds” to begin precautionary measures. A government official said on Friday that five million euros, about $5.5 million, had been set aside for the effort. Two Chinese nationals, a husband and wife, were being held in isolation at Rome’s Spallanzani Hospital, which specializes in infectious diseases, after they tested positive for the virus. The couple arrived in Milan a week ago and traveled to Parma and other cities before getting to Rome, where the husband began showing flu symptoms, the official said. A group of Chinese tourists who had been traveling with the couple were also being held in isolation at the hospital, Italian officials said Friday. At present, none of the other Chinese visitors showed any symptoms, said the Lazio region’s councilor for health, Alessio D’Amato, at a news conference on Friday.Three people who had come in contact with the infected couple were also being monitored at home, he also said. On Thursday, thousands of passengers had been blocked from leaving a cruise ship that docked at an Italian port for more than 12 hours over concerns that someone aboard might have had the virus. That episode was ultimately found to be a false alarm. In Germany, the Bavarian state Health Ministry confirmed a sixth case of the virus on Friday — the first child to be infected in the country. The child is related to another coronavirus patient identified this week.  On Friday, a German passenger jet left for China to evacuate more than 100 German citizens from Wuhan and Hubei province, according to the German foreign ministry. Although none of the people on the passenger list appear to be infected, they will spend two weeks in quarantine once they arrive in Germany. As foreign governments evacuated their citizens from China this week, China said it was arranging chartered flights to bring Wuhan residents who were overseas back to the epicenter of the outbreak. Citing the “practical difficulties recently encountered” by residents abroad, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs said in a statement on Friday that evacuations would begin as soon as possible. Five million people from Wuhan left the city last week before travel restrictions were enforced. Unnerved by the exodus, some regional countries and territories have banned entry to people from Wuhan or Hubei province. Travel restrictions across China and the suspension of international flights to the country have left Chinese travelers stranded around the world. But it was unclear if the Chinese government was also targeting those who had intentionally fled the center of the outbreak. It was similarly unknown where the residents had traveled. Someone stole 25,000 face masks from a warehouse in Hong Kong on Friday as the city, still haunted by memories of SARS, is struggling with a severe shortage. The police said 500 boxes containing 50 masks each were reported missing from a building in an industrial neighborhood. The warehouse mostly supplied an e-commerce platform in the city, The Apple Daily newspaper reported. The theft came as residents in Hong Kong desperately searched for the item, often displayed at inflated prices, in pharmacies and retailers. In a dangerous practice, families that cannot afford new disposable masks have resorted to reusing them, according to local reports. 
HONG KONG — New walls are rising between China and the world as the country grapples with a fast-moving coronavirus and its mounting death toll. Vietnam on Saturday became the latest country to try to close itself off from the world’s most populous country, barring all flights from and to China. Over all, nearly 10,000 flights have been canceled since the outbreak. Australia joined the United States in temporarily denying entry to noncitizens who have recently traveled to the country. There are officially eight confirmed cases in the United States, including one person connected to the University of Massachusetts-Boston. Japan also said it would bar foreigners who had recently been in the Chinese province at the center of the outbreak, or whose passports were issued there. As the death toll increases and more countries cut off China, the economic and political crisis caused by the virus is only intensifying there, with authorities coming under scrutiny for their slow initial response. Major businesses have started to acknowledge the effect that the virus — and China’s near shutdown — is having on their bottom lines. Earlier, Apple had said it was rerouting part of its supply chain but would shut only one store. By Saturday, it said it would close all 42 of its stores in mainland China, its third-biggest market and where it generates about one-sixth of its sales. It was the latest move by some of the world’s biggest companies to shift supply chains and adjust operations in China. Chinese officials have been changing course after their initially slow response to the virus. A prominent government expert admitted that he had been wrong to say the virus was under control in early January. And the mayor of a town near Wuhan, the center of the outbreak, was fired for negligence after the disabled teenage son of a quarantined patient died. The cause of death was still under investigation. But the Chinese authorities also appeared to be taking tougher measures to stifle criticism, for example scrubbing the internet of an article critical of the government in The Global Times, a tabloid controlled by the governing Communist Party. As the number of deaths and new cases rapidly rose this past week — 304 deaths and more than 14,000 cases by Sunday — one by one, international organizations and foreign countries reacted. The State Department issued a travel alert urging Americans not to go to to China because of the public health threat. Delta, United and American Airlines suspended all flights between the United States and mainland China. By the time the World Health Organization declared the outbreak a global health emergency on Thursday, some of the world’s biggest companies had barred their employees from any travel to China, and countries began to close their borders. Even as some countries took drastic measures, their leaders also acknowledged the economic impact. “It’s going to hurt us,” warned Lee Hsien Loong, the prime minister of Singapore, after announcing that the small island state would bar all Chinese visitors and foreigners who had traveled to China within the past 14 days. (The incubation period for the disease is believed to be one to two weeks.) “China is a very big source of tourists for Singapore,” Mr. Lee told reporters after announcing the ban. Restaurants, travel operators and hotels in Singapore were all “bound to be significantly affected.” On Saturday, Australia joined the United States and a growing list of other countries and cities that have issued travel warnings in an attempt to stem the flow of people who could be carrying the virus. The American government said on Friday that it would temporarily deny entry to noncitizens who had recently traveled to China. The Australian government also urged Australian nationals to “reconsider their need to travel” to China. Prime Minister Scott Morrison said that “Australian citizens, Australian residents, dependents, legal guardians or spouses” would still be allowed to return. Qantas, Australia’s biggest airline, canceled its mainland flights, though it said it would still fly to Hong Kong. Taiwan said it would bar Chinese nationals from the southern coastal province of Guangdong from entry beginning Sunday and travelers who recently visited the area would be subject to a mandatory 14-day quarantine. Vietnam, China’s neighbor along its southern border, joined Singapore and Mongolia in essentially shutting off its borders to China, banning all flights coming from mainland China, Hong Kong and Macau until May 1, according to the Federal Aviation Administration. Only flights that have received approval from the country’s Civil Aviation Authority will be allowed following the ban, which took effect on Saturday. The Mongolian authorities also shut the border with China until March 2, while other countries and regions this past week stopped short of sealing off their borders entirely. Hong Kong halved the number of flights from China, shut down rail service to mainland China, and also limited visas to the semiautonomous region in a move that has prompted criticism from trade unions including hospital workers, some of whom have voted to strike. They want to shut the city off from the mainland. In a twist, Hun Sen, the leader of Cambodia, one of China’s close neighbors, emerged as a contrarian when he decided not to limit any travel and movement of Chinese tourists to his country. He was defiant in his decision, saying that doing so would “be an attack on the Cambodian economy” and would “strain relations” with China. “I don’t care what other countries think — Cambodia does not behave this way,” he said. Cambodia is home to many Chinese businessmen and China is the country’s largest benefactor. North Korea’s leader, Kim Jong-un, sent a letter to President Xi Jinping of China offering condolences — and aid — to help Beijing fight the coronavirus outbreak, the North’s state-run news agency reported on Saturday. But North Korea was one of the first countries to shut its borders to visitors from China to keep out the coronavirus. Amid the expanding crisis and growing criticism of Beijing’s strategy, a prominent respiratory expert who originally told Chinese state news media that the coronavirus was under control and preventable admitted that his choice of words had been inappropriate. The expert, Wang Guangfa, head of the department of pulmonary medicine at Peking University First Hospital in Beijing, compared himself and other medical professionals tackling the outbreak to soldiers walking onto a battlefield. “All the bullets are flying,” Dr. Wang said in an interview with Jiemian, a finance-focused news site founded by Shanghai United Media Group, which is controlled by the Shanghai government. The doctor has come to symbolize how slowly China recognized the urgency of the outbreak. Dr. Wang himself contracted the coronavirus, apparently during a visit to Wuhan. He initially said that the virus could not be spread by person-to-person contact. But 11 days later, he confirmed to state news outlets that he had the virus and that he might have contracted it during a trip to the center of the outbreak with a group of experts. In his interview, Dr. Wang said that he had misdiagnosed his symptoms as those of flu, and that he had waited days before checking himself into a hospital. He said he had since recovered and was discharged on Thursday. Asked why he had originally called the coronavirus “preventable and controllable,” Dr. Wang blamed limited information at the time of his Wuhan visit. A clearer picture of the virus’s transmissibility would have required “epidemiological data, which is difficult to judge,” he said. His interview has been widely shared on Weibo, China’s Twitter-like social media platform. Some of the most popular comments have come from angry users. Criticism about how long it took for the authorities to act has grown online. The initial reports of the virus began in early December, but it was not until late January that Chinese officials sprung into action, eventually locking down entire cities around the epicenter and halting public transport across the country during its busiest holiday travel period of the year. China’s sudden action drew praise from the World Health Organization and other bodies overseas, but at home, anguished and angry comments sneaked past censors. Yet not all criticism made it through the great firewall. On the Chinese internet, people complained that censors were working in overdrive as many articles and social media posts were deleted. One of the starkest examples of censorship that critics pointed to was an article written by Hu Xijin, the editor of The Global Times, the nationalist tabloid of the Communist Party. Mr. Hu wrote that the heads of the national health commission and the Chinese Center for Disease Control and Prevention should take responsibility for the delay in reporting the seriousness of the epidemic. A few hours after it was posted on Friday, his article was deleted from The Global Times’s website. 
[This briefing has ended. Read about the latest developments in the coronavirus outbreak here.] Stocks in China plunged in early Monday trading as investors returned from a long holiday to the prospect of the world’s No. 2 economy virtually shut down by the coronavirus epidemic. Stocks in Shanghai opened 8.7 percent lower, while shares in the southern Chinese boomtown of Shenzhen fell 9 percent. The markets had been closed since Jan. 23 for the Lunar New Year holiday, and government officials extended that closure until Monday while the authorities dealt with the outbreak. Other markets in the region, which have already digested much of the impact, opened lower as well. Shares in Tokyo and in Australia were down about 1.5 percent in early Monday trading. Stocks in Hong Kong opened about half a percent lower. The damage could be confined to Asia. Futures markets that predict the performance of stocks in the next day forecast a positive opening for Wall Street and a mixed day for shares in Europe. A 44-year-old man in the Philippines has died of the coronavirus, health officials said on Sunday, making him the first known death outside China. The man, a resident of Wuhan, China, the epicenter of the virus, died on Saturday after developing what officials called “severe pneumonia.” “This is the first known death of someone with 2019-nCoV outside of China,” the World Health Organization’s office in the Philippines said in a statement, using the technical shorthand for the coronavirus. Philippine health officials said the man had arrived in the country on Jan. 21 with a 38-year-old woman who remains under observation. “In his last few days, the patient was stable and showed signs of improvement,” said the health secretary, Francisco Duque III. “However, the condition of the patient deteriorated within his last 24 hours, resulting in his demise.” Hours before the death was announced, the Philippines said it was temporarily barring non-Filipino travelers arriving from mainland China, Hong Kong and Macau. Mr. Duque said the Philippines was currently observing 23 people who had been isolated in hospitals with possible coronavirus symptoms. Chinese officials on Sunday reported a surge in new cases. ◆ The death toll in China rose to at least 360. ◆ More than 2,000 new cases were also recorded in the country in the past 24 hours, raising the worldwide total to nearly 17,205, according to Chinese and World Health Organization data. The vast majority of the cases are inside China; about 150 cases have been confirmed in at least 23 other countries. ◆ All of China’s provinces and territories have now been touched by the outbreak. ◆ Countries and territories that have confirmed cases: Thailand, Japan, Hong Kong, Singapore, Taiwan, Australia, Malaysia, Macau, Russia, France, the United States, South Korea, Germany, the United Arab Emirates, Canada, Britain, Vietnam, Italy, India, the Philippines, Nepal, Cambodia, Sri Lanka, Finland, Sweden and Spain. ◆ Cases recorded in Thailand, Taiwan, Germany, Vietnam, Japan, France and the United States involved patients who had not been to China. ◆ China has asked the European Union for help in buying urgently needed medical supplies from its member countries, China’s official Xinhua news agency said on Saturday. Many of the world’s leading infectious disease experts say the outbreak is likely to become a pandemic, defined as an ongoing epidemic on two or more continents. Scientists do not yet know how lethal the new coronavirus is, but there is a growing consensus that it is readily transmitted. Scientists have found that it is spreading more like influenza than its slow-moving viral cousins, SARS and MERS. “It’s very, very transmissible, and it almost certainly is going to be a pandemic,” said Dr. Anthony S. Fauci, director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Disease. “But will it be catastrophic? I don’t know,” he added. The effects of a pandemic would likely be harsher in some countries than in others. While wealthier countries can direct their resources toward early detection and treatment, countries with fragile health care systems will not necessarily be able to offer the same level of care. [Three American airlines have suspended flights between the United States and China. Are you affected, or do you know someone who is? Please contact us at coronavirus@nytimes.com] China is now dealing with another disease outbreak — this one mostly affecting animals, but also potentially deadly among people. The Ministry of Agriculture said late Saturday that a fresh outbreak of a lethal form of influenza had been found in poultry in the southern province of Hunan, and that officials had ordered the slaughter of 17,828 chickens. China has previously dealt with several bird flu outbreaks. In the new case, the H5N1 bird flu virus was found at a farm in the city of Shaoyang. The farm had 7,850 chickens, and more than half have died from the bird flu, the ministry said. It called the strain “highly pathogenic.” Although bird flu poses more of a danger to poultry than humans — it is not easily transmissible among people — the World Health Organization has called on countries to be on guard. China is also grappling with an African swine fever epidemic that has infected tens of thousands of pigs and could stoke worries about the food supply. The Chinese government has delivered on its promise to build a hospital for coronavirus patients at the epicenter of the outbreak within 10 days. About 1,400 military medics will begin working at the hospital in Wuhan on Monday, according to state news media. Several state outlets streamed footage from the new hospital, which spans roughly 365,000 square feet and has been fitted with 1,000 beds. A second facility in Wuhan, with 1,500 beds, is expected to be completed this week. An official in Hubei Province, of which Wuhan is the capital, said in a news briefing on Sunday that the time required to confirm new cases of the virus had halved to no more than two hours, and that the accuracy of the test kits had improved. But the situation in Hubei remains “severe and complicated,” Vice Governor Xiao Juhua said. Since the coronavirus emerged, hospitals in Wuhan have been met with a shortage of masks and basic protective gear for doctors and nurses, and overwhelmed hospitals have had to turn away many people with flulike symptoms. Eleven days into the lockdown of Wuhan, the Chinese city where the epidemic began, the government there is extending its quarantine in an effort to halt the coronavirus that has killed at least 224 people in the city. Starting Sunday, the authorities are putting into quarantine people in Wuhan who have had close contact with confirmed carriers of the virus and people with pneumonialike symptoms who may be carriers. Under the new rules, many may face supervised quarantine away from their families. The government had already ordered residents not to leave the city and to stay indoors as much as possible. Now, people who have had close contact with confirmed carriers of the virus “will be sent to centralized isolation and observation points,” according to the new rule. The regulation did not specify where people will be kept for observation, but it warned that people would have no choice. “Those who refuse to cooperate will be compelled under the law by assisting public security offices,” the order said. “During isolation, each district will provide free room and board, as well as medical observation and treatment.” President Trump’s national security adviser played down the risk of an outbreak of the coronavirus in the United States, saying on CBS’s “Face the Nation” on Sunday that “right now there’s no reason for Americans to panic.” The national security adviser, Robert O’Brien, said that the United States had offered to send health officials to China to help contain the epidemic, but that officials had not yet received a response from Beijing. Mr. O’Brien also defended remarks by Commerce Secretary Wilbur Ross, who said on Thursday that the United States could benefit economically from the outbreak because it could cause companies to reconsider their global supply chains and ultimately “help to accelerate” the return of jobs to the United States. “I think what Commerce Secretary Ross is saying is there’s a danger, there’s a risk factor in doing that, and wouldn’t it be better if we had supply chains and factories here in the U.S.?” Mr. O’Brien said. New Zealand imposed new restrictions on travelers from mainland China, saying it would deny entry to visitors departing from or transiting through the mainland for two weeks starting on Monday. Citizens and residents will be allowed entry to New Zealand, but will be required to quarantine themselves for 14 days, Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern said. The government will also send a charter flight to repatriate up to 300 citizens in Wuhan. “Ultimately, this is a public health decision,” she said. Many other countries have expanded travel restrictions on noncitizens who had traveled to China, including the Philippines, the United States and Australia. Japan and South Korea are barring noncitizens who have traveled to Hubei. (South Korea also said it would restrict tourism to and from China.) Vietnam recently barred almost all flights to and from mainland China, Hong Kong and Macau until May 1, according to the United States Federal Aviation Administration. But Vietnam then partly eased its ban, allowing flights from Hong Kong and Macau to continue. Indonesia is suspending visa-free travel for Chinese citizens and barring passengers who have visited mainland China. Like other countries in Southeast Asia, Indonesia depends heavily on Chinese tourism. On Thursday alone, 10,000 Chinese tourists canceled their trips to Bali, according to one industry association. Russia, which shares a 2,600-mile border with China and which had temporarily stopped issuing work visas to Chinese citizens, is also halting visa-free entry for Chinese tour groups, the government said. Iraq is temporarily barring travelers coming from China. Chinese people working in oil production are allowed to remain, though any who leave will not be able to return for the time being. Saudi Arabia’s state airline and Oman also suspended flights to China on Sunday, according to Reuters. A day after New York City’s health authorities said that a woman hospitalized at Bellevue Hospital Center might have the new coronavirus, the authorities on Sunday announced that two more patients might have the virus. Samples from all three patients are being sent for testing to a laboratory in Atlanta that is run by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. The turnaround time for the results is usually at least 36 hours, but often longer. For more than a week, New York City has been bracing for the arrival of the new coronavirus, which is believed to have originated in the Chinese city of Wuhan, as isolated cases began to appear elsewhere in the country. In all three suspected cases in New York, the individuals had recently been in China and came down with flulike symptoms. All three had been tested for influenza and a number of other common illnesses, and those tests came back negative. Citing what it called the “apparently inevitable” spread of the coronavirus, Israel’s government on Sunday closed its borders to arrivals from China and said that it would work on producing a vaccine. Israeli citizens who have traveled to China will be allowed back, officials said. And the Israeli news media reported that the country was expected to extend the work permits of nearly 1,700 Chinese construction workers whose contracts expired. The arrival of the same number of workers from China who were due to replace them has been indefinitely postponed. Taiwan complained on Sunday that it was being punished because the World Health Organization considers it part of China, which has been subject to travel bans as the coronavirus spreads. Italy and Vietnam included Taiwan in banning flights from China, a move that they announced after the W.H.O. declared the outbreak a global health emergency. Vietnam backtracked on Saturday, but the ban from Italy remains, Joseph Wu, Taiwan’s foreign minister, said on Sunday. He pointed out that Taiwan had 10 confirmed cases, versus more than 14,000 in mainland China. “The number of confirmed cases of coronavirus in Taiwan is not higher than in most countries affected,” Mr. Wu said, adding that other than China, “no other country has had its flight banned by Italy.” China considers self-governed Taiwan to be part of its own territory and has long sought to limit Taiwan’s diplomatic relations and recognition at international bodies. Taiwan also announced that it would deny entry to Chinese nationals from Guangdong, a coastal province that has been battered by the virus, and travelers who have recently visited the area. As many as 9,000 medical workers in Hong Kong have pledged to strike this week, a threat that alarmed officials in the territory, which confirmed its 14th coronavirus case late Saturday. The workers are demanding that Hong Kong close all border checkpoints to visitors from mainland China, saying they represent a threat to health care workers in the city. Matthew Cheung, Hong Kong’s No. 2 official, appealed to the medical workers to reconsider. “At this critical moment, I believe the general public would count on medical personnel to fight against the epidemic together, in the spirit of professionalism,” he wrote in a blog post on Sunday. Health officials said it was unclear where the latest coronavirus patient in the territory had developed the disease. The patient, an 80-year-old man, had visited mainland China during a cruise, and later spent several days on a cruise ship in Japan with more than 3,000 passengers and employees. “We are very worried,” said Chuang Shuk-kwan, a Hong Kong health official. “Everyone should prepare mentally for the possibility that the disease is spreading within the community.” Hong Kong officials say that the number of visitors from the mainland and other countries has decreased significantly after they closed several border points and cut flight arrivals by half. But several border points remain open, and many medical workers fear that Hong Kong’s well-regarded health care system will be overwhelmed. They have also voiced frustrations about patients from mainland China hiding their travel and medical history, potentially endangering other patients. Two of the 120 Germans repatriated from China on Saturday have fallen ill and are being treated for the coronavirus in a university hospital in Frankfurt, the German authorities said. All of those who were repatriated by the German government are being quarantined for two weeks at army barracks in the western state of Rhineland-Palatinate. Eight cases of the coronavirus have been confirmed in the southern German state of Bavaria, the state ministry said. All of them are linked to a company in the town of Starnberg that was visited by a Chinese woman who began exhibiting symptoms on her return flight to China. Eleven British citizens were expected to return from Wuhan on Sunday, raising to 94 the total number of people who have been repatriated, the country’s foreign secretary said. The group — which traveled on a French flight carrying people from 29 European countries — will be taken to a hospital in northwestern England where a previous batch of repatriated citizens have been staying in isolation, the foreign secretary, Dominic Raab, told the BBC. Most of the 64 French citizens on the flight will be quarantined near Aix-en-Provence in southern France or the resort area Carry-Le-Rouet, a spokesman for France’s health ministry said. In Britain, footage from the facility, Arrowe Park Hospital, showed some of the quarantined people wearing face masks while eating breakfast or playing pool indoors. Ben Pinkerton, a 23-year-old teacher from Northern Ireland, described the facility as “very comfortable.” “We have TVs, video games, a nice room and good food,” he said in a Facebook message. Kharn Lambert, who is also in quarantine at the center, told Sky News on Saturday that those being kept in the facility were in good health and good spirits — “albeit subdued.” He said that they were allowed to go in a courtyard, but an outer perimeter that prevents them from leaving “is patrolled by the police quite regularly.” 
HONG KONG — A 44-year-old man in the Philippines has died of the coronavirus, the first known fatality outside China, health officials said on Sunday, as the number of deaths jumped to more than 360 and other countries expanded travel restrictions in an effort to slow the spread of the outbreak. The man, whose name was not released, was a resident of Wuhan, China, the center of the outbreak. He died on Saturday after developing what officials called “severe pneumonia.” “This is the first known death of someone with 2019-nCoV outside of China,” the World Health Organization’s office in the Philippines said in a statement, using the technical shorthand for the coronavirus. Philippine health officials said the man had arrived in the country on Jan. 21 with a 38-year-old woman. She remains under observation. Hours before the announcement, the Philippines said it was temporarily barring non-Filipino travelers arriving from mainland China, Hong Kong and Macau. In Hong Kong, a semiautonomous Chinese territory, a new union representing health care workers vowed to strike on Monday to force the city’s government to ban travel from mainland China. Fears in the city escalated after another case was confirmed and officials could not rule out the possibility that the patient, an 80-year-old man, had been infected within Hong Kong. “We are very worried,” Chuang Shuk-kwan, a health official, said at a news conference on Sunday. “Everyone should prepare mentally for the possibility that the disease is spreading within the community.” Hours later, the government announced its 15th case, which appeared to confirm local transmission of the virus. A 72-year-old woman who had largely stayed at home was infected, likely via her son. He returned from a trip to Wuhan on Jan. 23. By Sunday, with infections standing at more than 14,000 worldwide, nations continued to expand travel restrictions and bar visitors from China. New Zealand said on Sunday that it would deny entry to visitors departing from or traveling through mainland China for two weeks starting on Monday. Citizens and residents of New Zealand will be allowed entry from China but will be required to quarantine themselves for 14 days, Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern said. “Ultimately, this is a public health decision,” she said, adding that the restrictions were precautionary measures to keep New Zealand virus-free and to contain the worldwide outbreak. In Israel, Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu convened a meeting of ministers in Jerusalem on Sunday to make national preparations “because we estimate that the virus will arrive,” his office said in a statement. Along with preparations “to isolate those who have been infected and treat them” for two weeks at home, the country had temporarily closed “land crossings, seaports and airports to arrivals from China.” Israeli citizens who visited China will be allowed to return, the statement said. In addition, about 1,700 Chinese construction workers whose work permits had expired and who were supposed to return to China this weekend would be granted extended stays in Israel. They are being allowed to keep working rather than being replaced by newly recruited laborers who could potentially arrive with the virus, according to Israeli news reports. The United States and Australia have also expanded travel restrictions, temporarily barring noncitizens who recently traveled to China. South Korea said on Sunday that it would deny entry to any foreigners who have traveled in the past 14 days to Wuhan and surrounding Hubei Province, the area at the center of the outbreak. In a move to help stop the spread of the virus in Wuhan, the Chinese authorities have fulfilled a promise to build a new 1,000-bed specialty hospital in the city within 10 days. About 1,400 military medics are to begin working there on Monday. South Korea’s travel restrictions will take effect on Tuesday, Prime Minister Chung Sye-kyun said, as the number of people testing positive for the coronavirus in South Korea increased to 15. Any South Korean returning home who has been in Hubei Province within the past two weeks will be subject to 14 days of self-quarantine and monitoring, the government said. It also said it would bar South Koreans from visiting China as tourists. Japan will bar noncitizens who traveled recently to Hubei. Taiwan is denying entry to Chinese nationals from Guangdong, a southern coastal province that has been battered by the virus, and travelers who recently visited the area. Vietnam recently barred almost all flights to and from mainland China, Hong Kong, Macau and Taiwan until May 1, according to the United States Federal Aviation Administration. But Vietnam then eased its ban, allowing flights from Hong Kong, Macau and Taiwan to continue while keeping the prohibitions in place for mainland China, the aviation authorities said. Taiwan, which is self-ruled but which China claims is part of its territory, complained on Sunday that it was being punished with flight restrictions because the World Health Organization considers it part of China. Italy included Taiwan in a ban on flights from China, a move that it announced after the W.H.O. declared the coronavirus outbreak a global health emergency. While Vietnam backtracked, Italy’s ban remains, Taiwan’s foreign minister told reporters. Taiwan has 10 confirmed cases, versus more than 17,000 in mainland China, said the foreign minister, Joseph Wu. “The number of confirmed cases of coronavirus in Taiwan is not higher than in most countries affected,” he said. “Other than China, no other country, no other country has had its flight banned by Italy.” China has long sought to limit Taiwan’s diplomatic relations and recognition at international bodies such as the W.H.O. Taiwan previously participated as an observer at the World Health Assembly, the group’s governing body. But it has since been excluded as Beijing has increased pressure on Taiwan under President Tsai Ing-wen, who is skeptical about closer ties with Beijing. “It is not fair to the 23 million people in Taiwan, and it is not fair to other people who might otherwise obtain support from Taiwan if we were not excluded,” Mr. Wu said. In Hong Kong, some residents are pushing for tougher restrictions on arrivals from mainland China. As many as 9,000 medical workers have pledged to strike beginning on Monday, a threat that alarms the territory’s officials as they are struggling to contain the outbreak. The workers are demanding that Hong Kong close all checkpoints to visitors from mainland China, saying they represent a threat to health care workers. The workers plan to paralyze nonemergency and emergency services at hospitals, said the Hospital Authority Employees Alliance, a union formed during the city’s antigovernment protest movement. “We believe such actions are our last resort,” the alliance wrote in a statement on Saturday night. Under the plan, nonessential hospital staff members who belong to the union would not go to work on Monday. If the government did not close the border and heed their other demands by 9 p.m. local time, union members handling emergency services would also strike, the union said. Matthew Cheung, Hong Kong’s No. 2 official, appealed to medical workers to reconsider, comparing them to guardians of the public. “At this critical moment, I believe the general public would count on medical personnel to fight against the epidemic together, in the spirit of professionalism,” he wrote in a blog post on Sunday. Government officials in Hong Kong say that the number of visitors from the mainland and other countries had decreased significantly after they closed several border points and rail stations and cut flight arrivals by half. But several border locations remain open, and many medical workers fear being overwhelmed by a flood of visitors seeking treatment in Hong Kong’s well-regarded health care system. They have also voiced frustrations about patients from mainland China hiding their travel and medical history, potentially endangering other patients. 
WASHINGTON — The rapidly spreading coronavirus could claim one more victim: the United States-China trade deal. The virus, which has killed more than 360 people and sickened thousands, is taking a heavy toll on China’s economy by halting factory work, grounding flights and disrupting supply chains. It is also likely to slow China’s progress in meeting the commitments it agreed to as part of the initial trade deal that the Trump administration signed with Chinese officials last month. Under the terms of the agreement, China has pledged to purchase over the next two years an additional $200 billion of American goods, including soybeans, machinery and energy products. In order to reach those lofty sums, Chinese companies would soon need to begin purchasing large amounts of American products. The Chinese government is also supposed to act quickly to open its markets for American agricultural and financial firms, making major reforms to those sectors within months. But with factories and stores throughout China shuttered and government officials focused on containing the virus, Beijing will have less capacity to meet President Trump’s terms, analysts say. “It could be problematic, particularly for manufacturers,” said Mary E. Lovely, a senior fellow at the Peterson Institute for International Economics. She pointed to one example: Grounded flights and less tourism will weigh on Chinese airlines, potentially reducing their purchases of new American aircraft this year. “How is the U.S. going to handle this? We don’t really know,” she said. Karthik Natarajan, a supply chain expert at the University of Minnesota, said the closing of cities and factories was severely affecting manufacturing and travel. “Parts of the deal are set to go into effect by mid-February, but with the Chinese government intently focused on responding to the outbreak, developing action plans to meet the trade deal commitments might take a back seat,” he said. One of the final sentences of the Phase 1 trade deal may prove to be key. The provision calls for consultations between the parties if “a natural disaster or other unforeseeable event outside the control of the Parties delays a Party from timely complying with its obligations under this Agreement.” But even with a deadly disaster looming, China’s failure to meet its commitments may create some opposition in the United States, potentially returning the countries to their rockier relations before the signing of the trade deal. Economists have predicted a drag on global growth from the virus, at least in the short term. In the United States, Goldman Sachs analysts estimate a 0.4 percentage-point reduction in first-quarter economic growth, though that effect is likely to fade. Those costs could quickly outweigh the economic benefits of the trade agreement. While the Trump administration has touted big economic gains from the pact, economists’ forecasts have been modest, since the deal leaves tariffs in place on more than $360 billion of Chinese goods. Privately, some Trump administration officials say that China may use the virus as an excuse to delay meeting its commitments, in hopes that Mr. Trump will ultimately be voted out of office this year. Some in China have reacted negatively to the Trump administration’s decision to restrict travel between the countries, including barring entry to all foreign nationals who recently traveled in China. In a note to clients, Ian Bremmer, the president of Eurasia Group, said that the Chinese government had found the American move to shut its borders “unnecessarily provocative, and it adds a sour tone on the back of the recently agreed Phase 1 trade deal,” he said. Michael Pillsbury, a China expert at the Hudson Institute who advises the Trump administration, said he supported the emergency measures and that they might be escalated based on the situation. He added that the administration would have to carefully weigh the potential consequences of the virus against upsetting the relationship with China. “We need to balance a defensive concern with limiting a pandemic that can harm our own economy against the desire by some to be overzealous,” Mr. Pillsbury said. Such a response could “provoke paranoia among China’s hard-liners, who already claim that the U.S. is ruthlessly exploiting the health crisis,” he said. Comments by some American officials have stoked those concerns. In an interview with Fox Business on Thursday, Commerce Secretary Wilbur Ross appeared to describe the virus as presenting a possible economic opportunity for the United States. While Mr. Ross expressed sympathy for the victims of the coronavirus, he said it would probably facilitate the return of labor to the United States. “It does give businesses yet another thing to consider when they go through their review of their supply chain,” he added. “So I think it will help to accelerate the return of jobs to North America.” Ms. Lovely said the virus, like the American tariffs on China, has been encouraging companies to examine their supply chains and invest in manufacturing some of the same products outside China, so they are not completely dependent on one source. But often these factories are not returning to the United States. “We see a pickup in trade shares from Mexico and from Vietnam, but also some higher-income countries like South Korea and Japan,” she said. 
In 2002, when a lethal, pneumonialike virus known as SARS emerged in China, the country’s factories were mostly churning out low-cost goods like T-shirts and sneakers for customers around the world. Seventeen years later, another deadly virus is spreading rapidly through the world’s most populous country. But China has evolved into a principal element of the global economy, making the epidemic a substantially more potent threat to fortunes. International companies that rely on Chinese factories to make their products and depend on Chinese consumers for sales are already warning of costly problems. Apple, Starbucks and Ikea have temporarily closed stores in China. Shopping malls are deserted, threatening sales of Nike sneakers, Under Armour clothing and McDonald’s hamburgers. Factories making cars for General Motors and Toyota are delaying production as they wait for workers to return from the Lunar New Year holiday, which has been extended by the government to halt the spread of the virus. International airlines, including American, Delta, United, Lufthansa and British Airways, have canceled flights to China. China’s economic growth is expected to slip this year to 5.6 percent, down from 6.1 percent last year, according to a conservative forecast from Oxford Economics that is based on the impact of the virus so far. That would, in turn, reduce global economic growth for the year by 0.2 percent, to an annual rate of 2.3 percent — the slowest pace since the global financial crisis a decade ago. Returning from a long holiday for the first time since the coronavirus’s threat became clear, Chinese investors sent shares in China down about 8 percent on Monday. Stock markets around the world have plunged in recent days as the sense takes hold that a public health crisis could morph into an economic shock. In a sign of deepening concern, China’s leaders on Sunday outlined plans to inject fresh credit into the economy. That will include a net $22 billion to shore up money markets as well as looser borrowing terms for Chinese companies. Though China’s factories still produce a mind-bending array of relatively simple, low-value products like clothing and plastic goods, they have long since achieved dominance in more advanced and lucrative pursuits like smartphones, computers and auto parts. The country has evolved into an essential part of the global supply chain, producing components needed by factories from Mexico to Malaysia. China has also risen into an enormous consumer market, a nation of 1.4 billion people with a growing appetite for electronic gadgets, fashion apparel and trips to Disneyland. The trade war waged by the Trump administration has prompted a partial decoupling of the United States and China, the two largest economies on earth. Multinational companies that have used factories in China to make their wares have sought to avoid American tariffs by shifting production to other countries — especially Vietnam. The coronavirus might accelerate that trend, at least for a time, should global companies find themselves locked out of China. The outbreak of the virus in Wuhan, a city that is home to 11 million people, prompted the Chinese government to effectively quarantine the metropolis and much of surrounding Hubei province, barring people from moving around. Until now, the impact on factories was limited by the fact that the outbreak was unfolding during the Lunar New Year, the most important holiday of the year. Many businesses are closed during the holiday, while hundreds of millions of migrant workers return home to their families in the countryside. In a bid to keep people home and halt the spread of the virus, the government extended the holiday through Sunday, adding three days. But the fear of the virus is so widespread and intense that many workers are likely to remain away from factory towns this week. A frightening epidemic coinciding with a major holiday will almost certainly spell a substantial loss of sales for China’s tourism and hospitality industries. Hotels and restaurants that would normally be full of revelry are empty. Concerts and sporting events have been canceled. IMAX, the large screen film company based in Toronto, has postponed the release of five films it had intended to showcase in China during the holiday. Even as the holiday officially ends, business is unlikely to return to normal. Many major industrial areas — including Shanghai, Suzhou and Guangdong province — have lengthened the holiday by at least another week, preventing workers from returning. With flights to China limited and emergency public health restrictions in place, the Chinese operations of multinational companies are likely to be constrained. Major banks, including Goldman Sachs and JPMorgan Chase, are directing that employees who have visited mainland China stay home for two weeks. General Motors last year sold more cars in China than in the United States. Its Chinese factories will be closed for at least another week at the request of the government. Ford Motor has told managers in China to work from home while its factories remain idled, said a company spokesman. All of this could play havoc with businesses that depend on China for components, from auto factories in the American Midwest and Mexico to apparel plants in Bangladesh and Turkey. If customers cannot buy what they need from China, Chinese factories could, in turn, slash orders for imported machinery, components and raw material — computer chips from Taiwan and South Korea, copper from Chile and Canada, factory equipment from Germany and Italy. “This could potentially disrupt global supply chains,” said Rohini Malkani, an economist at DBRS Morningstar, a global credit rating business. “It’s too early to say how long it is going to last.” Similar worries accompanied the outbreak of SARS in 2002 and 2003, when the virus emerged in the southern province of Guangdong before spreading across China and around the world, killing nearly 800 people in at least 17 countries. China had just joined the World Trade Organization, gaining access to markets around the globe. It was harnessing its seemingly limitless supply of low-wage workers to produce cheap consumer goods. Its economy centered on exports. Its consumer market remained in its infancy. In the years since, China’s annual economic output has multiplied more than eightfold, to nearly $14 trillion from $1.7 trillion, according to the World Bank. Its share of global trade has more than doubled, to 12.8 percent last year from 5.3 percent in 2003, according to Oxford Economics. Its economic output per person has multiplied to roughly $9,000 last year from about $1,500 in 2003, giving households additional cash for an enormous range of consumer goods. “China today accounts for about one-third of global economic growth, a larger share of global growth than from the U.S., Europe and Japan combined,” Andy Rothman, an economist at Matthews Asia, an investment fund manager, noted during recent testimony before a congressional panel. The American semiconductor industry is particularly entrenched in China, which is both a major manufacturing hub and a market for its products. Intel’s customers in China accounted for about $20 billion in revenue in 2019, or 28 percent of its total for the year. Qualcomm, the dominant maker of chips for mobile phones, is even more dependent on China, drawing 47 percent of its annual revenue — or nearly $12 billion — from sales in the country. No one knows how long the coronavirus outbreak will last, how far it will spread, or how many lives it will claim. It is impossible to calculate the extent to which it will disrupt China’s economy. But China’s formidable stature in the world economy means that the impact of the current outbreak is likely to substantially exceed that of SARS. “The knock-on effects for the global economy are going to be much larger than they were,” said Nicholas R. Lardy, a China expert at the Peterson Institute for International Economics in Washington. For manufacturers, the timing of the outbreak may limit the damage. They just completed the fourth quarter, when production increases to meet demand for the winter holidays. The end of January is typically slow. But the effects of the virus on supply chains, which have grown notoriously complex, are difficult to anticipate. A single part of an advanced product like a smart TV may be made of dozens of smaller components, with each of these assembled from other pieces. Companies themselves often do not know the suppliers that are three and four rungs down the chain. “If you run out of widgets that are essential to production processes and all those widgets come from China, then it may well be that your production lines go to a halt,” said Ben May, global economist at Oxford Economics in London. “These problems are likely to be popping up all over the world.” This became a problem in the aftermath of the 2011 earthquake and tsunami in Japan, which devastated manufacturers. Many companies assumed they were buying parts from a diverse range of suppliers, protecting them from shortages, only to realize that critical components were produced by single plants. If that plays out in China, the consequences are likely to be great. “We’re talking about a potentially vast swath of a country that the whole world depends on as a manufacturing workshop,” said Susan Helper, an economist at Case Western Reserve University and the former chief economist at the Commerce Department. “The effects will be unexpected.” Apple assembles most of its products in China. The company has severely restricted travel in China for its employees, its chief executive officer, Timothy D. Cook, said on an earnings call on Tuesday. Apple disclosed much wider volatility in its potential revenues for the current quarter in the face of uncertainties around factory production and sales of its products. Those uncertainties deepened on Saturday. Apple, which derives about one-sixth of its sales from China, announced that it would close its 42 stores in the country. Walmart buys vast volumes of its products from Chinese factories while operating 430 stores in the country, including in areas shut down by quarantine. The company has reduced hours at some stores, a Walmart spokeswoman said. “We may still be in the early stages,” of the coronavirus crisis, Judith McKenna, who runs Walmart’s International business, wrote in an internal memo on Friday. China is the world’s largest manufacturer of toys. At the International Toy Fair in Nuremberg, Germany, many Chinese suppliers expressed confidence that their factories would soon reopen, said Rick Woldenberg, chief executive of Learning Resources, a family-owned manufacturer of educational products and toys in Illinois. “But no one’s quite sure how much of this information can be relied upon,” Mr. Woldenberg said. Because of the trade war, the toy industry was effectively prepared for a moment in which its access to Chinese suppliers was imperiled, Mr. Woldenberg said. In December, when the Trump administration was threatening to impose an additional 15 percent tariff on Chinese imports, many toy companies sped up their orders to beat the deadline. Some shifted production to Thailand and Vietnam to avoid the tariffs altogether. Toymakers will soon need to rebuild inventory. “If this goes on for four more months, we are talking about a big problem,” said Jim Silver, chief executive of TTPM.com, a consumer research site. After SARS, China suffered several months of economic contraction and then rebounded dramatically. That might happen this time, too. The only certainty is this: Whatever happens in China will be felt widely. “Clearly China has become a much more dominant player in the world economy,” said Mr. May of Oxford Economics. “It’s just so much more involved in the global supply chain. Over the last decade, it has been the spender of last resort for the global economy.” 
Officials of some of the world’s largest oil producers are scrambling to stem a sharp fall in prices over concerns that the growing coronavirus epidemic will reduce demand from China, the biggest importer. Over the weekend, officials from the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries, as well as Russia, agreed to meet on Tuesday and Wednesday in Vienna, where OPEC has its headquarters, to discuss the situation in the oil markets, according to two people briefed on the plans. The big producers are also discussing whether to schedule an emergency ministerial-level meeting this month, moving up a gathering planned for early March. On the agenda would be production cuts of up to one million barrels a day, or about 1 percent of world supplies, according to a person familiar with the matter. “They are absolutely trying to put a floor under prices,” said Amrita Sen, chief oil analyst at Energy Aspects, a market research firm. The price of Brent crude, the international benchmark, has fallen about 19 percent over the last month to less than $55 a barrel, the lowest in more than a year. The plunge has undercut the impact of the carefully orchestrated production cuts that OPEC announced at its December meeting in Vienna. West Texas intermediate, the American benchmark, entered a bear market on Monday after it fell more than 20 percent from its January high, settling at $50.11. OPEC seems unlikely to stem the price declines soon. Ms. Sen said China was already reducing its orders for March from Saudi Arabia, the de facto leader of OPEC and the world’s largest oil exporter. It is too late to cut February orders. China is Saudi Arabia’s most important customer and, along with other Asian countries like India and South Korea, is increasingly vital for the big oil producers around the Persian Gulf. Any slowing of these economies will sap demand for oil, hitting prices and the revenues that OPEC governments depend on. OPEC is likely to make some cuts, Ms. Sen said, but that may not be enough to bolster skittish markets. “People are fearing the worst,” she said. Chinese oil demand already appears to have crashed as the lockdown of Wuhan and other cities and overall fear curb air travel, driving, trucking and factory use. Gary Ross, chief executive of Black Gold Investors, a New York trading and investment firm, estimates that Chinese oil demand over the last two weeks has been down around 2.5 million barrels a day, or close to 20 percent compared with the previous year. Mr. Ross said that cutbacks in Chinese oil purchases were likely to ripple across the world, causing supplies to build up in the United States and Europe. At least for the short term, he said, the oil market has entered “a vicious circle of selling pressure with no hope in sight.” There is much at stake for the big OPEC producers and Russia, as many of them depend on sales to China, particularly now that the United States has turned from major importer to exporter, largely because of shale production. In December, before the crisis hit, China imported nearly 11 million barrels of oil, comparable to the output of a major producer like Russia. A little more than half of Chinese supplies come from OPEC countries. Saudi Arabia was China’s largest supplier last year, averaging about 1.7 million barrels a day, or close to a quarter of Saudi exports, according to Energy Aspects. Russia was a close second, with Angola, Brazil and Iraq also feeding large volumes of crude to the Chinese economy. Analysts say it might not be easy for OPEC to come up with an effective response. For one, it is difficult to predict how long the coronavirus crisis will last and how much damage it will do to the world economy. Also, output curbs on the order of 2.5 million barrels a day would be unusual for OPEC, because such a deep cut would require producers to absorb serious pain. It is also difficult to judge when Libyan volumes, now down about one million barrels a day because of political infighting, will return. The OPEC countries were already selling oil at relatively low volumes after the December agreement. For instance, OPEC exports for January were down about 700,000 barrels a day from the previous month, according to Kpler, a firm that tracks petroleum exports. OPEC seemed to be trying to prop up the market with talk of a meeting, analysts say, but this tactic did not work. Attendees at this week’s technical meeting are likely to hash out the supply and demand numbers in preparation for a decision on cuts. But it will probably be left to top leaders like President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia and Crown Prince Mohammed bin Salman of Saudi Arabia to sign off on final production cuts. Most of the big producers seem amenable to a high-level emergency gathering, but it may not be called until they agree on what to do. “The worst thing would be to call a meeting and then not do something,” said Bhushan Bahree, an OPEC analyst at IHS Markit, a research firm. 
This briefing has ended. Read live updates on the coronavirus outbreak here.  A 39-year-old man in Hong Kong died Tuesday from the new coronavirus, the city’s Hospital Authority said. The death from the outbreak was the first in Hong Kong, a semiautonomous Chinese territory that has had 15 confirmed cases, and the second outside mainland China. A man in the Philippines who was from Wuhan, China — the epicenter of the outbreak — also died from the coronavirus, Philippine officials said Sunday. The man who died Tuesday had traveled by train to Wuhan on Jan. 21, returning from the mainland to Hong Kong two days later, the Hong Kong government said in a statement. His mother, who did not travel to Wuhan, later contracted the virus, suggesting a transmission within the household. The man’s wife, two children and a domestic helper who worked for him are being quarantined. The Hong Kong government has been under pressure to close its borders to mainland China. All but three border checkpoints out of 16 had been shut by Monday, but those remaining entry points can still admit thousands of mainland Chinese visitors per day.  More than 2,500 medical workers went on strike Monday to demand a fully closed border. They said they were unsatisfied by the partial closings, and many continued to strike on Tuesday. The death toll from the new coronavirus has exceeded that of the severe acute respiratory syndrome outbreak in 2002 and 2003 in mainland China. But the number of people who have recovered nationwide has also risen in recent days, suggesting that the new virus’s fatality rate is relatively low. China’s Health Commission reported on Tuesday that there were 632 recoveries and 425 deaths nationwide. During the SARS outbreak, 349 people died in mainland China.  [Read: China says 1,700 health workers have contracted coronavirus.] Health experts say they are encouraged by the steady rise in the number of recoveries. They take it as evidence that the treatments meted out have been effective and that the virus does not appear to be as deadly as SARS. SARS had a mortality rate of 9.6 percent, and about 2 percent of those reported to have been infected with the new coronavirus have died. China first announced an outbreak of a mysterious pneumonia in the city of Wuhan on Dec. 31. It has been 12 days since the authorities began to place the city and much of the surrounding Hubei Province — home to tens of millions of people — under lockdown. In Hubei, the epicenter of the outbreak, 80 patients had recovered on Sunday, compared with 56 deaths. On Saturday, 49 patients had left the hospitals, while 45 people had died. Still, the number of infections from the new coronavirus continues to climb, suggesting that it could be some time before the outbreak is over.  China had 20,438 confirmed infections as of Monday, the government said on Tuesday. During the SARS outbreak, it had 5,327 cases, according to the World Health Organization. Oil prices fell on Monday over concerns that the growing coronavirus epidemic will reduce demand from China.  West Texas Intermediate, the American benchmark, entered a bear market, after declining more than 20 percent from its January high. And the price of Brent crude, the international benchmark, has fallen about 19 percent over the last month to less than $55 a barrel, the lowest in more than a year. Over the weekend, officials from the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries, as well as Russia, agreed to meet this week to discuss the situation in the oil markets, according to two people briefed on the plans. On the agenda are production cuts of up to one million barrels a day, or about 1 percent of world supplies, according to one of the people. “They are absolutely trying to put a floor under prices,” said Amrita Sen, chief oil analyst at Energy Aspects, a market research firm. But OPEC may be unlikely to stem the price declines quickly. Ms. Sen said China was already reducing its orders for March from Saudi Arabia, the de facto leader of OPEC and the world’s largest oil exporter. It is too late to cut February orders. Stocks in China fell about 8 percent in Monday trading as investors returned from a long holiday to the prospect of the world’s No. 2 economy virtually being shut down by the coronavirus epidemic. The markets had been closed since Jan. 23 for the Lunar New Year holiday. Other markets in the region were also trading in the red. Shares in Tokyo finished the day down nearly 1 percent, while in Australia they closed down 1.3 percent. Stocks in Hong Kong opened down, but later pared those losses and were flat. The damage to the stock market was confined to Asia. Stocks in the United States and Europe, which have had nearly two weeks to react, ended higher on Monday. Separately, China’s central bank moved to pump $173 billion into its financial system on Monday in an emergency move to help government efforts to contain the coronavirus outbreak. Chinese officials tried to reassure the country on Monday that a shortage of medical supplies was being alleviated, that the food supply remained adequate and that food prices, which had been sharply rising, were stable. Tian Yulong, an official from the industry and information technology ministry, acknowledged the shortages of basic medical and health supplies, but promised to fix them soon.  Describing the availability of medical protective clothing and masks as a “delicate balance,” he said that 154,500 sets of protective clothing and 133,600 high-quality masks had been shipped to Hubei Province, the center of the outbreak, by Sunday. The Vatican also said on Monday that it had sent “several hundred thousand” face masks to Hubei and to Zhejiang and Fujian Provinces to help contain the virus’s spread.  Regarding rising food prices in China, which were a concern even before the coronavirus crisis, Lian Weiliang, a deputy director of national development, said that most of China’s basic necessities, especially food, would be guaranteed. He said that the average retail prices of pork, beef, mutton and eggs in 36 large and medium-sized cities nationwide had fallen from previous highs. China Eastern Airlines, which carried about 1.4 million airline passengers between the United States and China in 2018, has started suspending nonstop flights between the countries. It appears to be the first major Chinese airline to do so amid escalating concern about the spread of the coronavirus. The airline has suspended flights between China and Hawaii, Lt. Gov. Josh Green said on Twitter. It also suspended flights arriving or departing from Los Angeles, New York, San Francisco and Chicago, according to a notice to travel agents obtained by CNN.  Airlines headquartered in the United States began announcing limited service with China last week as demand started to decline. Several then announced outright suspensions shortly before the Trump administration announced stringent travel restrictions. In 2018, a total of 8.5 million people flew on nonstop flights between China and the United States, according to Transportation Department data. Air China carried 1.6 million of those passengers, more than any other airline. United carried 1.5 million, while China Eastern carried 1.4 million. The handful of American airports still permitted to receive flights from China were scenes of confusion and uncertainty on Monday as the first federally mandated quarantine in more than a half-century — since the era of smallpox — took effect. “It feels like trying to leave Paris in 1940 or something — there’s a bit of panic settling in,” said Jeffrey Phillips, 41, who was unsure when his wife, Sue, would be able to return to the United States after a trip to visit her family in China. Americans whose flights took off from China after 5 p.m. Eastern time on Sunday and who had spent time recently in Hubei Province, the epicenter of the epidemic, will be subject to a quarantine of up to two weeks under restrictions announced by the Trump administration. Four United States military bases said they were expecting to house about 1,000 such “evacuees.” China’s foreign ministry on Monday sharply criticized the United States for its overall response to the epidemic, saying that it was “creating and spreading fear” instead of helping contain the coronavirus. “In the face of the public health crisis, countries should work together to overcome the difficulties and not shift one’s troubles onto others, let alone take advantage of people’s precarious position,” said Hua Chunying, a ministry spokeswoman. Secretary of State Mike Pompeo, traveling in Uzbekistan, said on Monday that the United States was coordinating with Beijing to organize more flights for Americans in Wuhan, and possibly citizens from other countries. He said the administration hoped to use those flights to also deliver medical supplies. “We’re working closely and hand-in-hand with the Chinese Government to try and resolve what is now this global epidemiological challenge,” he said, according to a State Department transcript. As more cases of the new coronavirus surface in the United States, federal health officials hope to speed up test results for the virus by distributing kits to public health laboratories around the country. At a news briefing on Monday, the federal Centers for Disease Control and Prevention said the kits should be distributed to state health laboratories by the end of this week. In the last few weeks, all tests have been conducted at the C.D.C.’s labs, sometimes resulting in delays of several days for individual results. The Food and Drug Administration first has to approve the test for wider distribution, the C.D.C. said. The United States has 11 confirmed cases so far. Dr. Nancy Messonnier, director of the National Center for Immunization and Respiratory Diseases, said that 167 “patients under investigation” who had symptoms like cough or fever, and had traveled to Wuhan or been in contact with a patient, had negative test results. A further 82 tests are pending, including some with samples in transit to the agency’s labs. The severity of the disease has varied in patients in the United States, Dr. Messonnier said. Some have had mild illness, but a few have been more severely ill, with some needing oxygen. None has died. Of the 11 patients, nine had been to Wuhan and two were close contacts of patients who had traveled, indicating that person-to-person spread of the virus has occurred in the United States. “We expect to find additional cases in the United States and we expect more cases of person-to-person spread among close contacts,” Dr. Messonnier said. With the C.D.C. already running through its allocations for emergency response funds, the Department of Health and Human Services has formally informed Congress that it may transfer up to $136 million to help combat the spread of coronavirus, according to a person with knowledge of the notification. Of the maximum $136 million that the department may transfer, up to $75 million would go to the disease centers, up to $52 million to the department’s Office of the Assistant Secretary for Preparedness and Response, and up to $8 million to the department’s Office of Global Affairs. It was unclear where that money would be transferred from. The State Department plans to repatriate more people from Wuhan, and the C.D.C. has sent four teams to military locations where their flights will land, Dr. Messonnier said. She said she did not know yet how many passengers would be returning.  The travelers will be quarantined for 14 days. Dr. Messonnier said the C.D.C. has been working with state and local health departments to find places to keep people under quarantine. She said the possibilities could include military bases and hotels, and could vary from state to state. “We want to make sure they’re comfortable, but also make sure they’re safe and their families and communities are safe,” Dr. Messonnier said.  Referring to the outbreak inside China, she said: “A couple of weeks ago there were 41 cases. This morning there were 17,000. This is a novel coronavirus that the population doesn’t have immunity to.” She said: “Our goal is to slow this thing down. We have the opportunity to slow it down before it gets into the United States.” Growing concern about the coronavirus has now led to the cancellation of two major technology meetings. On Monday, SEMI, an industry association that represents companies in electronics manufacturing, announced that it would postpone a conference in Shanghai. The event is the association’s largest, and it typically hosts more than 70,000 vendors and attendees in mid-March. A new date has not yet been announced. Last week, the trade group canceled a separate conference in Seoul, South Korea, that was set to begin this week. This is only the second time in its 50-year history that SEMI has canceled one of its conferences, which are held throughout the year in different locations around the world.  The last time SEMI canceled an event was during the SARS outbreak.  “People were concerned that when we have such a large gathering, can we affect more people?” Ajit Manocha, the president and chief executive of SEMI, said Friday.  The semiconductor industry, which often relies on Chinese manufacturers, has not yet seen supply chains disrupted by travel restrictions, Mr. Manocha said. “If the outbreak of coronavirus doesn’t get contained,” he said, “then I think it will definitely hurt the supply chain eventually.” China’s leader, Xi Jinping, has not appeared much in public in recent days. But on Monday he oversaw a Communist Party leaders meeting that demanded greater urgency and coordination in the fight against the coronavirus epidemic — which they called “a major test of China’s system and capacity for governance.” “Epidemic prevention and control must stick to treating the country as a grand chessboard,” Mr. Xi said, according to an official account issued by the Xinhua news agency. Officials who resist orders and “lack boldness” could be punished, he said. Mr. Xi’s comments suggested that at least some regions have been reluctant to devote resources and personnel to the effort.  The focus of the fight remains Hubei, the central Chinese province that has been worst-hit by the virus. The meeting emphasized that other regions must be willing to send medical supplies and workers to Hubei, whose capital, Wuhan, is where the outbreak began.  Party leaders also called for more stringent monitoring to identify and treat carriers of the virus, including policies to track people traveling after China’s Lunar New Year holiday, which had been extended until Monday because of the epidemic. The senior officials called for “well managed propaganda and instruction, as well as opinion guidance,” suggesting that the government may step up censorship after a surge of reporting and online commentary critical of the government. The Wuhan coronavirus is a close cousin of the one that caused SARS in 2003, and may have originated in bats, according to two studies published on Monday in the journal Nature. That is not to say that bats directly infected humans with the new virus: Many scientists believe there was an intermediate host animal, which was infected by bats and then infected humans. Based on the new virus’s genetic sequence, researchers showed that the virus can bind to receptors in civets and pigs, although they ruled out mice.  The researchers, working in two separate teams from the Wuhan Institute of Virology and Fudan University in Shanghai, isolated the virus’s genome from people who were working at the wet market in Wuhan, China, where the first cases were reported in December 2019. They found that the genetic makeup of the new virus, temporarily called 2019-nCoV, is 79.5 percent similar to that of the SARS coronavirus — a cousin of Wuhan virus that seems to spread more easily, but is less lethal. The Wuhan coronavirus uses the same receptors, or entry points, to infect human lung cells, which explains how transmission occurs and why some people develop pneumonia.  The Wuhan team, led by Zheng-Li Shi, showed that the novel virus is genetically 96.2 percent similar to a coronavirus that circulates in bats, which served as the origin for the SARS virus. The Fudan University group, led by Yong-Zhen Zhang, reported that the novel coronavirus was 89.1 percent similar to SARS-like coronaviruses in bats.  But the Wuhan coronavirus evolved different mutations than SARS before jumping to humans.  Together, the studies describe early steps toward understanding the novel coronavirus and its evolutionary history. They also provide hope that treatments and vaccines developed for SARS may work for the new virus, experts said. President Rodrigo Duterte of the Philippines on Monday urged the country not to discriminate against the Chinese amid the coronavirus outbreak, a day after his government reported the death of a Chinese man in Manila. His government has imposed restrictions travel to and from China. But he said on Monday that Chinese flying in from elsewhere would be allowed entry to the Philippines. “We are a community of nations,” Mr. Duterte said in a late-night news briefing after an emergency cabinet meeting. “We cooperate. China has been kind to us — we can also show the same favor to them. Stop this xenophobia thing.” He said that the spread of the virus “was not the fault of anybody, not of the Chinese, not of the Filipinos, not of anyone.” Although the first cases of this coronavirus originated in Wuhan, China, he said that the virus could have also incubated elsewhere. Hong Kong’s government said Monday that it would close four more border crossing points with mainland China, leaving open just three, as the number of coronavirus cases in the city continues to grow. Carrie Lam, Hong Kong’s top official, has been under increasing pressure from hospital employees, businesses and even some pro-government lawmakers to further tighten border controls. More than 2,400 medical workers in Hong Kong went on strike Monday morning to pressure the government to bar entries from mainland China, a number that was expected to grow if the government did not relent. The medical workers, members of a newly formed union, said they worried that hospitals would be overwhelmed as mainland Chinese seek to use Hong Kong’s well-respected health care system. Hong Kong itself has 15 confirmed cases of infection. Mrs. Lam announced measures last week to reduce arrivals from mainland China, but she has resisted a complete closing, calling such a move “a discriminatory approach” and not in line with recommendations from the World Health Organization.  Signaling concerns among business executives in the territory, more than half of American business leaders questioned said they wanted Hong Kong’s government to shut down the border with the mainland, according to a survey of 156 executives by the American Chamber of Commerce in Hong Kong. Russia on Monday suspended passenger rail links to China and North Korea, postponed a major business conference and laid the groundwork to deport foreigners diagnosed with the coronavirus. All passenger train travel to and from China is halted until further notice, said regional authorities in Russia, which shares a 2,600-mile border with China. Russia’s main train operator said it was also suspending passenger service to North Korea in response to a request from Pyongyang. The Russian state-run news service Tass said the move was part of North Korea’s effort to combat the spread of the virus.  North Korea, which borders both China and Russia, had not officially reported any coronavirus cases to the World Health Organization as of Sunday, but the isolated country has been quarantining people arriving from China. North Korea had also already decided to close its borders to all foreign tourists amid the outbreak. Two coronavirus cases have been confirmed in Russia — both of them Chinese citizens — and it was not immediately clear whether Moscow would seek to deport them. Russia’s new prime minister, Mikhail Mishustin, said on Monday that he would postpone an annual economic forum scheduled to be held at the Black Sea city of Sochi this month. Among the 4,000 registered attendees, about 250 are from countries where coronavirus cases have been confirmed, officials said. From Amy Qin, a China correspondent, and Elsie Chen, a researcher, on the ground in Wuhan: People desperate for treatment started descending on a new hospital in Wuhan on Monday that was built within 10 days to fight the coronavirus outbreak. But with workers still trying to finish its construction, many potential patients were turned away. Road checkpoints were set up to screen cars heading to the hospital. A sign at one read, “Only diagnosed patients transferred from other hospitals can be admitted.” Officers at that checkpoint told sick people and their relatives to instead call China’s emergency number. One man, Xue Ying, was driving toward the hospital with his cousin, who had been tested for the coronavirus and was awaiting the results. Mr. Xue believes his mother died from the coronavirus, but they could not secure a bed in a hospital and she was never tested for it. His aunt and uncle were also in a hospital. “I can’t afford to lose anyone else,” he said. About 1,400 military medics will begin working at the new hospital, which covers roughly 365,000 square feet and has been fitted with 1,000 beds. A second facility in Wuhan, with 1,500 beds, is expected to be completed this week. From Amy Qin, a China correspondent, and Elsie Chen, a researcher, on the ground in Wuhan: Weak with fever, An Jianhua waited in line for seven hours outside the hospital in the cold, hoping to be tested for the new coronavirus, which doctors suspected she had contracted. Ms. An, 67, needed an official diagnosis from a hospital to qualify for treatment, but the one she and her son raced to last week had no space. The next hospital they were referred to in Wuhan, the city of 11 million people at the center of the outbreak, was full, too, they said. They finally got an intravenous drip for Ms. An’s fever, but that was all. Since then, Ms. An has quarantined herself at home. She and her son eat separately, wear masks and are constantly disinfecting their apartment. Ms. An’s health is declining rapidly, and even keeping water down is a struggle. “I can’t let my mom die at home,” said her son, He Jun. “Every day I want to cry, but when I cry there are no tears. There is no hope.” For some people, like Gan Hanjiang, the city’s new hospitals for treating the coronavirus cannot be built fast enough. Last month, his father came down with a severe fever and cough. He was tested for the coronavirus, but the results were negative. Ten days after the onset of symptoms, however, his father died, Mr. Gan said. The hospital classified the cause as “severe pneumonia,” Mr. Gan said, but he believes it was the coronavirus. Several experts have conceded that several rounds of testing may be needed for an accurate diagnosis. On the day his father died, Mr. Gan began to show the same symptoms, he said. But without a car, he has not been able to go to one of the designated hospitals to be tested. “Getting treatment is so difficult,” he whispered slowly by telephone from a small hospital near his home where he was being treated for viral pneumonia. “We can’t get admitted to the hospitals. And there’s not enough medicine.” Hundreds of citizens from countries including Australia, France, Italy, Brazil, Britain and Rwanda have been evacuated from Wuhan, the center of the outbreak, over the past few days. Australia flew 243 passengers from Wuhan to an air base in Western Australia on Monday, including 89 passengers under 16 years old and five passengers younger than 2, according to Australia’s foreign minister, Marise Payne. From there, they will be transported by military planes to Christmas Island, a location previously used to house asylum seekers, where they will be quarantined for two weeks. The French authorities said on Monday that they had helped repatriate more than 400 people from Wuhan since the beginning of the coronavirus outbreak. France’s foreign ministry said that a plane carrying 64 French passengers, 135 from other European Union countries, 55 from countries like Brazil, Britain and Rwanda, plus several dozen consular workers, had landed in southern France on Sunday.  In Italy, a military plane carrying 56 Italian evacuees from Wuhan landed at a military airport about 20 miles south of Rome on Monday morning.  Italy’s health minister, Roberto Speranza, said that his counterparts from the Group of 7 industrialized nations planned to further discuss the coronavirus in a telephone conference call.  As more governments evacuate their citizens from Wuhan, those left behind in the locked-down city are growing uneasy. Among them are about 50 Nigerians, many of them teachers or students at universities in Wuhan. Some have young children with them. [Read: Coronavirus is forcing foreign students in China to choose: stay or go.] Lawal Bappah, an official at the Nigerian Embassy in Beijing, said the embassy was monitoring the situation and had been in touch with the Nigerian citizens in Wuhan. “What we have recommended so far is that they should continue to maintain their self-isolation,” Mr. Bappah said. “The protocol for the evacuation is a very long process. So we are waiting for directives from our authorities.” Other African governments have worked to get their citizens out of Wuhan. Morocco’s king ordered an evacuation last week, according to an official statement. An Algerian plane took off from Algiers on Sunday and was due to pick up Algerian, Libyan, Tunisian and Mauritanian nationals, according to the state news agency Algérie Presse Service. A day after New York City’s health authorities said that a woman hospitalized at Bellevue Hospital Center might have the new coronavirus, the authorities said on Sunday that two more patients might also have the virus. Samples from all three patients must be tested at an Atlanta laboratory run by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention to determine whether any of them have the coronavirus. The turnaround time for receiving the results is usually at least 36 hours, and often longer. Local health departments are not yet able to test for the new illness. Based on the type of symptoms, the patients’ recent travel in China and the exclusion of influenza and other common illnesses, the New York City health authorities are taking seriously the possibility that these patients may have the virus. Three more cases were confirmed in California on Sunday, bringing the total in the United States to 11. While much attention is focused on China’s handling of the coronavirus outbreak, medical experts worry about looming problems in Southeast Asia, which has the largest cluster of patients with the coronavirus outside China. The Times’s Southeast Asia bureau chief, Hannah Beech, reports that some governments in the region have either played down the threat of the epidemic or openly expressed worry about offending China, a superpower whose economic heft can propel their economies. On Sunday, the first overseas death from the virus, a 44-year-old Wuhan resident who had died a day earlier, was reported in the Philippines. The virus has spread to about two dozen countries. Medical experts worry that a delayed response to the coronavirus in Southeast Asia could hasten the spread of the disease. “Our greatest concern is the potential for the virus to spread to countries with weaker health systems,” said Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, the World Health Organization’s director general. In Cambodia, Prime Minister Hun Sen told a packed news conference last week that he would kick out anyone who was wearing a surgical mask because such measures were creating an unwarranted climate of fear. And in Indonesia, the health minister advised citizens to relax and avoid working overtime to stay free of the disease, saying that “to prevent it is very easy as long as your immunity is good.” 
(Want to get this briefing by email? Here’s the sign-up.)  Good evening. Here’s the latest. 1. Nearly a day late, and incomplete. Iowa’s Democratic Party released partial results for Monday’s caucuses. Above, its chairman, Troy Price, tried to explain how the first statewide test of the 2020 primary descended into chaos. The margins were close. With 62 percent of the precincts reporting, Pete Buttigieg captured 26.9 percent of the vote; Bernie Sanders 25.1 percent; Elizabeth Warren 18.3 percent and Joe Biden 15.6 percent. We’ll update with more results as they become available. The delay was caused by a coding issue in an app used to tabulate caucus results that, as our tech columnist Kevin Roose noted, was hastily designed and inadequately tested. The lesson, he writes: The only safe election is a low-tech election. 2. And on Capitol Hill, a set change. President Trump delivered his third State of the Union, after a day of Senate commentary on the impeachment and a day before the senators are expected to acquit him. Mr. Trump celebrated his record and praised the economy as a “great American comeback,” adding that “the state of our union is stronger than ever before.” Follow along here for live coverage and analysis. We also fact-checked his address.  3. President Xi Jinping appears to recognize that China’s coronavirus outbreak is a serious political threat. In comments reported by China’s state-run news media, he called the crisis “a major test of China’s system and capacity for governance,” warning officials not to resist orders or to let “bureaucratism” slow government efforts to bring the outbreak under control. Above, a new hospital in Wuhan, the epicenter of the virus.  But the number of cases in the country is rising fast, and our New New World columnist Li Yuan writes, “The Chinese people are getting a rare glimpse of how China’s giant, opaque bureaucratic system works — or, rather, how it fails to work.” 4. Oil markets were down again, another expression of the disruption caused by the coronavirus. Hong Kong reported its first death from the virus and, under pressure from health workers, closed more of its border points with the mainland. Macau shut its casinos, above. Japan quarantined a cruise ship because of a passenger’s infection, Britain advised all its citizens in mainland China to leave if they could, and Hyundai is suspending production in South Korea because of supply chain problems. And more Americans prepared to leave Wuhan on government evacuation flights. 5. “Honk More Wait More” As New York pedestrians, we really liked this story. In a test to reduce honking in traffic, the Mumbai police played a trick. They installed decibel meters at red lights, and when the noise exceeded a certain level, the light stayed red longer. They also put up a few explanatory signs that, clearly, not everyone understood. The police filmed all of this and posted a video on social media last week. Now Indians in every corner of the country are laughing about it — and officials in several other cities are inquiring about the tool. 6. Tesla’s stock has more than doubled since Jan. 1. It rose 40 percent in two days alone. Some of that makes sense. Backers are enthusiastic, since Tesla came back from a rocky start to 2019 to generate $1 billion in cash in the fourth quarter alone. Profits are no longer unknown. The company also has a lock on the growing battery electric vehicle market and is expanding factory production in China and Europe. But there’s another reason: The many investors who have been short-selling Tesla — selling borrowed stock in hopes that the price would drop — are caught in what’s called a “short squeeze.” The stock has only gone up, so they’re scrambling to buy some to cover their deals before it goes even higher. 7. The world’s strangest mammal is struggling to survive. Australia’s platypus — a rare egg-laying mammal with fur, bills and webbed feet — must fight habitat loss, predation from invasive species (including foxes and feral dogs and cats), severe drought and now wildfires wrought by climate change. A recent study estimated that climate change alone could lead the number of platypuses to decline as much as 73 percent in the next 50 years. We also looked at the post-wildfire future of the country’s Kangaroo Island. Once a wildlife haven, tourist magnet and agricultural center, it’s now unrecognizable. 8. Taylor Swift has long shaped her image by bridging the divide between transparency and privacy. A new Netflix documentary shows that might be changing. “Miss Americana” pulls back the curtain (slightly) as the pop star grapples with a formidable opponent — the patriarchy — and shows how her self-protection instincts have begun to thaw. Our music critics (and resident Swifties) discuss. And our culture reporter, a Swift fan starting at age 11 who then lapsed, says the film “rekindled a connection to Swift as a person, beyond my nostalgia for her early albums, that I haven’t felt in a long time.” 9. And for a different kind of listening experience: a Beethoven marathon. In anticipation of Ludwig van’s 250th birthday later this year, a Times editor listened to all 16 quartets by the composer — nearly nine hours of music in all — over 10 days. He grabbed a movement or two at a time, adding “a piece to a puzzle” with each additional movement. “I recommend completism,” he writes. “It’s a fine antidote to the fragmentation bomb of culture we live in and a chance to encompass an artist in totality. And when it comes to total immersion, there is nothing like Beethoven.” 10. Finally, the joy of cooking. Naked. When it comes to cooking and dining, many nudists are unequivocal. Naked means fewer inhibitions, more creativity. For them, it’s worth the occasional splatter burn. Our reporter visited Lake Como Family Nudist Resort in Lutz, Fla., where residents said their relationship to eating, at home or in restaurants, is better without all the clothing. “It’s like a painter when his mind is free of everything else,” said Jack Clark, an optometrist who lives part-time at the resort. “He paints whatever.” Have a breezy night. Your Evening Briefing is posted at 6 p.m. Eastern. And don’t miss Your Morning Briefing. Sign up here to get it by email in the Australian, Asian, European, African or American morning. Want to catch up on past briefings? You can browse them here. What did you like? What do you want to see here? Let us know at briefing@nytimes.com. 
The coronavirus is providing a lesson in how much the world’s car factories revolve around China. Hyundai, the world’s fifth-largest automaker, said Tuesday that it was temporarily stopping production lines at its factories in South Korea because of shortages of Chinese parts. The Hyundai shutdowns — the first factory lines to be idled outside China — could portend much more serious disruptions in the complex networks that supply automakers with essential components and materials. Hyundai “decided to suspend its production lines from operating at its plants in Korea,” the company said in a statement. “The decision is due to disruptions in the supply of parts resulting from the coronavirus outbreak in China.” President Trump’s trade war notwithstanding, the global economy remains highly interconnected and interdependent. Supply chains are finely tuned to deliver parts just as they are needed, so companies don’t need to waste money on big warehouses. The systems are efficient, but also vulnerable. The coronavirus is testing these supply chains in ways they have never been tested before. Automakers are especially susceptible to interruptions in the flow of goods because the industry is global, and cars are complex products with many precision parts. The scope of the damage is impossible to measure, because no one knows how long the coronavirus emergency will last and how bad it will get. So far, factory closings have not affected the production of autos and parts in North America, where almost all vehicles include at least some Chinese components. Many manufacturers have inventories of parts to use or expect new shipments that left China before the outbreak, said Dan Hearsch, a managing director in the automotive and industrial practice at AlixPartners. “Everybody planned to be down for a week, but nobody planned to be down for a month,” he said. “The manufacturers are concerned about depleting their inventory of parts, but the question is how long is it going to go on? If it becomes six weeks, eight weeks, 10 weeks, that’s a real problem.” In China, many auto plants have already shut down because of the virus, including factories run by Hyundai, Tesla, Ford and Nissan. Companies like Volkswagen, Daimler and Continental, a German supplier of electronics and other components, said they planned to reopen their factories in China next week if they received government authorization. “The supply chain is on track to be fully functional in time for start of production, and planned deliveries to customers remain unchanged,” Volkswagen said in a statement. Ford, which has two joint ventures in China, plans to resume production there early next week, a spokesman said. But in the meantime, companies are paying workers to stay home and maintaining idle factories. The closings could last beyond next week if the virus spreads further and the death toll rises. “It’s simply too early to comment on the impact,” Ford’s chief executive, Jim Hackett, told analysts on an earnings call on Tuesday. “It will take weeks to understand the implications of the outbreak.” The extra costs and lost sales hit the auto industry at an especially bad time. Sales in the United States, Europe and China slumped last year because of trade tensions, and the industry is in the midst of a costly shift to electric cars with autonomous driving technology. Daimler issued a profit warning last month, citing legal costs in the United States and other jurisdictions where the authorities are investigating possible emissions cheating. The virus has also demonstrated how much automakers have come to depend on China for sales and growth. China has become the biggest car market by far and until recently the most dynamic. But even before the virus hit, an economic slowdown in China had depressed sales. German carmakers are particularly sensitive to what happens in China. Volkswagen sells more cars there than anywhere else, and it is also a critical market for BMW and Daimler, the maker of Mercedes-Benz cars. “The biggest problem in Wuhan is that nobody is buying a car,” said Ferdinand Dudenhöffer, a professor at the University of Duisburg-Essen who follows the auto industry. “The Germans have the biggest risk portfolio in China.” European automakers and suppliers surveyed Tuesday said they were not experiencing disruptions to factories outside China, but acknowledged that the situation could change. “We are watching closely, but at the moment there are no effects,” said Saskia Essbauer, a spokeswoman for BMW. “Currently supplies are assured.” A spokeswoman for the French carmaker Renault, Rié Yamane, said in an email: “At this stage we have no impact but the supply chain teams are closely studying the subject.” And Hyundai “is reviewing various measures to minimize the disruption of its operations, including seeking alternative suppliers in other regions,” a spokesman said via email. The company said suspension schedules would vary by assembly line. Hyundai and its affiliated automaker, Kia, produced 7.2 million cars last year. Hyundai has a worldwide network of factories, including plants in Russia, Turkey, the Czech Republic and Montgomery, Ala., which can probably make up for lost production in South Korea. But the longer that Chinese factories remain shut, the greater the risk that shortages will affect other manufacturers. Auto parts frequently imported from China include wheels, suspension systems including shock absorbers, and electronic components. A handful of vehicles are produced in China and exported to the United States. They include the Buick Envision from General Motors, a sport utility vehicle. The Ford ExoSport, which is made in India with about 15 percent of its parts coming from China, is also sold in the American market. 
Read the latest developments in the coronavirus outbreak here. The death toll from the monthlong coronavirus outbreak has continued to climb, rising to 490. New cases have surged by double-digit percentages in the past 11 days, with no sign of a slowdown. More people have now died in this epidemic than in the severe acute respiratory syndrome, or SARS, outbreak of 2002-2003 in mainland China. During that outbreak, 349 people died. The new figures from China’s Health Commission on Wednesday showed that 65 people died on Tuesday and that 3,887 more people had been infected. So far, 24,324 people have been infected. Health experts say the death toll is likely to rise because of the large number of infections. The mortality rate of the coronavirus, about 2 percent so far, appears to be far lower than SARS, which has a mortality rate of about 10 percent. Experts warn they still lack full data to say definitively how lethal the new coronavirus is. Many residents in Wuhan believe the death toll is much higher than the official tally because people with flulike symptoms are being turned away by overstretched hospitals. The health care system there is so overwhelmed that many cases are not diagnosed because of a shortage of testing kits. The number of people recovering from the virus is also rising, suggesting that the treatment plan is working. On Tuesday, 262 people left the hospitals. The number of new suspected cases has dropped for two days in a row. Officials said they were tracking 3,971 new suspected cases, compared with 5,173 cases the day before. On Tuesday, health officials released details of the deaths so far, saying that two-thirds of them were men. More than 80 percent were over 60 years old, and they typically had pre-existing health conditions such as cardiovascular diseases or diabetes. The central province of Hubei has been hardest hit by the virus. The epicenter of the outbreak is home to the bulk of deaths (479) and infections (16,678). Wuhan, the capital of Hubei, in particular has borne the brunt of the deaths and infections. The government said it has put 252,154 people under surveillance. The United States has begun its second airlift of American citizens out of China. “Two planes have departed Wuhan en route to the United States,” the State Department said in a statement Wednesday night. Little information was immediately available on the planes’ destination. But it was believed that like the first Americans evacuated from Wuhan, the passengers will be taken to a military base and directed to remain there pending medical tests. The first evacuees were flown from Wuhan on Jan. 29, and their plane stopped in Anchorage to refuel and for the passengers to be given initial screenings. The Boeing 747 then continued on to March Air Reserve Base in Riverside, Calif. Britain and France intensified warnings to their citizens in China on Tuesday, urging all who could do so to vacate the mainland to minimize the risk of infection. “If you’re in China and able to leave, you should do so,” Britain’s Foreign Office said in an updated travel advisory.  The Foreign Office also advised “against all travel” to Hubei Province, the epicenter of the outbreak, and “against all but essential travel to the rest of mainland China.” It made exceptions for Hong Kong and Macau. “Where there are still British nationals in Hubei Province who wish to be evacuated, we will continue to work around the clock to facilitate this,” said Britain’s foreign secretary, Dominic Raab. France’s Foreign Ministry issued a similar warning. “As a precaution,” the warning said, “it is recommended that the French, in particular families, who have no essential reason to stay in China, move away temporarily from the country.” In Britain, at least, the government faced criticism for saying little about why it had escalated its warnings, leaving some Britons in China feeling anxious and confused.  Emily Thornberry, the opposition Labour Party’s spokeswoman on foreign affairs, accused the government of abandoning British citizens in China. “From the very start of this outbreak, the government’s response has been a total shambles,” she said.  Hyundai, the world’s fifth-largest carmaker, said on Tuesday that it was suspending production lines at its car factories in South Korea, one of the first major manufacturers to face severe supply chain issues because of the coronavirus. Hyundai, which relies on auto parts from China, said in a statement that it had “decided to suspend its production lines from operating at its plants in Korea. The decision is due to disruptions in the supply of parts resulting from the coronavirus outbreak in China.” Many auto plants in China have shut down because of the virus, including factories run by Hyundai, Tesla, Ford and Nissan. Hyundai plants in South Korea would be the first to shut down lines outside China. “The company is reviewing various measures to minimize the disruption of its operations, including seeking alternative suppliers in other regions,” a Hyundai spokesman said in an email. Hyundai has a worldwide network of factories, including plants in Russia, Turkey, the Czech Republic and Montgomery, Ala., which can probably make up for lost production in Korea. But the shutdown of some production at its Korean plants may signal further disruptions at manufacturers that depend on parts from China. The longer that Chinese factories remain shut down, the greater the risk of shortages of key components. At a time when they are already cutting jobs and weighed down by debt, American oil producers are bracing for the latest shock to hit world energy markets: the economic effects of the coronavirus outbreak on China and beyond. Oil and natural gas producers have been suffering from low commodity prices for the past year and now expect a sharp drop in global prices for their products. As a result, they are preparing to slash investments in exploration and production. The price of West Texas intermediate crude, a key benchmark, fell below $50 on Monday, a 20 percent decline in less than a month. After recovering slightly Tuesday morning, the price fell further. Just a few weeks after the outbreak of the virus, daily Chinese oil demand is already down 20 percent because of dwindling air travel, road transportation and manufacturing.  China buys only about 200,000 barrels a day of oil and refined transportation fuels from the United States, out of 8.5 million barrels of total daily American exports. But oil is a global commodity, and benchmark prices are set on world markets, not domestically. Lower prices mean lower profits. “It’s a blow,” said Steven Pruett, chief executive of Elevation Resources. China’s consul general in New York, Huang Ping, publicly thanked the Chinese-American community and other concerned Americans on Tuesday for their aid in battling the coronavirus outbreak. But Mr. Huang, a veteran diplomat, also criticized what he described as an overreaction by the American government in severely restricting travel to and from China. He singled out in particular the decision to evacuate the American Consulate in Wuhan, the city of 11 million in Hubei where the outbreak was first detected. “I personally don’t quite get it,” Mr. Huang said at a news conference at the Chinese Consulate in Manhattan. “It’s not the practice of Chinese diplomats. I myself did a few evacuations, and at a difficult time of something like that, the diplomats of China would be sent in, rather than pulling out, because you might get people there who need you.” Mr. Huang, whose consular operations cover 10 states where 130,000 Chinese students are enrolled in universities, also said he had no clarity on how many of them were from Hubei or how recently they had been there, partly because of American privacy rules. “We’ve been trying our best to find out this information,” he said. “But it’s not that easy.” Mr. Huang spoke a day after visiting Boston, where a University of Massachusetts student tested positive for the coronavirus last week after returning from China. School officials said the student was recovering, and remained in isolation. Asked about instances of anti-Chinese bigotry in the United States that have been tied to the coronavirus outbreak, Mr. Huang said that “I really don’t want to see this,” and that he had expressed his concern to Massachusetts officials that the Boston case not incite such behavior. “I said, ‘The virus is the enemy, not the Chinese,’” Mr. Huang said. [Have you or someone you know faced prejudice in the United States as a result of coronavirus fears? Please contact us at coronavirus@nytimes.com if you are willing to share your story.] What is a coronavirus, and how dangerous is it? Read up on the basics, including its symptoms and how it is transmitted. Where has the virus spread? You can track its movement with this map. How is the United States being affected? There were 11 confirmed cases as of Monday. American citizens and permanent residents who fly to the United States from China are now subject to a two-week quarantine. China’s leader, Xi Jinping, has signaled a more assertive strategy for dealing with the coronavirus epidemic after days of seeming to retreat from center stage. His convening of a second special Communist Party meeting on Monday was only his second public appearance since the government in Wuhan, which is at the epicenter of the outbreak, took the extraordinary step of locking down the city on Jan. 23. That order was almost certainly approved at the highest levels in Beijing. Mr. Xi sent Premier Li Keqiang to Wuhan more than a week ago, when the death toll stood at 106. By Tuesday, the toll in China was more than 420 deaths. The Chinese government has reported 20,438 confirmed cases. Mr. Xi called the crisis “a major test of China’s system and capacity for governance,” according to the state-run news media. He warned officials not to resist orders or to let “bureaucratism” slow government efforts to bring the outbreak under control. “Those who disobey the unified command or shirk off responsibilities will be punished,” Mr. Xi said, the Xinhua news agency reported.  A 39-year-old man in Hong Kong died on Tuesday from the coronavirus, the city’s Hospital Authority said. It was the first death from the outbreak was in Hong Kong, and the second outside mainland China. The other death, of a man from Wuhan, was in the Philippines. The man who died in Hong Kong traveled by train to Wuhan on Jan. 21 and returned to the Chinese territory two days later, the government said. Health officials said he also had diabetes, which may have impaired his immune system.  The man’s mother, who did not travel to Wuhan, later contracted the virus. His wife and two children, as well as a domestic worker employed by the family, are being quarantined. Though Hong Kong shares a landmass with mainland China, the territory has not been hit nearly as hard by the outbreak, and has just 17 confirmed cases. A neighboring city just across the border, Shenzhen, has had hundreds of cases. Hong Kong’s government has been under pressure to close its borders to mainland China. All but three border checkpoints out of 16 were shut on Monday, but the remaining entry points can still admit thousands of mainland Chinese visitors per day. More than 2,500 medical workers went on strike Monday to demand a fully closed border.  The coronavirus crisis is testing China’s ability to feed its 1.4 billion people, one of the Communist Party’s proudest achievements. Cooped up at home and fearful that the epidemic could last weeks or even months, families across China are hoarding provisions, making it harder for shops and supermarkets to keep fresh food in stock. Many places have closed off roads to passing traffic, slowing truck shipments and raising freight costs. Chinese officials have vowed to keep food flowing to Wuhan, the inland city of 11 million at the center of the outbreak. Shouguang, one of the country’s biggest hubs for growing, trading and shipping vegetables, has begun donating produce by the truckload to the locked-down city. As airlines cancel flights to and from China, some travelers are trying to get refunds, while others are unsure of whether to rebook their trips for later dates or cancel them altogether. There is also confusion for those with itineraries via China to other destinations. InsureMyTrip, a travel insurance comparison site, has experienced “at least a 30 percent increase in call volume,” said Julie Loffredi, the media relations manager. Most calls concern the coronavirus. For some, it is unclear who is responsible for issuing refunds, and travel insurance does not always cover the cost of a canceled trip, since policies differ and refund eligibility may depend on when an insurance policy was bought. On Tuesday, United Airlines said that it would suspend flights from Feb. 8 until Feb. 20 in light of a “continued drop in demand.” In 2018, United carried 14.5 percent of the 3.9 million passengers who took nonstop flights between the United States and Hong Kong. Cathay Pacific, the flagship airline of Hong Kong, said it was temporarily cutting its flight capacity 30 percent, including suspending 90 percent of its flights into mainland China. American Airlines said it had suspended flights to Hong Kong from both Dallas/Fort Worth and Los Angeles through Feb. 20 “due to demand.” And Japan Airlines said it was suspending several flights to mainland China, and the British authorities said that British Airways and Virgin Atlantic had suspended their mainland China flights. The drugmaker GlaxoSmithKline has joined the global hunt for a vaccine for the new coronavirus, aiming to develop a type of treatment that increases the protection offered by a vaccine. That approach relies on using an agent known as an adjuvant, which helps create stronger and longer-lasting immunity against infections than a vaccine can provide on its own. The use of this technology allows scientists to produce vaccines much faster and make them available to more people, said Dr. Richard Hatchett, the chief executive of the Coalition for Epidemic Preparedness Innovations, which is partnering with GSK. GSK also used adjuvant technology to develop vaccines against pandemic influenza in 2009. More than a dozen biotech companies and academic groups are working on coronavirus vaccines. Taiwan’s Centers for Disease Control said last week that healthy people did not need to wear surgical masks unless visiting a hospital. Hong Kong’s chief executive instructed officials on Tuesday to stop wearing masks to help save supplies for medical workers. The answer to the simplest of questions — do the masks work? — is, unfortunately, not that simple. There isn’t much high-quality scientific evidence on whether masks are an effective safeguard outside health care settings, where experts generally agree that they reduce risks. It appears that while they can slow the spread of disease when worn by sick people, the masks — of which there is now a global shortage — do little when worn by healthy people. Still, in some Asian cities like Hong Kong, where long lines form each morning for limited mask supplies, most people on sidewalks and public transportation wear one, and people who don’t are sometimes questioned about it. Most experts agree: To prevent the spread of the coronavirus and keep yourself safe, it’s best to wash your hands and avoid touching your face. Ever since the coronavirus outbreak was first reported, investors have been trying to handicap its impact on the global economy. Last week, the concern was that the travel shutdowns and shuttered factories would hurt growth both in China and elsewhere. This week, the sentiment seems to be that maybe the big picture won’t be so bad after all. Stocks shot higher on Tuesday, with the S&P 500 on track for its best day of the year, after China took further measures to bolster its economy amid the still-expanding outbreak. The People’s Bank of China said that it pumped a further 500 billion yuan (roughly $71 billion) into the country’s financial system on Tuesday, following an injection of 1.2 trillion yuan (over $170 billion) into its financial markets the day before. It wasn’t just Wall Street that rallied on the news. In Asia, stocks in Shanghai and Hong Kong were also sharply higher. Major European markets in France, Germany and Italy rose more than 1 percent. Other recent updates on corporate earnings and the economy have also given investors a lift. On Monday, a closely watched gauge of manufacturing showed that factory activity expanded in the United States in January, after five straight months of contraction in the industrial sector. The report suggested that the manufacturing turndown — a reflection of a global factory slowdown widely linked to the trade war — that had hampered the American economy might have been easing, at least before the outbreak in China hit. The recent round of fourth-quarter corporate earning reports have also been better than expected. Of course, investors can change their minds quickly, and the mood in stock markets may well sour if traders are confronted with evidence of the coronavirus impact that they had not anticipated. But for now, even those companies that are certain to be affected by the shutdowns are rebounding. For example, after officials in the city of Macau asked its 41 casinos to close for half a month — a move that will shut down the world’s gambling capital — shares of the big casinos operators Wynn Resorts and Las Vegas Sands rose.  Ten passengers on a cruise ship quarantined in Yokohama, Japan, have tested positive for the coronavirus, Japan’s health minister said on Wednesday. The ship, carrying around 3,700 people, arrived in Yokohama on Tuesday, but the authorities did not allow anyone off. An 80-year-old Hong Kong resident who had disembarked earlier in his home city was found to be infected. In all, 273 passengers were tested for the virus after everyone on board underwent an initial health screening. Twenty-one were cleared, and officials were awaiting the other results. The passengers who tested positive were being transported by a Japanese Coast Guard ship to a hospital. The other passengers are to remain quarantined on board the Princess Cruises ship. Also on Wednesday, the American military, which has a large presence in Japan, said that anyone under its jurisdiction who was returning to the country from China would undergo a 14-day quarantine.   A woman hospitalized in New York City amid concerns that she might have the coronavirus has tested negative, city health officials said Tuesday. The woman, was one of three people recently hospitalized in the city who doctors thought might be infected. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention reported the negative test results to the city authorities on Tuesday, officials said. Test results for the other two patients are pending, officials said. “We’re relieved to hear that the person in question does not have the novel coronavirus,” Mayor Bill de Blasio said in a statement. “I can’t say this enough: If you have the symptoms and recent travel history, please see your health provider immediately.” There has yet to be a confirmed case of the new illness in New York City or anywhere in New York State. But like other cities, New York is starting to experience the economic fallout of a precipitous drop in Chinese visitors because of travel restrictions. Tour operators and travel agents in the New York area are bracing for empty rooms in hotels and empty seats on tour buses. Chinese tourists represent the second-largest group of foreign travelers to New York. A company that arranges Chinese-language bus tours of the sights in Manhattan is dealing with as many as 300 cancellations from Chinese tourists. And the owner of a Queens travel agency who had booked trips for 200 Chinese tourists in the next two weeks said he might have to lay off two of his five employees. Restaurant and store owners in New York’s three main Chinatowns say business has been hurt. In restaurants in the Manhattan Chinatown, workers and owners said business had dropped 50 to 70 percent in the last 10 days. With Wuhan in lockdown, volunteers are trying to reach thousands of pets trapped alone in homes and at risk of starvation. Many pet owners who traveled out of the city during the Lunar New Year holiday period left only a few days’ supply of food and water, and they have taken to social media to plead for help in checking on their animals. Hundreds of people, worried about their cats, dogs, pigs and snakes, have joined chat groups connecting them with volunteers. On Saturday, the Wuhan Small Animal Protection Association, which is providing food and water to pets in isolation, said it had helped more than 600 pets in the last week. One Wuhan resident who asked to be identified as Lao Mao, or Old Cat, told Reuters that his team of volunteers had rescued more than 1,000 pets since Jan. 25, and estimated that as many as 50,000 pets remained unattended in the city. But gaining entry to locked apartments and buildings, even with owners’ permission, has been a challenge. In one instance, Lao Mao said, he climbed up rusty pipes to feed two cats in a third-floor apartment that had been left alone for 10 days. He found the cats barely alive under a sofa. When he video-called the owners, who could not return to Wuhan because of roadblocks, they cried. Macau’s top official said on Tuesday that the government would shut down the city’s lucrative casinos for half a month to combat the coronavirus outbreak, a drastic move that will further weaken the Chinese territory’s ailing economy. The semiautonomous enclave, which neighbors Hong Kong and is the world’s largest gambling hub, has reported 10 confirmed cases of the coronavirus, with a worker in the gambling industry among those infected. The shutdown was announced on Tuesday by Ho Iat Seng, the chief executive. “Of course this was a difficult decision, but we must do it for the health of Macau’s residents,” Mr. Ho said. Macau’s casinos have struggled as the coronavirus outbreak led to growing travel restrictions for visitors from the mainland. Macau, the only place in China where casino gambling is legal, derives a significant portion of its revenue from gamblers from the mainland. Mr. Ho also said the city’s basic public services — except for emergency ones — would be suspended, and he urged Macau residents to “not go outside” except to get food. The death toll from the new coronavirus has exceeded that of the severe acute respiratory syndrome outbreak in 2002 and 2003 in mainland China. But the number of people who have recovered nationwide has also risen in recent days, suggesting that the new virus’s fatality rate is relatively low. China’s Health Commission reported on Tuesday that there were 632 recoveries and more than 420 deaths nationwide. During the SARS outbreak, 349 people died in mainland China. Health experts say they are encouraged by the steady rise in the number of recoveries. They take it as evidence that the treatments meted out have been effective and that the virus does not appear to be as deadly as SARS. SARS had a mortality rate of 9.6 percent, and about 2 percent of those reported to have been infected with the new coronavirus have died. 
HONG KONG — A patient diagnosed with the new coronavirus became Hong Kong’s first fatality from the affliction Tuesday as Thailand reported six more cases, Japan quarantined a cruise ship because of a passenger’s infection and Macau shut its casinos, underscoring the contagion’s spread beyond mainland China. In further signs of the epidemic’s disruptive effects, Britain and France advised all their citizens in mainland China to leave if they could, and South Korea’s Hyundai automaker idled factories because of Chinese supply-chain problems. The developments came as President Xi Jinping of China promised a toughened response. But the World Health Organization, worried that the epidemic could widen globally, asked donors on Tuesday for an immediate $675 million infusion and said it would ship 250,000 test kits around the world to help diagnose cases. The money primarily is intended for poor countries with weak public health systems and regular arrivals of passengers from China; many African countries fall under that heading because more than one million Chinese expatriates work on the continent and thousands of African students are studying in China. The death of a 39-year-old man in Hong Kong was only the second reported outside mainland China, after the death in the Philippines of a man from Wuhan, the city in China’s central Hubei Province where the outbreak began. Within mainland China, the toll of the virus continued to climb fast, with 425 deaths and 20,438 confirmed cases as of Tuesday, Chinese health authorities reported — roughly double the figures four days earlier. By Wednesday, the numbers in China had climbed to at least 490 dead and 24,324 confirmed cases, the authorities said. More than 180 infections have been confirmed in two dozen other countries and territories. Mr. Xi on Monday called the outbreak “a major test of China’s system and capacity for governance,” according to the state-run news media, and suggested more aggressive action to come, though without offering details. Trying to quell complaints that the government had not responded effectively, Mr. Xi convened a second special meeting of the ruling Communist Party’s Politburo Standing Committee to address the crisis, and warned government officials not to hinder actions demanded by Beijing. “Those who disobey the unified command or shirk off responsibilities will be punished,” he said, according to the Xinhua news agency. Of the patients who have died in mainland China, more than 80 percent were older than 60, and more than 75 percent had an underlying health condition that put them at greater risk, Jiao Yahui, an official with China’s health commission, said on Tuesday. Two-thirds of the fatalities were men, she added. The death in Hong Kong came as the city entered the second day of a strike by hospital workers demanding that the government close the border with mainland China. Many countries have shut off or sharply curtailed traffic to and from China to prevent the virus from spreading. The patient had traveled to Wuhan by train on Jan. 21, and had returned to Hong Kong two days later, the Hong Kong government said in a statement. Health officials said he also had diabetes, which can impair the immune system. His death raised further concerns in the city because of the possibility that the disease was transmitted within the man’s household. His mother, who did not travel to Wuhan, later contracted the virus. The man’s wife and two children and a domestic helper who worked for him are being quarantined. Hong Kong has 17 confirmed cases of the new strain of coronavirus, including four that are highly likely to have been transmitted locally, said Chuang Shuk-kwan, a health department official. Dr. Chuang said there was a “significant risk of community transmission in Hong Kong” and a large-scale local outbreak could not be ruled out. At least 7,000 health workers in Hong Kong took part in the strike on Tuesday, including 4,500 nurses and 360 doctors, according to the Hospital Authority Employees Alliance, the union that organized it. The Hospital Authority, which has about 80,000 employees, said 4,400 workers were absent on Tuesday, suggesting that there were fewer strikers than the union had claimed. Carrie Lam, Hong Kong’s top official, has ordered all but three of Hong Kong’s entry points from the mainland closed, and the central government has said it will stop issuing individual entry permits for people from the mainland. But Mrs. Lam has resisted shutting the border entirely, saying that would be discriminatory and against World Health Organization recommendations. Mrs. Lam has condemned the strike and said it had affected isolation wards, neonatal intensive care and delivery of some cancer treatments. “I’m appealing to those who are taking part in this action that let’s put the interests of the patients and the entire public health system above all other things,” she said. The union, which formed during last year’s antigovernment protest movement, said it would continue the strike on Wednesday.  “There is only one person who can solve this epidemic — and that is Carrie Lam,” said Winnie Yu, head of the union. “She must order a total shutdown of the border and cut off the roots of the virus.” In nearby Macau, the top official, Ho Iat Seng, said on Tuesday that the government would shutter the city’s lucrative casinos for half a month to combat the coronavirus outbreak, a severe blow to the Chinese territory’s already ailing economy. Macau, a semiautonomous enclave that is the world’s largest gambling center, has reported 10 confirmed cases of the coronavirus, including a gambling-industry worker. “Of course this was a difficult decision, but we must do it, for the health of Macau’s residents — this is our only goal,” Mr. Ho said. “Macau can still bear these economic losses right now.” Macau’s casinos have struggled as the coronavirus outbreak has led to growing travel restrictions for visitors from the mainland. Macau, the only place in China where casino gambling is legal, derives a significant portion of its revenue from gamblers from the mainland. Mr. Ho also said the city’s basic public services — except for emergency ones — would be suspended, and he urged Macau residents to “not go outside” except to get food. “This is not a holiday,” he said. Thailand, which has 25 coronavirus cases, the highest number outside China, said that two of the six new cases reported on Tuesday were a couple who had traveled to Japan, raising the possibility they may have been infected there. A South Korean woman who traveled to Thailand before returning home on Jan. 19 was also infected, South Korean health officials said on Tuesday. South Korea has 16 confirmed cases. Britain and France both elevated their travel warnings on Tuesday. Britain’s Foreign Office told citizens, “if you’re in China and able to leave, you should do so,” and France’s Foreign Ministry issued similar advice. But several major international airlines, including British Airways and Air France, have suspended China service because of the outbreak, leaving British and French citizens who wish to heed the advice limited travel options for returning home. In addition, American Airlines and United Airlines said they had suspended service to Hong Kong, primarily because of falling demand. Fears about the potential spread of the virus led Japan to quarantine around 3,700 people aboard a cruise ship off the port city of Yokohama because a passenger had tested positive, the Japanese news media and the authorities said on Tuesday. The passenger, an 80-year-old resident of Hong Kong, boarded the ship in Yokohama on Jan. 20, the national broadcaster NHK reported. He arrived five days later in Hong Kong, where he disembarked and was diagnosed, it said. The ship traveled to Vietnam, Taiwan and the Japanese island of Okinawa before returning to Yokohama, where it is anchored. Passengers were being held aboard as they awaited officials from Japan’s Health Ministry to test them for the coronavirus, the chief cabinet secretary, Yoshihide Suga, said during a regular news briefing on Tuesday. “The quarantine office will make an appropriate judgment about whether we will approve the ship to dock and passengers to disembark,” he said, adding that the quarantine office would make the decision based on guidelines from the World Health Organization. 
(Want to get this briefing by email? Here’s the sign-up.) Preliminary results from the Iowa caucuses show Pete Buttigieg with a narrow lead over Bernie Sanders at the top of the Democratic primary field. As of 11:30 p.m. in Iowa, or 5:30 a.m. Wednesday in London, it was unclear when the full results would be released. Here’s what we know so far. Most of the Democratic candidates are now barreling toward the New Hampshire primary on Feb. 11. One prominent exception is Michael Bloomberg, the former New York City mayor, who is skipping the first four nominating contests but aggressively contesting larger states that begin voting in March. Details: The Iowa votes counted so far reflect 71 percent of the precincts and are relatively representative of the state. But the margin between Mr. Buttigieg and Mr. Sanders — 26.8 percent and 25.2 percent, respectively, of the state’s delegate equivalents — is unusually slim. Background: After a razor-close finish in Iowa between Hillary Clinton and Mr. Sanders in 2016, new standards this year required officials to submit three numbers — rather than one — from each of the state’s 1,600-plus precincts. That change, and a new app, slowed the reporting of results. Go deeper: The app had been designed to help Democrats to match the Republicans’ prowess in digital advertising. Its misfires raise new questions about how the party hopes to compete with the Trump campaign in the presidential election. The United States has begun its second airlift of American citizens out of China, and Britain and France have urged their citizens to leave the country if they can. Here’s the latest on a coronavirus outbreak that has killed at least 490 people, primarily in the Chinese province of Hubei, and sickened more than 20,000 in Asia. The epidemic is disrupting life and business across the globe. On Tuesday, the South Korean carmaker Hyundai said it had idled factories because of Chinese supply-chain problems; Japan said it had quarantined a cruise ship with 3,700 people aboard because a passenger had tested positive for the virus; and Macau, a gambling hub and semiautonomous Chinese enclave, said it would shut its casinos for two weeks. Quotable: “It’s heartbreaking,” says Zhang Lei, a cabdriver who volunteers to ferry residents, especially older adults, to grocery stores and hospitals in Wuhan, the epicenter of the outbreak. “There is no one to take care of them.” On Twitter: The Times correspondents Amy Qin and Chris Buckley are our eyes and ears in Wuhan, the provincial capital of Hubei. Visuals: Our maps track where the virus has spread, and drone footage shows Wuhan, a city of 11 million people, looking unusually quiet and desolate. Analysis: Our columnist Li Yuan writes that the Chinese government’s response to the crisis offers its 1.4 billion people “a rare glimpse of how China’s giant, opaque bureaucratic system works — or, rather, how it fails to work.” On the eve of a vote that will almost certainly acquit him of impeachment charges, President Trump used a major speech to claim credit for a “great American comeback” and define the coming presidential election as a battle to stop the rise of socialism in the United States. Here’s a roundup of our coverage and six takeaways from the night. In the annual State of the Union address, Mr. Trump argued against Democratic plans to expand access to health care and praised his own tax cuts and the American drone strike that killed a senior Iranian commander, among other subjects. The president also sprinkled the evening with dramatic flourishes — an army sergeant surprising his family in the House chamber, for example — that evoked his days as a reality television star. Quote of note: “In just three short years, we have shattered the mentality of American decline and we have rejected the downsizing of America’s destiny,” Mr. Trump told Congress, speaking in the same House chamber where he was impeached nearly seven weeks ago. Mutual snubs: In a decidedly chilly exchange, Mr. Trump declined to shake the hand of Speaker Nancy Pelosi, who then introduced him in a perfunctory way that eschewed the more florid language that she and other speakers have used in the past. She later ripped up her copy of his speech. Notable guest: Juan Guaidó, the Venezuelan opposition leader, sat in Mr. Trump’s guest box. It was America’s most visible show of support yet for Mr. Guaidó, who is fighting to oust his country’s president from power. As antigovernment protests continue in Lebanon, many Shiites in the country are struggling to square their loyalty to Hezbollah with its support for the status quo: a government that cannot offer 24-hour electricity, much less a functional economy. Hezbollah, an Islamist militia that has propped up the government’s incompetence since entering Lebanese politics in 2005, also faces a choice: Will it keep trying to smother demonstrations by Shiites, or listen to their economic grievances? Context: Hezbollah has insinuated that the protests are the product of a foreign conspiracy against Shiites. That campaign, coupled with unrest in Iraq and Iran over the American killing of a top Iranian commander, has prompted some onetime Lebanese protesters to believe that the United States is secretly maneuvering to pressure the militia and its Shiite partners in all three countries. Catch up: Lebanon’s refuse crisis says a lot about its political economy. One consequence of the Fukushima nuclear disaster of 2011: Japan has all but closed its nuclear power program, and now plans to build as many as 22 new coal-fired power plants. The construction (one site is pictured above) sets Japan apart from other developed economies that are busy phasing out coal. Critics say it also undercuts the government’s effort to portray this summer’s Olympic Games in Tokyo as one of the greenest ever. Daniel arap Moi: As the autocratic president of Kenya from 1978 to 2002, he ruled the country in a postcolonial era of political repression, economic stagnation and notorious corruption. He died on Tuesday at 95. Prada: The Italian fashion brand on Tuesday reached a deal with the New York City Commission on Human Rights to provide “racial equity training” for its New York employees and Milan executives, after a civil rights lawyer filed a complaint about figurines that resembled monkeys in blackface. Tech profits: Alphabet, Amazon, Apple, Facebook and Microsoft made a combined $55.2 billion in net profit in the most recent quarter, making clear that threats of regulatory and legal scrutiny have done little to hurt the bottom line. Tesla shares: They closed at $887 on Tuesday, up from $650 two trading days earlier, for a gain of 36 percent. That reflects optimism over the electric-car manufacturer’s future, but also moves by the company’s haters to cut their losses. Snapshot: Above, a nudist dinner party in Florida. (Yes, this is a thing.) What we’re listening to: This episode of “Literary Friction,” a monthly podcast about books, by Carrie Plitt, a literary agent, and Octavia Bright, a writer and academic. “I’m just catching up with its 2019-in-review episode,” says Chris Stanford of the Briefings team. “And based on their recommendations, I’ve already added to my nightstand’s ever-growing pile.” Cook: This recipe for a chocolate caramel tart comes from the dawn of the salty-dessert trend, and it’s a perfect example of why the pairing works. Action: Abi Daré’s debut novel, “The Girl With the Louding Voice,” tells the story of a 14-year-old girl who finds work as a housemaid for a rich family in Lagos, Nigeria. Smarter Living: A former F.B.I. negotiator offers some interesting tips for travel. Australia’s bush fires have brought pain and destruction to land, wildlife and property, but they have also highlighted the camaraderie and support that Australians call “mateship.” Damien Cave, our Australia bureau chief, experienced it firsthand recently while reporting on volunteer firefighters. This is his account. We had just finished interviewing a group of firefighters trying to contain a sprawling blaze, and after bouncing down rocky roads for a few miles, we hit pavement. That’s when I heard the familiar thump, thump, thump. I turned to Matthew Abbott, the photographer who was driving. “I think we’ve got a flat,” I said. The back left tire on his Toyota pickup was hissing like a snake. And the jack he had? Built for a smaller car. While we searched for rocks to prop it up, an S.U.V. pulled over. “Need any help?” the older gentleman behind the wheel asked. Then a truck driver pulling a load of timber stopped, and a man with tattoos on his arms and legs hopped out. Within minutes, he’d found a better place for the jack, lying on the ground to push it into place. Three or four other cars drove down the small country road while we were stuck. Every driver stopped to offer assistance. Every. Single. One. Such kindness is no panacea for climate change or mega-blazes, but it does show that Australia has depths of something it will need to recover from this horrific fire season: thoughtfulness and empathy. 
 President Trump boasted of an economic boom in his State of the Union address last night. Here’s the NYT fact check of his claims. (Want this in your inbox each morning? Sign up here.) In the same week that Alphabet drew back a curtain on YouTube’s money machine, we also now have a better sense of how big Facebook’s Instagram subsidiary is — and it’s even larger. Instagram collected about $20 billion in ad revenue last year, Sarah Frier and Nico Grant of Bloomberg report, citing unnamed sources. That’s more than a quarter of all of Facebook’s sales last year — and a sea change from 2012, the year that Facebook bought Instagram, when the service had no ads.  YouTube’s reported ad revenue was $15.2 billion last year. And that’s a “gross revenue” figure including money meant to be shared with the service’s content creators. (Those video stars also now want a bigger cut from YouTube.) And Instagram doesn’t share any revenue with users, as our colleague Shira Ovide points out. The revelation underscores why Facebook is fighting critics who want the company broken up. The tech giant is under investigation from the antitrust authorities, and lawmakers like Senator Elizabeth Warren have said it shouldn’t be allowed to exist in its current form. Question of the day: Which deal will be considered better 10 years from now: Facebook’s $1 billion takeover of Instagram, or Google’s $1.65 billion acquisition of YouTube? Send us your thoughts. The chaos of the Iowa Democratic caucuses came down not to hacking, but to a faulty app created by a company whose previous work was riddled with failures, the NYT reports. • The app was created by Shadow, which was founded by veterans of Hillary Clinton’s presidential campaign. • But the company almost went bankrupt when its previous products failed. It was bailed out by Acronym, a highly touted progressive digital advocacy group. • Shadow took on a seemingly impossible task: creating an app to tabulate caucus results within two months. The work was so rushed that the company didn’t even have time for Apple to approve the app. “Precinct leaders failed to access the app or reported being locked out as they sought to punch in numbers to report them to state party officials,” the WaPo reports. The debacle raises questions about the Democrats’ digital strategy, which the NYT notes largely revolves around “enterprises that are intended to both boost the Democrats’ digital game and turn a profit, like Shadow.” (The Trump campaign keeps its digital operations largely in-house.) The electric-car maker’s shares have been on a tear this year, prompting some to wonder whether it’s in bubble territory. Here are a few potential factors behind the company’s dizzying run. • Critics are getting squeezed. Short-sellers — investors who have borrowed Tesla shares and sold them, betting that the stock will fall when they buy back shares to cover their bets — are suffering as the stock rises. Many of them may be covering their bets by buying more shares, in what’s known as a short squeeze. • Hugely enthusiastic backers. The prominent investor Ron Baron added to the exuberant expectations for Tesla yesterday, saying that the company could have $1 trillion in total revenue over the coming decade. The bottom line: “You can explain it with math,” Peter Cecchini, the chief market strategist at Cantor Fitzgerald, told the WSJ. “But you don’t need to explain it with math to know that it’s silly.” More: Saudi Arabia’s sovereign wealth fund sold nearly all of its shares in Tesla in the fourth quarter — before the company’s stock began its current run.  Analysts and business executives have worried that the current coronavirus outbreak could affect global supply chains. That fear is increasingly becoming reality. The carmaker Hyundai said it was idling plants in South Korea because of a shortage of Chinese parts. They are the first major factory lines outside China to be temporarily shut down. “The global economy remains highly interconnected and interdependent,” write Jack Ewing, Neal Boudette and Geneva Abdul of the NYT. “Supply chains are finely tuned to deliver parts just as they are needed, so companies don’t need to waste money on big warehouses.” Many manufacturers have stockpiles of Chinese parts — but “nobody planned to be down for a month,” Dan Hearsch of the consultancy AlixPartners told the NYT. “If it becomes six weeks, eight weeks, 10 weeks, that’s a real problem.” More: The S.E.C. is warning investors about fraudulent claims tied to coronavirus treatments. And critics of Beijing are mocking the government’s response as a game of “tossing the wok.” When the German lender began a business relationship with Donald Trump, it took on a borrower whom few on Wall Street were willing to work with. That has since put Deutsche Bank under a spotlight — and made it privy to Mr. Trump’s true finances, David Enrich writes in the NYT magazine. From the article, which is based on Mr. Enrich’s new book, “Dark Towers: Deutsche Bank, Donald Trump, and an Epic Trail of Destruction”: Mr. Enrich’s takeaway: “Deutsche Bank’s relationship with Trump, rather than being an odd outlier, is a kind of object lesson in how the bank lost its way.” Bonus: Mr. Enrich has obtained the talking points that Deutsche Bank gave employees before his book’s publication. Walt Disney’s earnings report yesterday may have been a mixed bag, but Wall Street mainly cared about one figure: the number of subscribers to its Disney Plus streaming service, writes Brooks Barnes of the NYT. Disney Plus reported 28.6 million subscribers as of Monday. That’s impressive for a service that’s less than three months old and isn’t available in most countries. Bob Iger, Disney’s C.E.O., told analysts that it “exceeded even our greatest expectations.” That number is expected to grow this spring as Disney Plus enters new markets beyond the U.S., Canada and three other countries. Mr. Iger has bet Disney’s future in part on streaming, and the subscriber number puts the service in a strong position to compete with the likes of Netflix (167 million subscribers worldwide) and Amazon Prime (150 million subscribers worldwide). Now for the bad news: • Disney expects to lose over $300 million from the temporary closing of its Shanghai and Hong Kong theme parks because of the coronavirus outbreak. • Profit declined sharply at ESPN, long Disney’s biggest moneymaker. Deals • The owner of the New York Stock Exchange, Intercontinental Exchange, has offered to buy eBay, though talks appear to be off for now. (WSJ) • Inside Brookfield, the secretive $500 billion investment firm that grew out of the Seagram family fortune. (FT) • The hedge fund billionaire Steve Cohen is reportedly ending talks to buy the Mets. (NY Post) Politics and policy • Mike Bloomberg said that he didn’t agree with Senator Bernie Sanders on “virtually anything” — but that he would back him if Mr. Sanders became the Democratic presidential nominee. (Axios) Tech • Michael Ronen, a senior investing partner at SoftBank’s Vision Fund, is leaving. (FT) • The White House is working with American tech companies like Microsoft and Dell to create software for next-generation 5G wireless networks that doesn’t rely on Huawei of China. (WSJ) • The S.E.C. and the messaging app Telegram are heading to court over the company’s $1.7 billion sale of cryptocurrency in 2018. (WSJ) • Protocol, the new tech site from the publisher of Politico, has gone live. (Protocol) Best of the rest • U.S. regulators barred a senior Goldman Sachs executive in Asia from the banking industry over his role in the 1MDB corruption scandal. (NYT) • Macy’s plans to close 125 stores and lay off about 2,000 employees. (NYT) • “Jeffrey Epstein’s Mystery Bank Came Alive After His Death.” (NYT) • Netflix has spent millions marketing its movies for awards season, but it’s not expected to win many Oscars. (NYT) We’d love your feedback. Please email thoughts and suggestions to business@nytimes.com. 
WASHINGTON — The overall United States trade deficit shrank last year for the first time in six years as the American economy cooled, domestic oil production soared and President Trump waged an aggressive global trade war to rewrite America’s trading terms. The trade deficit for both goods and services fell to $616.8 billion in 2019, down $10.9 billion from the previous year, according to data released by the Commerce Department on Wednesday. Both imports and exports fell as American factory activity slowed and businesses and consumers felt the impact of tariffs imposed on China, the European Union, Canada, Mexico and other nations. Total American exports dropped $1.5 billion to roughly $2.5 trillion, while imports fell $12.5 billion to $3.1 trillion. Soaring domestic oil production was a major factor in the shrinking trade deficit, cutting into imports of foreign crude oil by $30.3 billion last year. Exports of civilian aircraft also fell $12.6 billion last year, reflecting the fallout from the deadly crashes of Boeing’s 737 Max airplane. But the most dramatic changes in global trade flows occurred with China, the target of Mr. Trump’s biggest economic offensive. The trade deficit in goods with China shrank $73.9 billion to $345.6 billion in 2019. It was the first drop on an annual basis since 2016, as both the United States and China placed tariffs on hundreds of billions of dollars of each others’ products. In particular, American imports from China fell sharply in the final two months of the year, as companies worked to avoid tariffs that Mr. Trump has placed on $360 billion worth of Chinese goods and the potential that he could tax nearly everything from China. Mr. Trump and his advisers have pointed to trends in trade flows as evidence that his trade policies are helping to revive factories and construction sites around the nation. “This is a blue collar boom,” Mr. Trump said in the State of the Union address on Tuesday evening. But most economists have been skeptical, saying that the country’s factory activity weakened last year, and that the trade flows largely reflect a cooling American and global economy. Economists say the hefty tariffs Mr. Trump has placed on China have encouraged American consumers to purchase goods from other countries and have not led to an American manufacturing renaissance. “Tariffs to date have clearly had a significant impact on imports from China,” said Brad Setser, a senior fellow at the Council on Foreign Relations. “They equally clearly have not led to a stronger U.S. manufacturing sector.” Rather than bringing manufacturing back to the United States, the clash with China has caused American companies and consumers to shift purchases to other countries, like Mexico, Vietnam and South Korea, said Mary E. Lovely, a senior fellow at the Peterson Institute for International Economics. Data released Wednesday morning showed the trade deficit in goods with Mexico increased $21.1 billion last year to a record $101.8 billion, as the United States brought in more goods from its southern neighbor. The trade deficit in goods with Canada grew by $8 billion, while the gap with Taiwan increased by $7.8 billion. “You’re going to see this rearrangement of the deck chairs,” Ms. Lovely said. The trade deficit in goods with the European Union also expanded to a record $177.9 billion in 2019, presaging Mr. Trump’s next conflict. In recent weeks, Mr. Trump has said that his attention was shifting to Europe now that he has signed trade deals with China, Japan, Canada and Mexico. Mr. Trump has criticized Europe for selling more to the United States than it buys and has accused its central bank of pushing down the value of the euro to make it easier for European companies to compete against American rivals. His administration is already imposing tariffs on Europe over airplane subsidies, and is threatening further levies in response to its digital taxes and on its cars. Many economists have predicted that Mr. Trump’s trade deal with China would give businesses more certainty about trading conditions and cause imports from China to rebound, at least in part, in the coming months. But the spread of a deadly coronavirus has thrown those predictions into question. China has shuttered factories, canceled flights and placed entire cities on lockdown to stop the spread of the virus, weighing heavily on trade. And China may delay some of its planned purchases of American goods as a result. Mr. Trump has long pointed to the United States trade deficit — the gap between what America exports and what it imports — as proof that America is at a competitive disadvantage because of unfair practices by China and other countries. In the president’s view, American businesses would be making more at home and consumers would be buying more domestic goods if countries like China weren’t subsidizing their industries and manipulating their currencies to make their products cheaper. Some analysts agree with that perspective. Michael Stumo, the chief executive of the Coalition for a Prosperous America, which has supported Mr. Trump’s trade moves, said the shrinking trade deficit showed that American consumers were shifting to buying more American-made products, and that Mr. Trump should make his China tariffs permanent. “Rebuilding U.S. manufacturing is the single most important step Washington can take to increase prosperity for America’s middle class,” Mr. Stumo said. But most economists argue that the trade deficit is a poor metric for measuring the health of the economy or America’s trading relationships. While a falling trade deficit can be a sign of a growing economy, the measure can fall for a variety of other reasons, many of them unrelated to trade and not all of them positive. Mr. Setser said that a falling trade deficit can sometimes be a sign of the kind of manufacturing boom that the Trump administration has been trying to engineer. In that case, American factory production would be rising, displacing foreign products from the American market and causing imports to fall and exports to rise. But that is not the situation the United States finds itself in, he said. Instead, factory activity has been weak, and both American imports and exports have contracted, he said. In addition, tariffs and trade uncertainty appear to have cut into business investment, slowing economic growth. When petroleum products are excluded, the United States trade deficit in goods actually rose compared with the year before. Speaking at an event at George Washington University on Tuesday, Janet L. Yellen, the former Federal Reserve chair, said that the bilateral trade deficit between the United States and China was “not the proper focus.” Ms. Yellen said that Mr. Trump and some of his advisers see the trade gap “as a symptom of relationships being unfair.” But for many economists, a country’s overall trade deficit with the rest of the world just means that country is spending more than the output it can produce itself, she said. “Most economists think that a country’s savings and investment are decisions that aren’t affected by trade policy,” she said. Economists point to another major reason focusing on the trade deficit can be misleading: The gap with China is exaggerated because of how the data is calculated. United States trade data counts the entire value of a good as coming from the country it was assembled in. China is still a global center for assembling products like smartphones and laptops, but many of the components and the technology that goes into these goods are made elsewhere. Take a smartphone, for example. A touch screen might be made in Taiwan, or a microprocessor in South Korea. The chips may come from American companies like Qualcomm or Texas Instruments, and the product may have been developed and marketed in the United States. All of those companies and their employees will receive a share of the final profits. But if all of those components are assembled in China before being shipped to the United States, trade statistics will record the entire value of the phone as being generated in China. Economists say this method of measurement may exaggerate the trade deficit with China, perhaps by as much as one-third. Some analysts do see a victory for the United States in the falling trade deficit with China: those in Washington who see China as an increasing national security threat. China’s profits from what it sells to the United States and other nations helps fund its efforts to expand its influence around the globe, like its Belt and Road infrastructure building project, activities that do not benefit the United States, said Derek Scissors, a resident scholar at the American Enterprise Institute. “I’d rather put the hard currency in the hands of the South Koreans, the Vietnamese. And normal economists just don’t think that way,” he said. “Economists will say, ‘Oh great, the president has had success on a meaningless indicator he made up for political reasons,’” Mr. Scissors added. “I agree with that. But I want to trade more with my friends” and less with dictators, he said. 
The new coronavirus has infected nearly 90,000 people, and more than 3,000 have died. But relatively few children appear to have developed severe symptoms so far, according to available data. “Disease in children appears to be relatively rare and mild,” with those under 19 years making up only 2.4 percent of the total cases, according to a report published Feb. 28 by the World Health Organization. So why aren’t more children getting sick? “My strong, educated guess is that younger people are getting infected, but they get the relatively milder disease,” Dr. Malik Peiris, chief of virology at the University of Hong Kong, said last month. Dr. Peiris has developed a diagnostic test for the new coronavirus. The numbers so far support that theory: According to the W.H.O., only 2.5 percent of those under 19 have developed severe disease and only 0.2 percent had critical disease. There have been no deaths recorded in children under 9. Scientists may not be seeing more infected children because “we don’t have data on the milder cases,” Dr. Peiris said. Without more information, it is also unclear whether children can transmit the disease to others. The W.H.O. report said that its team sent to China, the epicenter of the outbreak, “could not recall episodes in which transmission occurred from a child to an adult.” Still, children who are detected as infected must be shedding some virus or they wouldn’t be detected, noted Dr. Marc Lipsitch, an epidemiologist at the Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health. But whether their infectiousness is high is as yet unknown. “It’s a very high priority to do studies to find it out,” he said. One way to find out, he said, is to look at outbreaks such as the one at the church in South Korea. “If there were children among those people,” he said, “that would be a goldmine of data.” The other approach is to conduct household studies, where multiple members of a family might be infected. In one such published case study of a family, a 10-year-old traveled to Wuhan, China, with his family. Upon returning to Shenzhen, the other infected family members, ranging in age from 36 to 66, developed fever, sore throat, diarrhea and pneumonia. The child, too, had signs of viral pneumonia in the lungs, doctors found — but no outward symptoms. Some scientists suspect that this is typical of coronavirus infection in children. “It’s certainly true that children can be either asymptomatically infected or have very mild infection,” Dr. Raina MacIntyre said last month. Dr. MacIntyre is an epidemiologist at the University of New South Wales in Sydney, Australia, who has been studying the spread of the new coronavirus. In many ways, this pattern parallels that seen during outbreaks of SARS and MERS, also coronaviruses. The MERS epidemics in Saudi Arabia in 2012 and in South Korea in 2015 together claimed more than 800 lives. Most children who were infected never developed symptoms. No children died during the SARS epidemic in 2003, and the majority of the 800 deaths in the outbreak were in people over age 45, with men more at risk. Among the more than 8,000 cases of SARS, researchers at the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention were able to identify 135 infected children in published reports. Children under age 12 were much less likely to be admitted to a hospital or to need oxygen or other treatment, the researchers found. Children over age 12 had symptoms much like those of adults. “We don’t fully understand the reason for this age-related increase of severity,” Dr. Peiris said. “But we see that now — and with SARS, you could see that much more clearly.” It’s not unusual for viruses to trigger only mild infections in children and much more severe illnesses in adults. Chickenpox, for example, can be largely inconsequential in children, yet catastrophic in adults. Influenza is unusual in that it has evolved with humans over thousands of years and infects millions worldwide each year. Still, even though thousands of young children end up in the hospital each year with influenza, just a small percentage of them die, said Dr. Krys Johnson, an epidemiologist at Temple University in Philadelphia. This trend is generally true of respiratory illnesses because children tend to eat well, and to get plenty of exercise and rest — none of which may be true of adults. “The younger, most healthy segment of the population are able to fight it off,” she said. Adults may also be more susceptible because they are more likely to have other diseases, such as diabetes, high blood pressure or heart disease, that weaken their ability to stave off infections. The body’s innate immunity, which is critical for fighting viruses, also deteriorates with age, and particularly after middle age. “Something happens at age 50,” Dr. MacIntyre said. “It declines, and it declines exponentially, which is why for most infections we see the highest incidence in the elderly.” A key question about the new coronavirus is whether children who are infected and asymptomatic are able to pass the virus to others. “We know that young people in general — not just kids, but young adults and teenagers — have the most intense contact in society,” Dr. MacIntyre said. Young people who don’t realize they are sick may contribute to the epidemic’s momentum, she said. To understand the epidemic fully, she and other scientists said they need detailed data: when people were first exposed to the virus, when they first began to show symptoms, how many and which people have mild symptoms versus more severe disease. With detailed data, some observations, such as the higher risk in men, may change. Still, Dr. Mark Denison, a pediatric infectious diseases specialist at Vanderbilt University in Nashville, said last month that he does not expect to see a sudden uptick in infected children. “It’s hard for me to imagine that there’s such a degree of underreporting of clinical illness in children that we’re only hearing about two or three cases,” he said. “I think it means that there are many, many less children” who are infected in China, he said, “and that they’re not as much at risk.” 
This briefing has ended. Read the latest updates in the coronavirus outbreak here. China’s leader, Xi Jinping, said on Wednesday that China is in a “critical moment” of its fight against the coronavirus epidemic as the death toll and number of infections continued to soar. Health officials in China said on Thursday that 563 people had died from the virus, up from nearly 500 people the day before, and that 28,018 cases had been confirmed. On Monday, the number of confirmed cases was put at 20,438, meaning the number increased more than 35 percent in just a few days. Many doctors believe that the number of deaths and infections are undercounted because hospitals and laboratories are under severe strain to test for the virus. Local officials in Hubei, the center of the outbreak, have called on health care workers to speed up the process. Many sick residents in Hubei also say that they have been turned away by overstretched hospitals, which lack test kits and beds. The widening scope of the new virus has strained China’s health care system and brought the country to a standstill. The government has sealed off more cities, canceled public gatherings and shut down schools. Mr. Xi also said his government would crack down on people who resist epidemic prevention, assault medical workers and manufacture and sell fake products, according to Xinhua, China’s official news agency. On Monday, Mr. Xi called the epidemic “a major test of China’s system and capacity for governance.” In the early days of the new coronavirus, the Chinese public’s frustrations over how the Communist government was handling the problem were left largely uncensored online, and news outlets reported rigorously on the outbreak. Those days may now be over. With thousands more people being infected every day, there is a crackdown on the media and on the internet. It signals an effort to control the narrative about a crisis that has become a once-in-a-generation challenge for leaders in Beijing.   In the early days of the crisis, online vitriol was directed largely at the local authorities, said King-wa Fu, an associate professor at the Journalism and Media Studies Center at the University of Hong Kong. But now, he said, more of the anger is being aimed at higher-level leadership — and there seems to be more of it over all. So the Chinese government has shifted its strategy for information control. In a meeting with the Chinese Communist Party committee in charge of improving China’s legal system, Mr. Xi called for a crackdown on “rumor-mongering” that undermines control efforts. Local officials have also cracked down on what they call online “rumors” about the virus.  State-run news media and more commercially minded outlets have lately been told to focus on positive stories about virus relief efforts, according to three people at Chinese news organizations who spoke on the condition of anonymity to discuss internal directives. And internet platforms have removed several articles that suggest shortcomings in the Chinese government’s response or are otherwise negative about the outbreak.  Hundreds of Americans who had been in Wuhan as the outbreak worsened arrived in California on Wednesday on two evacuation flights arranged by the United States government. It was a second wave of American evacuations; an earlier flight arrived last week. The passengers were expected to spend days in quarantine on military bases under a strict and highly unusual protocol federal officials have put in place to slow the spread of the outbreak. The evacuees were expected to be accommodated at Travis Air Force Base in Fairfield, Calif., and at Marine Corps Air Station Miramar in San Diego. Ningxi Xu, a 30-year-old asset manager from New Jersey, said she was thrilled to be among those able to get a seat out of Wuhan, though she was uncertain about what the days ahead in quarantine might hold. “Do you know how the conditions at the Southern California quarantine site have been?” she asked. “Do you know or think they’d allow visitors while we’re in quarantine?” The State Department said that it would stage one or two more evacuation flights from Wuhan on Thursday, but that it had no additional flights planned after that time. China’s leader, Xi Jinping, said on Wednesday that the country was at a “critical moment” in its fight against the coronavirus epidemic as the death toll and the number of infections continue to soar. In a meeting with the Communist Party committee in charge of improving China’s legal system, Mr. Xi called for a crackdown on people who resist efforts to control the epidemic and on rumor-mongering that undermines those efforts. Mr. Xi also said his government would crack down on people who assault medical workers and who manufacture and sell fake products, according to Xinhua, the state-run news agency. On Monday, Mr. Xi called the epidemic “a major test of China’s system and capacity for governance.” The epidemic has strained China’s health care system and brought the country to a virtual standstill. The government has sealed off cities, canceled public gatherings and shut down schools. But the virus continues to spread. As of Thursday, 28,018 people had been infected and 563 people had died, according to the government. Many doctors believe the deaths and infections are undercounted because hospitals and laboratories are under severe strain as they test for the virus. Local officials in Hubei Province, the epicenter of the outbreak, have called on health care workers to speed up the process. Many sick residents in Hubei say that they have been turned away by overstretched hospitals, which have shortages of test kits and beds. Officials in Wisconsin confirmed that state’s first case of coronavirus on Wednesday. The patient, an adult who had recently returned from China, was said to be doing well and was being isolated at home. After returning to the United States, the patient sought treatment in the emergency department of a hospital in Madison, but was not admitted. Hospital workers who came into contact with the patient were being monitored for potential symptoms. There are now 12 confirmed coronavirus cases in the United States. The Wisconsin case is the first new confirmation reported since Sunday, when three new cases were announced in California. “At this time, the risk of getting sick from 2019 novel coronavirus in Wisconsin is very low,” said Jeanne Ayers, the state health officer. “We are responding aggressively to the situation.” Administration and health officials came to Capitol Hill on Wednesday to brief lawmakers about how the government is responding to the coronavirus outbreak. “I think they were appropriately observant of what the challenge is without being fear-mongering,” the House speaker, Nancy Pelosi, said as she left the briefing. House members pressed the briefers on what the government was doing to contain the outbreak, asking whether additional funding was needed.  The Department of Health and Human Services has notified lawmakers that it may need to transfer up to $136 million to help support the response, but it remains unclear how the money will be used and where the money would be transferred from. “It raised all kinds of questions,” said Representative Nita M. Lowey, Democrat of New York and chairwoman of the House Appropriations Committee. “But from the people who briefed us, I think they’re on it, and I look forward to additional information.” Other lawmakers sounded more skeptical.  “Bottom line: they aren’t taking this seriously enough,” Senator Chris Murphy, Democrat of Connecticut, said on Twitter after leaving the briefing. “Notably, no request for ANY emergency funding, which is a big mistake. Local health systems need supplies, training, screening staff etc. And they need it now.” From Amy Qin, a China correspondent, and Elsie Chen, a researcher, on the ground in Wuhan: His days are long, 12 hours crisscrossing the city and ferrying local residents to buy groceries, get medicine and go to the hospital. And the roads he travels are mostly empty with the city sealed off, public transportation shut down and private vehicles mostly banned in an effort to contain the coronavirus. In his blue and white car, Zhang Lei is a rare sight on the streets of Wuhan. During normal times, Mr. Zhang, 32, is a taxi driver in this Chinese city of 11 million at the epicenter of the outbreak. But after the local government abruptly locked down the city late last month, Mr. Zhang became one of the thousands of people who have volunteered to help ease transportation woes. Mr. Zhang, who wears a powder blue protective suit, face mask and goggles when driving, is not permitted to transport residents suspected of having the virus. Ambulances are supposed to handle that. Most of his passengers are poor, older residents who don’t have children or whose families ares outside Wuhan and can’t come home because of the quarantine. “It’s heartbreaking,” he says. “There is no one to take care of them.” The free rides are arranged by neighborhood committees, which typically serve as a go-between for residents and the local government.  Mr. Zhang makes no effort to conceal the mixed motivations behind his altruism. “Boredom!” he exclaimed on a recent afternoon, when asked why he decided to volunteer for the job, then quickly added: “Second, to serve the people. Everyone is cooped up at home all day, so I may as well do something to contribute to society.” Hidden away in her cabin, Masako Ishida reckoned she did not face much risk from the coronavirus that was stalking her cruise ship, forcing an onboard quarantine of 3,700 passengers and crew members off the port city of Yokohama. Ms. Ishida, 61, was trying to see the bright side as she faced two long weeks stuck inside the Diamond Princess. She had a window to gaze out of, unlike some passengers. Like her two traveling companions — her husband and her mother, both in their 80s — she was healthy. But it’s not going to be easy. The ship, which has 13 decks and in normal times offers entertainment like movies under the stars and live musical productions, arrived in Yokohama on Monday night and stayed at anchor for two days while the authorities decided what to do. Japanese health workers have begun screening 273 people who displayed symptoms or had come into contact with a man who got off the boat in Hong Kong and was found to have the coronavirus. So far, 20 of the 102 people screened have tested positive.  The quarantine has not always gone smoothly, especially at mealtimes. One day, breakfast, delivered by staff members in goggles and masks, didn’t arrive until almost 2 p.m. Then lunch came right on its heels. Nevertheless, the crew members are “serving guests with a smile,” Ms. Ishida said. “That’s giving us some peace of mind.” Another passenger, David Abel, a Briton, has tried to remain optimistic. He said he was looking forward to the free time. “Most of my day will be spent writing and researching and so on,” he said, adding, “What my bar bill is going to be, goodness only knows.”  Separately, a cruise ship that left Hong Kong on Sunday, the World Dream, was turned around by the authorities in Kaohsiung, Taiwan, on Wednesday, after three passengers on a previous trip were confirmed to be infected with the coronavirus.   Relatively few children appear to have developed severe symptoms so far from the new coronavirus, according to the available data. The median age of patients is between 49 and 56 years, and cases in children have been rare, according to a report published Wednesday in JAMA.  So why aren’t more children getting sick? Dr. Malik Peiris, chief of virology at the University of Hong Kong, who has developed a diagnostic test for the virus, said he believed children are being infected — but with a milder version of the virus.  Scientists may not be seeing more cases of childhood infection because “we don’t have data on the milder cases,” he said. In one published case, a 10-year-old traveled to Wuhan, the epicenter of the outbreak, with his family. Upon returning to Shenzhen, the other family members, who ranged in age from 36 to 66, developed fever, sore throat, diarrhea and pneumonia. The child, too, had signs of viral pneumonia in the lungs, doctors found, but no outward symptoms. Some scientists suspect that this is typical of coronavirus infection in children. Hong Kong said that it will begin requiring people who arrive from mainland China to undergo a mandatory 14-day quarantine. Carrie Lam, Hong Kong’s top official, has resisted demands from some lawmakers and medical workers to completely close off the border, calling it discriminatory and not in line with World Health Organization guidelines. But Hong Kong has taken a series of measures, including closing all but three border crossings, that have resulted in a sharp drop in entries from the mainland. Mrs. Lam said that Hong Kong now had 21 confirmed cases of the coronavirus, including three that were transmitted locally. One of the confirmed cases involved someone working at the Kowloon Commerce Center, a hub of multinational firms, according to an internal note sent to employees at the Bank of America, which has an office in one of the towers.  The building’s management office did not respond to a request for comment, and Bank of America declined to comment. Separately, Taiwan said that beginning on Thursday it would temporarily suspend entry by Chinese citizens who live on the mainland. It previously announced that foreigners who had been to mainland China over the previous 14 days would not be allowed to enter Taiwan. From Amy Qin, a China correspondent, and Elsie Chen, a researcher, on the ground in Wuhan: We came prepared, bringing with us two bags full of masks, hand sanitizer, goggles and disinfectant wipes to protect us as we went around reporting in Wuhan, the Chinese city at the center of the coronavirus outbreak. But after arriving last Friday, my colleague Elsie Chen and I quickly realized we had overlooked an important question: What do you eat when covering the coronavirus outbreak? Since the government imposed a lockdown in this city of 11 million two weeks ago, most of the restaurants have been shut. Grocery stores are still open, and many residents have stockpiled food to cook at home. But back at our hotel, we didn’t even have a microwave, let alone a stovetop. Exhausted from a long day of travel, we realized there was only one answer: instant noodles. Two days and four bowls of sodium-packed instant noodles later, my stomach felt as if it had deteriorated into a churning sack of MSG, salt and dehydrated beef cubes. Knowing it could be days or weeks before we were able to leave Wuhan, Elsie and I made an executive decision: It was time for an upgrade. We went to one of the large supermarkets and bought a small electric cooktop, groceries and some basic utensils. Stir-fried tomato and egg, the most basic of Chinese dishes, has never tasted so good. Of course, we couldn’t leave out the chili oil goddess, savior to Chinese students around the world when they’re missing a taste of home: Lao Gan Ma, or Old Godmother. One of the world’s largest technology conferences, the annual MWC Barcelona, has been impacted by the coronavirus outbreak, with companies beginning to pull out of the gadget showcase.  On Wednesday, LG Electronics, the South Korean electronics giant, said it would no longer attend the event, previously known as Mobile World Congress. It has been expected to draw more than 100,000 people from 198 countries and territories for the unveiling of new smartphones, tablets and other mobile technology. MWC is one of the world’s most anticipated telecom conferences, and companies spend months preparing and huge amounts on flashy presentations and extravagant booths.  “This decision removes the risk of exposing hundreds of LG employees to international travel,” LG Electronics said in a statement. The company may not be the only one to pull out of the event.  Huawei, the Chinese tech company, said it was monitoring the situation. European employees may end up playing a larger role in the event rather than those from China, a spokesman said. GSM Association, the wireless industry group organizing the event, said this week that there had been “minimal impact” thus far as a result of the coronavirus, but that it was taking several precautions.  Chinese scientists are reporting preliminary success with a new approach for treating patients with the coronavirus: an antiviral drug used for treating influenza and an anti-H.I.V. drug. The researchers found that Arbidol, an antiviral drug used in Russia and China for treating influenza, could be combined with Darunavir, the anti-H.I.V. drug, for treating patients with the coronavirus, according to ChangJiang News, a state-backed newspaper in Wuhan. The researchers did not say how many patients they had treated with the combination therapy, and it could be too soon to assess its effectiveness. The findings also have not been reviewed by outside experts. With no proven cure in sight, the race is on to find a treatment for the coronavirus. The Chinese authorities have turned to other types of treatments as well. In its treatment plan for the coronavirus released last week, the National Health Commission of China listed traditional Chinese medicine remedies to be used in conjunction with antiviral H.I.V. drugs. Cathay Pacific is asking its 27,000 employees to take three weeks of unpaid leave in an emergency move as Hong Kong’s flagship carrier struggles with a financial blow from the coronavirus outbreak in China. In recent days, the airline has cut nearly all flights to and from mainland China and has said it will pare back flights across its network as it faces its biggest emergency since the depths of the financial crisis in 2009. “The situation now is just as grave,” Augustus Tang Kin-wing, the chief executive of the airline, said in a taped video recording. The outbreak of the coronavirus has decimated large parts of the global travel network. Health experts have warned that the fast-moving virus could become a pandemic, and multinational companies have banned nonessential travel to China.  Cathay was already fighting for survival before the outbreak, besieged by the political turmoil that has gripped Hong Kong. Last summer, it found itself caught between Hong Kong’s pro-democracy protesters and the Chinese government as China demanded loyalty from businesses that depend on it for business. Cathay fired some employees for being openly supportive of the protesters. It started with a stubborn cough, a visit to an urgent care facility and a test being sent off to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. And then a 35-year-old resident of Snohomish County, Wash., was identified as the first confirmed coronavirus case in the United States. Hollianne Bruce, the lone epidemiologist assigned to the control of communicable diseases in the county’s public health office, jumped into action. Declining to wait for a C.D.C. team to arrive from Atlanta, she dialed up the patient, who had been taken to an isolation unit at a hospital. Seeking to establish a rapport, Ms. Bruce told him she knew he was not feeling well. She apologized for the disturbance. But she impressed on him how he might help save lives by sharing where he had been in recent days and with whom he had come into contact. “We don’t know a lot about this virus,” she told him. “We’d like to ask you some questions.” The man, who had been taken to the hospital the night before in a covered gurney intended for Ebola patients, agreed to help. It would be the first of several conversations he would have with Ms. Bruce, some by phone, others over a walkie-talkie as she stood outside his sealed room. Once, at his request, she bought him lunch at a nearby Panda Express. The coronavirus may be a global health emergency, but containing it is a local responsibility.  Across the United States, where at least 12 more cases have since been confirmed, it is health officials at the county and municipal levels who are scrambling to isolate the sick, learn where they have been and monitor those who have come into contact with them.  Read more here on what the campaign in Snohomish to contain the outbreak.  As United States officials impose new restrictions on travelers from China, many people who have returned to the country in recent days have hunkered down in their homes to make sure they were not carrying or spreading the disease. Some checked in regularly with local public health departments, taking their temperatures at regular intervals and having their food delivered. Others were simply choosing on their own to stay indoors, away from work, away from friends and, in some cases, away from everyone. All were counting down the days since they left China, waiting anxiously to see if symptoms develop — and whether they can get back to normal lives. “It’s pretty scary,” said a woman in Massachusetts whose husband and 18-month-old son have been holed up in the family’s basement since returning from China last week. The woman, a medical researcher who asked not to be named, said her family’s self-imposed quarantine was a necessary step to protect others. “If people are responsible people,” she said, “they are willing to do this.”  
The coronavirus outbreak in China has rattled the global economy, disrupting virtually every major industry, from food, fashion and entertainment to automobiles and technology. And more than two weeks into the crisis, there is no sign that the economic impact is about to ease up. Much of China was supposed to have reopened by now. But the country’s empty streets, quiet factories and legions of idle workers suggest that weeks or months may pass before this motor of global growth is running at full speed. Over the years, companies as varied as Disney, Nike, McDonald’s and Hyundai have come to rely on China’s efficient factories and increasingly affluent consumers. Now the virus is forcing companies to restrict travel to China or temporarily shut stores, offices, restaurants and theme parks. And the disruption to Chinese manufacturers has rippled through global supply chains, making it difficult for companies to obtain parts for everything from video-game consoles to cars. It’s too early to assess the full financial impact of the outbreak. But over the last few weeks, big companies have revealed, with varying degrees of specificity, how the virus has affected them. Here’s what we know so far. Under Armour told investors on Tuesday that its revenues in the first few months of 2020 — and potentially beyond — would take a hit of $50 million to $60 million because of the outbreak. The Asia-Pacific region made up about 12 percent of Under Armour’s total sales last year and has been one of its faster-growing markets. “Given the significant level of uncertainty with this dynamic and evolving situation, full-year results could be further materially impacted,” the company said. FedEx has reached an agreement with its pilots’ union, the Air Line Pilots Association, allowing crew members to decline trips to China. Another union representing pilots, the Independent Pilots Association, made a similar arrangement with UPS in a “Coronavirus Letter of Agreement.” That deal allows UPS pilots to take a leave of absence for trips involving “a flight segment into, or out of, mainland China,” the union’s president, Robert Travis, said. Disney has offered one of the more detailed assessments of how the coronavirus is affecting business. For more than a week, its theme parks in Shanghai and Hong Kong have been shut. The closings are expected to reduce the company’s operating income by $175 million in the second quarter, Christine McCarthy, the chief financial officer, said on an earnings call. The Canadian film company Imax was forced to postpone the release of five films it had planned to showcase in China during the Lunar New Year holiday period. In Japan, Nintendo, which makes video games and gaming devices, said shipments of its Switch game console to Japanese customers would be delayed. And last week, officials in the Chinese city of Macau asked its 41 casinos to close for half a month. The move will hit American casino operators in the region. Wynn Resorts is losing $2.4 million to $2.6 million every day that its casino in Macau remains closed because of the coronavirus, the company’s chief executive said. Tim Cook, the chief executive of Apple, told analysts in January that its suppliers could be disrupted and that traffic to its stores in China had dropped. Apple has a large sales presence in China and assembles most of its products there. Mr. Cook said that some Apple suppliers would remain closed and that traffic into its stores in the country had fallen off. Qualcomm, which makes smartphone chips, is also hurting. Last year, nearly half its revenue came from China, a major hub for smartphone manufacturing and sales. The company’s chief financial officer, Akash Palkhiwala, told investors last week that the company had reduced the low end of its earnings guidance for the next three months because of the uncertainty created by the outbreak. This month’s Mobile World Congress in Barcelona, Spain, one of the tech industry’s biggest trade shows, is putting special safety measures in place, including prohibiting any visitors from Hubei Province in China from attending. Several big companies, including Amazon and Sony, are choosing to stay away. Many auto plants have shut down in China because of the virus, including factories run by Tesla, Ford Motor and Nissan. On Monday, Nissan of Japan said it would shut down its plant in Kyushu, Japan, for four days beginning later this week because of “supply shortages of parts from China.” Hyundai, the world’s fifth-largest automaker, said last week that it would temporarily stop production lines at its factories in South Korea because of shortages of Chinese parts. Auto companies had hoped to restart production on Monday, but an increasing number have pushed that off until next Monday. Volkswagen on Saturday cited problems with “the nationwide restarting of supply chains as well as limited travel options for our production employees.” Fiat Chrysler warned that the outbreak could disrupt production at one of its European plants in the next few weeks, Reuters reported. But the company’s chief executive said it wasn’t changing its financial guidance for 2020. Over the last couple of weeks, a series of major airlines have canceled flights to China, including Delta, United and American. But the airlines have said little about how the cancellations will affect their bottom lines. Analysts expect the impact to be relatively small. United draws only about 4 percent of its revenue from service to China, which accounts for just 3 percent of Delta’s revenue and 2 percent at American, said Helane Becker, an airline analyst with Cowen Research. Also cutting back sharply is Air China, which flies the most passengers nonstop between the United States and China. On Thursday, it was granted permission to significantly limit service between the two countries, the Transportation Department said. Air China intends to operate seven flights a week, in both directions. In 2018, it operated an average 129 flights a week into and out of the United States, according to federal data. The spread of the virus has also taken a toll on the cruise industry. On Friday, Royal Caribbean barred all people holding Chinese, Hong Kong or Macau passports from boarding its ships. The vast majority of those passengers would be on ships leaving China, which account for only 6 percent of the company’s business, according to Rob Zeiger, a spokesman for Royal Caribbean. Several hundred of the approximately 3,300 McDonald’s restaurants in China have closed. But the company’s chief executive, Chris Kempczinski, said the overall impact on profits would be “fairly small” if the virus stayed contained. Starbucks has closed more than half its 4,300 stores in China and delayed a planned update to its 2020 financial forecast, saying it expects a material but temporary hit. And Yum Brands, the operator of the KFC and Pizza Hut franchises in China, said nearly one-third of its restaurants had been closed because of the outbreak. The remaining stores have seen a major drop in sales. About half the Nike stores in China have shut down, and those that remain open have shortened hours, the company said. Nike has not released a numerical estimate of the financial repercussions, but told investors that it expected “the situation to have a material impact on our operations in greater China.” Canada Goose Holdings said the impact would be substantial enough that it had to lower its profit outlook for the year, saying customer traffic in China and in “international shopping destinations in North America and Europe” has been affected. “No supply chain interruptions have occurred,” the company said in a statement on Friday. The VF Corporation, which owns brands like Timberland and the North Face, announced it would temporarily close about 60 percent of its stores in China. And it said traffic had slipped at stores that are currently open. Burberry warned investors that the outbreak was having a “material negative effect on luxury demand.” Twenty-four of its 64 stores in mainland China are closed, and those that remain open, with reduced operating hours, have fewer shoppers than usual, the company said.Tapestry, the American luxury giant that owns Kate Spade, Coach and Stuart Weitzman, said the outbreak could reduce its sales by up to $250 million in the second half of the year. And Estée Lauder, the luxury cosmetics company, warned that the outbreak would hurt its financial results “in the near term,” predicting that sales in the third quarter of 2020 would be the most affected. The spread of the virus has slowed air travel and tourism, reducing store traffic in key global shopping areas, it told investors. 
FRANKFURT — Chinese car and car-parts factories may stay closed longer than expected because of the coronavirus, increasing the chances that assembly lines in Asia, Europe and the United States could grind to a halt because of shortages of components. The hit to the auto industry, which employs eight million people worldwide, comes as output from the world’s factories is already sagging. It is likely to amplify the already alarming human and economic cost of the outbreak. Many automakers had planned to reopen their Chinese factories on Monday, which was already a week later than planned following the traditional Lunar New Year holiday. But several companies including BMW, PSA and Toyota have delayed restarting their assembly lines another week and others appear likely to. Even a relatively brief interruption in the flow of parts and materials could have far-reaching effects, analysts said. “Two weeks is probably the buffer most people have got,” Mark Fulthorpe, a director at the market researcher IHS Markit who follows the auto industry, said Friday. “A disruption in the supply chain can multiply and have a dramatic effect.” The shutdowns at Chinese factories hit automakers from several angles. The virus is already causing them to lose sales in China, the world’s largest car market by far. If they are forced to close factories outside of China because of parts shortages, as Hyundai has already done in South Korea, they could also lose sales in other regions. Because the auto industry is so vast, its pain would spread throughout the global economy. And it is hardly the only industry at risk from supply chain problems. Others include computers and electronics, textiles and heavy machinery. Every week that Chinese factories remain shuttered subtracts $26 billion from world trade, according to an estimate by Ana Boata, head of macroeconomic research at Euler Hermes. Some of those sales will be recouped after the virus subsides, but “we doubt the global economy is strong enough to catch up entirely,” Ms. Boata said in a note to clients on Friday. The disruption to the car industry is most intense in Wuhan and the surrounding province of Hubei, which is home to many auto parts suppliers. PSA, the French maker of Peugeot and Citroën cars, said its three car factories in Wuhan, the center of the epidemic in China, would remain closed until Feb. 14. The virus has also interrupted production far from Wuhan. The German carmaker BMW, which has three factories in Shenyang, in northern China, has suspended production until Feb. 17. Toyota said it would not resume full production at its four car and eight component factories in China until Feb. 17, a week later than planned. The Japanese carmaker said it was keeping an eye on potential problems outside China, but “there is currently no impact.” None of the carmakers can restart operations until they receive government permission to do so. Daimler and Volkswagen also have large operations in China. Volkswagen said Saturday that it would not resume production at most of its factories in the country until Feb. 17, citing problems with “the nationwide restarting of supply chains as well as limited travel options for our production employees.” Daimler said on Sunday that it was sticking with plans to begin reopening its Chinese factories on Monday. Daimler’s auto production in China is centered around Beijing. The German economy is especially vulnerable to any economic slowdown in China. A decline in the Chinese growth rate of 1 percentage point would strip 0.6 percentage points from German growth, the Ifo Institute in Munich estimated. That is in part because German factories are so dependent on components made in China. Growth in the European Union is already close to zero. The coronavirus could be enough to shove the region into recession. “The rapid spread of the coronavirus throughout China is quickly becoming a major source of uncertainty for the economy,” economists at ING Bank said in a note to clients. The longer it takes to contain the virus, the greater the risk that factories outside of China could begin to fall idle. Fiat Chrysler Automobiles warned Thursday that a plant in Europe, which it declined to identify, was in danger of running short of a critical component. “If the situation in China continues to worsen, FCA has identified potential risk within the next two to four weeks at one manufacturing facility in Europe,” the company said in a statement. The company “will continue to monitor the situation and continues to develop contingency plans.” Mr. Fulthorpe of IHS Markit said it could be difficult for companies to quickly find substitute suppliers. Even the lack of a small, seemingly insignificant part can cause a factory floor to go quiet. Automakers may not even know the origin of all of the components they use. They may be in for unpleasant surprises when an essential wiring assembly or other part, which they did not even know came from China, suddenly becomes unavailable. “You can’t build a vehicle with 95 percent of the parts,” Mr. Fulthorpe said. “You need everything.” 
CARSON, Calif. — The United States women’s national team, starting 10 of the 11 players that delivered a victory in the Women’s World Cup final last July, clinched a berth in the Tokyo Olympics with a 4-0 win over Mexico on Friday night. The Olympic spot was the prize in the teams’ winner-take-all semifinal at their regional qualifying tournament, but perhaps more important, the result positioned the Americans, winners of the past two World Cup titles, to atone for the most humbling chapter in their recent history: an embarrassing quarterfinal exit from the 2016 Olympics in Rio de Janeiro. Friday’s job was done early, with goals by Rose Lavelle and Sam Mewis in the first 14 minutes that disabused Mexico of any ideas about an upset. Mewis added another goal on a scorching low free kick midway through the second half, and the substitute Christen Press scored the Americans’ fourth in the 72nd minute, five minutes after she had entered the game. The United States will face Canada, which claimed the region’s other spot in the Tokyo Games with a 1-0 victory over Costa Rica in Friday’s first semifinal, in Sunday’s championship game. But regardless of how that goes, the team’s first job under its new coach, Vlatko Andonovski — qualifying for Tokyo — is now a box ticked. “It’s exciting,” Andonovski said. “I’m glad that they’re just as excited, and maybe more.” “It’s very important for a team that just won two World Cups back to back, that those emotions and that motivation is something that’s the hardest to get back up again. I was just glad to see that the emotions are there, that the motivation is there to make it happen. We are moving in the right direction, and I’m very happy with the stage we are at.” Lavelle, the breakout star of the Americans’ World Cup run in 2019, opened the scoring against Mexico in the fifth minute, running onto a back-heel pass from Megan Rapinoe and driving at two defenders at the top of the circle. Before the backpedaling Mexican players knew what was happening, Lavelle had pulled a left-footed shot from the top of the circle behind them into the lower right corner. Mewis doubled the lead less than 10 minutes later, pouncing on a Julie Ertz backheel off a bounding Rapinoe corner and one-timing a finish from near the penalty spot. Barely 15 minutes after kickoff, the game felt over. The United States, which has outscored its four opponents in this tournament by 22-0, and Canada, which has done one better at 23-0, have once again been the class of the region. Canada’s victory meant that the best player in the country’s women’s soccer history, Christine Sinclair, will head back to the Olympics just a month after her 37th birthday. She can thank her heir apparent, Jordyn Huitema, who is only 18, for the trip. Huitema’s goal, in the 72nd minute, sent Canada to its fourth straight Olympics. The Games will also be the fourth to include Sinclair, who earlier in the tournament broke Abby Wambach’s international record for goals by a women’s player. The goal that delivered Canada was at once accidental and clinical. Meeting a driven cross from Kadeisha Buchanan in the goal mouth, Huitema calmly redirected the ball toward the left post with her left foot — only to see it carom directly back to her. Huitema, who made her senior national team debut as a 15-year-old in 2017, calmly met the ricochet with her right foot and slotted her second chance inside the right post. The team’s celebrations may have given a hint at their mind-sets about what lies ahead: When the final whistle blew in Canada’s win, its substitutes sprinted off the bench and swallowed their teammates in joyous hugs. When the United States’s victory was assured, its starters and reserves mingled among themselves shaking hands, the emotion barely rising above the goodbyes at the end of a Rotary club meeting. There were smiles and even a little dancing later on as they circled the field thanking fans, but this was — at its core — a get-the-job-done performance. “Throughout all of this we kind of didn’t want to take anything for granted,” forward Carli Lloyd said, “so it’s good to get that out of the way.” Canada, the bronze medalist in London in 2012 and again at the Games in 2016, and the United States, the gold medalist in four of the previous Olympic tournaments, became the seventh and eighth nations to claim a place in the 12-team Olympic field. They joined the host, Japan; Brazil; New Zealand; and the three European qualifiers: Great Britain, Sweden and the Netherlands. Four places remain: two from Asia, one from Africa and a one from an Africa-South Africa playoff in April. The penultimate round of Asia’s qualifying tournament is currently being played in two groups, in South Korea and Australia. The latter four-team group, which includes the favorites Australia and China, was originally scheduled to play in Wuhan, China, but was moved to Australia last month because of the coronavirus outbreak. The delegation from China arrived in Brisbane without several of its players, and was immediately quarantined in a hotel. Despite having to practice in hallways, the Chinese opened with a 6-1 victory against Thailand on Friday. The Olympic women’s tournament begins July 22, two days before the opening ceremony in Tokyo. 
In the midst of spreading fear over the coronavirus outbreak, travelers to Asia, even to countries far from the epicenter of the virus in China, are beginning to reconsider their plans. While hard data on cancellations is scarce, as airlines, hotels and travel boards say they do not yet have numbers or will not share them, some tour operators, travel insurance brokers and even airline employees say they are facing growing numbers of customers changing their plans. Brian Fitzgerald, president of Overseas Adventure Travel, a company providing group tours to travelers mostly over 50, said that after its initial cancellations for trips to China through April in the wake of the outbreak’s announcement, this week tourists slated to go to Laos, Cambodia and Vietnam were starting to reconsider as well. “People are worried about traveling to Asia when they should be cognizant of traveling to China,” Mr. Fitzgerald said. He said the company had received “almost no new bookings” to China for the first half of the year and canceled trips. It offered about 400 travelers a full refund, the option to go elsewhere or to take the trip at a later date. The January data for APRIL Travel Protection, an insurance provider, which tracks residents in the United States traveling to every country in the world, shows that claims with an Asian country in the itinerary more than doubled compared to January of 2019. Additionally this January, 3 percent of all the company’s received claims were for cancellations related to the coronavirus. Hopper, a booking site that specializes in using data to suggest the best time to purchase travel, estimated that demand for international travel had declined by 3 percent since the first week in January, said Brianna Schneider, the company’s director of communications in an email. She said 80 percent of the decline was directly driven by demand from the United States to China; the other 20 percent was “a peripheral impact on other international destinations.”  Calls to airline reservations lines also found travelers looking to cancel. Tina, a Los Angeles-based reservation receptionist for Asiana Airlines, South Korea’s second largest airline, said that in the last week she’d seen calls to the center spike as much as 50 percent. She did not give her last name, citing company policy. “They don’t want to go to Asia,” she said. “Even though we cannot waive the fee for the Philippines or the other Southeast Asian countries, they still want to cancel.” Similarly, Jordan, a Philippines-based customer service agent for Singapore Airlines who did not provide his last name because of company policy, confirmed an uptick in cancellations, despite the fact that the airline has offered to reroute passengers to bypass mainland China and Hong Kong without charge. The continent of Asia has become an increasingly popular tourist destination in recent years. In 2018, more than 343 million international tourists traveled to Asia and the Pacific, according to the World Tourism Organization, an increase of 6 percent from the prior year. The coronavirus, with its initial cases reported in Wuhan, China, has sickened more than 31,000 people with more than 600 deaths reported as of Friday — all but two deaths in mainland China. More than 20 international carriers have suspended or restricted routes that ended in Wuhan and other major Chinese cities, including Beijing, Hong Kong and Shanghai. A number of airlines including China Eastern Airlines, Cathay Pacific and Air China route passengers through those cities on their way to other destinations. For some travelers, even a brief layover in China is not worth the risk. The newlyweds Jessica Salina and her husband, Anthony, planned to honeymoon in Japan in March — their first time traveling to Asia. But their Air China flight between Los Angeles and Tokyo included a layover in Beijing, and they decided to cancel on Jan. 30. “My biggest fear was not Japan, but that layover in Beijing,” Ms. Salina said in an email. “Between the large airport and additional screenings, I was starting to full-blown panic.” Luckily for her, the tour operator she booked through, Affordable World, provided penalty-free refunds for cancellation of flights passing through China. But other travelers whose itineraries never touched China are choosing to cancel as well, concerned about assuming unnecessary risk for a trip that can be taken another time. Japan, now in the heat of preparations for the summer Olympics and trying to avoid an outbreak there, has focused attention on the Diamond Princess, a cruise ship that has been docked in its port city of Yokohama since last week. More than 2,000 passengers are under a two-week quarantine, as cases onboard have escalated rapidly. Up to 61 people had tested positive for coronavirus by Friday, from the 20 cases confirmed Thursday. Thursday morning the Holland America Line updated its website, saying that it had been notified that the Japanese government would not allow the estimated 2,000 passengers aboard its MS Westerdam to dock in Japanese ports. The company issued a statement: “We are quickly working to develop alternate plans for guests currently on board and will keep them updated as information becomes available.” The cruise line has canceled a sailing on the Westerdam, scheduled to embark in Yokohama Feb. 15, but has announced no changes to the ship’s itinerary after that time. Other cruise companies that operate in Asia declined to specify changes to their planned sailings or how many people had canceled. “All itineraries that call in mainland China for the next six months are currently under review and we will communicate any itinerary revisions as soon as possible,” Norwegian Cruise Line said in a statement. “As always, we will closely monitor the situation and take appropriate action as necessary.” Kay Cuellar, deputy manager of the Los Angeles office of the Japan National Tourism Organization, noted earlier in the week that in Japan, “all the necessary precautions are being taken” and cautioned visitors not to overreact. “I don’t think it necessarily warrants the great concern that it’s getting in the media,” Ms. Cuellar said. “There’s no cause for that level of alarm.” In addition to the infected passengers aboard the Diamond Princess, Japan has another at least 25 cases. Stephen England-Hall, the chief executive of Tourism New Zealand, said in an email that his country had not seen a significant impact on arrivals yet, but that even though New Zealand is more than 6,000 miles away from Wuhan: “We expect that there will be a general softening in consumers preference to travel globally as a result.” Jason Schreier, the chief executive of APRIL Travel Protection, said the company’s call center had been lit up with travelers calling to purchase policies and to better understand their current coverage. Mr. Schreier said the company had received a plethora of calls from travel agents and tourists trying to determine if they would be reimbursed for canceling based on growing concern about coronavirus. The answer in most cases was no: “Fear of going to someplace is not unfortunately something that people can cancel for unless they have ‘cancel for any reason’ coverage,” he said. That coverage is far more expensive than the standard policy. 
[This briefing has ended. Read about the latest developments in the coronavirus outbreak here.] The coronavirus death toll in China has risen to 811, surpassing the death toll from the SARS epidemic of 2002-3, according to official data released early Sunday. The number of confirmed infections rose to 37,198, according to China’s National Health Commission. Eighty-nine deaths and 2,656 new cases were recorded in the preceding 24 hours, most of them in Hubei Province, the heart of the outbreak.  The SARS epidemic, which also began in China, killed 774 people worldwide. Many doctors believe that deaths and infections from the current epidemic in China are undercounted because testing facilities at hospitals and laboratories are under severe strain. The number of new cases confirmed in the country has stabilized in recent days, but World Health Organization officials cautioned against reading too much into those numbers, saying that Wuhan and Hubei Province were still in the midst of a “very intense outbreak.”  “It’s very, very early to make any predictions,” said Dr. Michael Ryan, executive director of the W.H.O.’s health emergencies program. “This is still a very, very intense outbreak in Wuhan and Hubei.”  The measures put in place in Hubei appear to be “paying off,” said Dr. Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, the W.H.O.’s director general, but he warned that the course of outbreaks like these was unpredictable. “We have to understand it with caution because it can show stability for a few days and then they can shoot up,” he said. “I’ve said it many times, it’s slow now but it may accelerate.” Dr. Tedros said the W.H.O. has identified a team of experts who will be traveling to China to provide assistance with the outbreak, and said the leader — whom he declined to identify — will depart for China on Monday or Tuesday, with the rest of the team following later. A United States citizen has died from the new coronavirus in Wuhan, China, in what appeared to be the first death of an American from the outbreak. Few details about the American, who died on Thursday, were immediately available. The person was around 60 years old and died at Jinyintan Hospital in Wuhan, according to the United States Embassy in Beijing. Two people familiar with the matter said the person was a woman who had underlying health conditions. “We offer our sincerest condolences to the family on their loss,” said a spokesman for the embassy. “Out of respect for the family’s privacy, we have no further comment.” The woman’s death was likely to add to diplomatic friction over Beijing’s response to the epidemic, which has generated frustration in China and abroad. It is also certain to raise questions over whether the Trump administration and the State Department in particular have taken sufficient action to ensure the safety of Americans in China and to aid in the evacuation of those who want to leave. A British government charter flight took off on Sunday from Wuhan carrying more than 200 people, in what Britain’s foreign ministry said would be the country’s final evacuation from the locked-down city. Britons and people from other countries were aboard the flight, a statement from the Foreign Ministry said. The flight was expected to have enough seats to accommodate all the remaining British nationals and their families in Wuhan and in the surrounding province of Hubei, Britain’s foreign minister, Dominic Raab, said in a statement on Tuesday.  Britain issued a warning against traveling to Hubei Province, and against all but essential travel to the rest of mainland China. It also urged anyone in China who could leave to do so.  “We have been working round the clock to help British nationals leave Hubei Province, on U.K., French and New Zealand flights,” Mr. Raab said. Britain has three cases of coronavirus, according to the World Health Organization. A lawyer who had provided a rare glimpse into the dire conditions in Wuhan, the epicenter of the coronavirus outbreak, has gone missing, his friends say, expressing fear for his safety. The lawyer, Chen Qiushi, who is based in Beijing, had been reporting from Wuhan since the city went into lockdown last month as the authorities scrambled to contain the virus. In a series of video blogs and footage posted on Twitter and sometimes on YouTube, which are both blocked in mainland China, Mr. Chen documented the plight of patients and the shortage of hospital supplies, and he warned of cross-infection in Wuhan’s mass quarantine sites. A friend who is currently managing Mr. Chen’s Twitter account said contact had been lost with him on Thursday. The friend, who requested anonymity to protect the account’s security, said Mr. Chen had recognized the risks that came with his journalistic work from the beginning and had shared his passwords with friends as a precaution, in case he would one day be detained. Xu Xiaodong, a prominent mixed martial arts practitioner in China, also said on Friday that he had lost contact with Mr. Chen, his friend. In a video message on Friday, Mr. Xu said that Mr. Chen’s parents had been told that their son had been quarantined because he had visited several hospitals and risked contracting the virus. “I’m announcing this because I’m scared! Because the next one could be me,” Mr. Xu tweeted on Friday. Mr. Chen made headlines last summer when he visited Hong Kong to report on the city’s antigovernment demonstrations and challenged portrayals by Chinese state news media that the protesters were rioters. The Chinese government has announced a temporary name for the illness caused by the coronavirus, ordering the local authorities and state news media to adopt it. In English, it will be called N.C.P., for novel coronavirus pneumonia, the National Health Commission said on Saturday. A final, official name will eventually be chosen by the International Committee on Taxonomy of Viruses. The organization has submitted a name to a scientific journal for publication and hopes to reveal it within days, the BBC reported. The naming of viral illnesses is a complicated matter that involves both science and public relations. Past names, like the Spanish flu or Rift Valley fever, have been seen as contributing to the stigmatization of countries or regions. In 2015, the World Health Organization issued new guidelines, after the choice of the name for Middle East respiratory syndrome, or MERS, was criticized. As well as avoiding place names, those guidelines recommend not using people’s names (Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease, Chagas disease), animal names (swine flu, equine encephalitis), cultural or occupational references (Legionnaires’ disease) or words that induce fear (unknown, death, fatal, epidemic). The W.H.O. has recommended its own temporary name for the new illness: 2019-nCoV acute respiratory disease, or 2019-nCoV. But the name is difficult to pronounce, and has been less popular than “coronavirus,” which describes a larger category of viruses. “We thought it was very important to put out an interim name so that no location was associated with the name,” Maria van Kerkhove, a W.H.O. epidemiologist, told the body’s executive board on Friday. On Saturday, the French health minister confirmed five new cases of the coronavirus, including four adults and one child — all British citizens — bringing the total in France to 11. The minister, Agnès Buzyn, said during a news conference on Saturday morning that the latest cases formed “a cluster, a grouping around one original case” and had been traced to an infected British citizen who had traveled from Singapore. Ms. Buzyn told reporters that the Briton stayed in Singapore from Jan. 20 to Jan. 23 and arrived in France on Jan. 24. The person stayed in the small town of Les Contamines-Montjoie, in southern France, where there is a ski resort. Before returning to Britain on Jan. 28, the infected person came into contact with 11 people, all Britons, with whom he lived in the same house, she said, adding that all of them had been hospitalized to monitor their conditions. Two schools in the area will be shut next week as the authorities try to determine with whom those infected had been in contact, Reuters reported. Three children being monitored — including the one infected child — attended a local school. France extended its travel warning on Saturday from only Wuhan to all of China, saying its citizens should avoid traveling to the country unless it was “imperative.” Hangzhou, a Chinese city with a population of 10 million, said it would temporarily ban the sale of flu and cough medicine at pharmacies, in an effort to compel people who might be sick to see a doctor. In a statement, which was issued at midnight Friday and took effect immediately, the local government said the policy was created to “strengthen the supervision of those with fevers and coughs.” To stop the spread of the coronavirus, the Chinese authorities have taken increasingly draconian measures to curb travel, impose social distancing and track those who might be sick. Several cities in the eastern province of Zhejiang, including some sections of Hangzhou, have set limits on how often people can leave their houses, generally allowing one person to leave every few days to buy groceries. Paper passports have been printed to keep tabs on residents. As such restrictions have increased, so have people’s fears about being suspected to have the virus. Some have complained that sites set up for quarantines do little to separate people who are already sick from those who have no symptoms, but who are from an area that experienced an outbreak. In recent weeks, several articles in Chinese news media have told of people who used medicine to suppress coronavirus symptoms to pass through the country’s now ubiquitous fever-screening checkpoints. Some wondered what those with chronic illnesses were supposed to do if they couldn’t get the medicine they needed to relieve their symptoms. Others worried that the policy would speed the spread of the virus by forcing many more people to go to hospitals, where some carriers of the virus would likely be. Hong Kong had already suffered through months of political protests. Its economy is shrinking, and mistrust divides its people from its leaders. Now the coronavirus is dealing Hong Kong, Asia’s financial capital, another devastating blow. Airlines are cutting service. Schools are closed. Panicked residents are hoarding rice, face masks and — in the latest run — toilet paper. In the air is a new emotion for a city where the glimmering skyline once seemed to promise riches and opportunity: fear. “We don’t know when it will end or how much worse it will get,” said Amber Suen, a flight attendant with Cathay Pacific, the beleaguered Hong Kong airline that on Wednesday asked its 27,000 employees to take three-week unpaid furloughs to save money. The new coronavirus, which has killed hundreds and sickened thousands in mainland China, has been much less prevalent in Hong Kong. One person has died and at least 25 have been infected, mostly while traveling in the mainland. Its hospitals are respected around the world. The world is not drawing a distinction, however, in part because the city has tightened but not fully closed the border with the mainland. The multinational companies that helped make the city global are restricting travel there. Some are advising or requiring returning employees to quarantine themselves. And getting to Hong Kong is becoming increasingly difficult. Virgin Australia joined United Airlines and American Airlines in cutting service. Italy has suspended flights from Hong Kong, while the Philippines and Taiwan are requiring arrivals to go into quarantine.  Julie Zhong, a 24-year-old from Wuhan, knows she has had to endure less than many other people from her city, where the new coronavirus first appeared. She had planned to move to Shanghai after a three-week trip with her family to Hainan, a holiday island off China’s southern coast. But then the outbreak happened. After Hainan officials took the family’s temperature, they began a self-imposed quarantine for 14 days. The quarantine is over. But her plans to move to Shanghai, where she is supposed to start a new job on Feb. 17, are in limbo. Hotels she called in the city told her that people from Hubei Province, which includes Wuhan, were not welcome. One said she could have a room, but only if she underwent another 14-day quarantine. “I’m innocent, but implicated,” she said. “It makes me really angry.” Many people from Wuhan have fared worse under a countrywide campaign to identify and isolate anyone who has recently been to the city. Ms. Zhong said that prejudice and anger directed toward people from her hometown was misplaced. “Is it the fault of people from Wuhan? It’s not. If it comes from eating wild meat, then the problem is the government didn’t control it well enough,” she said, referring to the food market in Wuhan where the illness is thought to have originated. “You can’t just dump everything on the heads of those from Wuhan,” she added. The government of Gibraltar, a British territory at the southern tip of Spain, on Saturday turned away a cruise ship because dozens of passengers were suspected of being sick with norovirus, which can cause diarrhea, vomiting and fever. The government said in a statement that these symptoms were not those of coronavirus, which has been spreading from China. However, “given the current situation, the vessel has been asked to continue to its next port of call,” the statement said. The ship, Spirit of Discovery, reached Gibraltar on Saturday morning but was told that it could not berth and should instead go to its next destination, Southampton, in southern England. The ship, which has 868 passengers and 513 crew members, had reported that it had 89 cases of suspected norovirus on board. The ship is operated by Saga Cruises, a British company. At least three other cruise ships have been quarantined, denied entry or refused permission to disembark, including ships in Italy, Hong Kong and Japan, where more than 3,700 crew and passengers began a quarantine on Monday. At least 64 passengers of the ship in Japan, the Diamond Princess, have tested positive for coronavirus. Last month, Italian authorities prevented a cruise ship from disembarking for more than 12 hours after a sick passenger’s symptoms had been misinterpreted as coronavirus.  Travelers to Asia, even to countries far from the epicenter of the virus in China, are beginning to reconsider their plans. Hard data on cancellations is scarce, as airlines, hotels and travel boards say they do not yet have numbers or will not share them. But tour operators, travel insurance brokers and airline employees say they are facing growing numbers of customers changing their plans. Brian Fitzgerald, president of Overseas Adventure Travel, a company providing group tours to travelers mostly over 50, said it encountered cancellations to China through April in the wake of the outbreak’s announcement. But this week, he said, tourists scheduled to go to Cambodia, Laos and Vietnam were reconsidering as well. January data from April Travel Protection, an insurance provider, which tracks residents in the United States traveling to every country in the world, shows that claims with an Asian country in the itinerary more than doubled compared to January 2019. More than 20 international carriers have suspended or restricted routes that ended in Wuhan and other major Chinese cities, including Beijing, Hong Kong and Shanghai. A report published on Friday on 138 coronavirus patients in Wuhan has disturbing details about the illness and how it spreads. Many of the patients — 41 percent — were presumed to have been infected in a Wuhan hospital, including 17 people who were already hospitalized for other illnesses, and 40 health care workers. One patient is thought to have infected more than 10 health care workers in the hospital’s surgical department, where the person was admitted because of abdominal symptoms, and the coronavirus was not initially suspected. The authors of the report, which was published in the Journal of the American Medical Association, said their data suggested that rapid person-to-person spread of the virus had occurred among their cases. That was partly because of patients like the one admitted to the surgical department, who had symptoms that misled doctors into suspecting other illnesses and failing to take precautions to prevent the spread of the virus. Another cause for concern is that some patients who appeared mildly or moderately ill at first took a turn for the worse several days or even a week into their illness. The median time from their first symptoms to when they became short of breath was five days; to hospitalization, seven days; and to severe breathing trouble, eight days. Experts say that pattern means patients must be carefully monitored, and it is not safe to assume that someone who seems to be doing well early on is out of the woods. Chinese car and auto parts factories may stay closed longer than expected because of the coronavirus, increasing the chances that assembly lines in Asia, Europe and the United States could grind to a halt because of shortages of components. Several automakers including BMW, PSA and Toyota have delayed restarting their assembly lines in China by another week, and others appear likely to follow suit. Even a relatively brief interruption in the flow of parts and materials could have far-reaching effects, analysts said. The shutdowns at Chinese factories have hit automakers from several angles. The virus is already causing them to lose sales in China, the world’s largest car market by far. If they are forced to shut down factories outside of China because of parts shortages, as Hyundai has already done in South Korea, they could also lose sales in other regions. The blow to the auto industry, which employs eight million people worldwide, comes at a time when output from the world’s factories is already sagging. It is likely to amplify the human and economic cost of the outbreak. 
The coronavirus death toll in China has risen to 908, surpassing the toll from the SARS epidemic of 2002-3, according to official data. The number of confirmed infections in the country rose to 40,171, China’s National Health Commission said Monday. Ninety-seven deaths and 3,062 new cases were recorded in the preceding 24 hours, most of them in Hubei Province, the heart of the outbreak. A United States citizen died from the coronavirus in Wuhan, the provincial capital, American officials said on Saturday.  The SARS epidemic, which also began in China, killed 774 people worldwide. There have been only two confirmed deaths from the new coronavirus outside mainland China: one in Hong Kong and one in the Philippines.  Many doctors believe that deaths and infections from the current epidemic are undercounted in China because testing facilities are under severe strain. The number of new cases has stabilized in recent days, but World Health Organization officials cautioned against reading too much into those figures, saying that Wuhan and Hubei were in the midst of a “very intense outbreak.” “It’s very, very early to make any predictions,” said Dr. Michael Ryan, executive director of the W.H.O.’s health emergencies program.  The measures put in place in Hubei appear to be “paying off,” said Dr. Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, the W.H.O.’s director general, but he warned that outbreaks like these are unpredictable. “We have to understand it with caution because it can show stability for a few days and then they can shoot up,” he said. “I’ve said it many times: It’s slow now, but it may accelerate.”  Cui Tiankai, the Chinese ambassador to the United States, said Sunday that experts from the World Health Organization would be allowed into China “very soon” to assist with the coronavirus outbreak, and the agency’s chief announced hours later that an advance team was on its way. D.r Tedros, the W.H.O.’s director general, posted a message on Twitter from Geneva saying that he had “just been at the airport seeing off members of an advance team” of experts led by Dr. Bruce Aylward.   Dr. Aylward, a W.H.O. assistant director general, was the organization’s special representative for the 2014 Ebola outbreak. Offers of assistance from the W.H.O. and the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention had been ignored for weeks, the Times reported Friday, but the moves on Sunday appeared to signal that Beijing would at least partly reverse course. “We are coordinating with the World Health Organization,” Mr. Cui said on CBS’s “Face the Nation.” “I’m sure that they will be going to China very soon.” He declined to say if a team of experts from the C.D.C would also be allowed into China, suggesting instead that American experts could be admitted as part of the W.H.O. or as individuals. “American experts are on the list recommended by the W.H.O.,” Mr. Cui said. “Even beyond that, some American experts have come to China already on their own individual basis.”  Nine members of a Hong Kong family were found to be infected with the new coronavirus after sharing a hot pot meal in late January, officials said on Sunday. Two members of the family — a 24-year-old man and his 91-year-old grandmother — were confirmed first, followed by the man’s parents, aunts and cousins. Officials said that the family was part of a gathering of 19 who had shared a hot pot meal, in which diners add meat and vegetables to a communal vat of boiling broth. Chuang Shuk-kwan, a health official, said on Sunday that most of those who had attended had shown either no symptoms, or minor ones not immediately distinguishable from the flu. The 24-year-old had consulted a private doctor several times before being admitted to a hospital with a fever that would not subside.  Two relatives at the meal on Jan. 26 had traveled from the neighboring mainland province of Guangdong, Hong Kong health officials said. The nine cases, who were being isolated at two hospitals, were among 10 new cases reported in Hong Kong on Sunday, bringing the territory’s total to 36. All 3,600 people aboard a cruise ship that had been held for four days in Hong Kong disembarked on Sunday after its crew members tested negative for the coronavirus, health officials said. The ship, the World Dream, had been grounded since Wednesday because eight people from mainland China who were on a previous journey were found to be infected. Everyone was cleared to leave after no cases were found among the 1,800 crew members. Most passengers had kept to their rooms during the holding period, watching movies or playing mahjong. Some ventured outside on balconies, waving to loved ones or shouting messages to reporters on the dock below. “I felt really bored staying in my room, but we know that the quarantine is to keep everyone else in the city safe,” Charlotte Chan, a sales executive, said on Sunday after she disembarked wearing two layers of masks.  Britain confirmed a new coronavirus case on Sunday, bringing the total cases in the country to four. The infected person was a “known contact of a previously confirmed U.K. case,” the chief medical officer, Chris Whitty, said in a statement.  The announcement came just hours after a flight from Wuhan carrying 200 Britons and European citizens arrived in Britain. About 150 of the passengers were taken to a center in Milton Keynes, England, to be quarantined for 14 days. The authorities in Spain said on Sunday that the country had confirmed its second coronavirus case: a British man who lives on the island of Majorca with his family. The man had reported to the hospital on Friday where his wife and children later tested negative for the virus, according to Spain’s national center for microbiology.  The infected man, who has been quarantined, had been in contact with a person who tested positive for the virus in France, Spanish officials said. The authorities in Majorca are now investigating whether the infected man came into contact with other people on the island before going to the hospital. The coronavirus continues to ripple through China’s huge network of auto and parts factories. The longer the China supply chain remains paralyzed, the greater the chance that production in Asia, Europe and the United States could grind to a halt because of shortages of components. A lot is at stake in getting the factories humming again: The auto industry employs eight million people worldwide. The German carmaker Daimler said Sunday that it was sticking with plans to begin reopening its Chinese factories on Monday. Its auto production in China is centered around Beijing.  Volkswagen will reopen only its Shanghai plant on Monday. Following the lead of BMW, PSA, Toyota and others, it said Saturday that production at most of its plants in China would not resume until Feb. 17 because of “challenges due to the nationwide restarting of supply chains as well as limited travel options for our production employees.”  Even a relatively brief interruption in the flow of parts and materials could have far-reaching effects. The shutdowns at Chinese factories have hit automakers from several angles. The virus is already causing sales losses in China, by far the world’s largest car market. If they are forced to shut down factories outside of China because of parts shortages, as Hyundai has already done in South Korea, they could also lose sales in other regions. Six more people on a cruise ship that has been quarantined for nearly a week in Yokohama, Japan, have tested positive for the coronavirus, passengers were told on Sunday. Five of them were crew members. About 3,700 people on the ship, the Diamond Princess, have been quarantined since last Monday, after it was learned that a passenger who disembarked in Hong Kong on Jan. 25 had been infected.  The Japanese health authorities have tested hundreds of people on the ship. The six new cases, which were confirmed by the Health Ministry on Sunday, bring the total to 70.  The announcement to passengers, a recording of which was posted online, said that the six people were being taken off the ship and that eight other passengers had been taken to hospitals for reasons unrelated to the coronavirus.  For Doug Perez, the most dangerous part of each day in Wuhan is taking his dog for a walk. Mr. Perez, 28, grew up around San Francisco, but he has taught math and science for the last two years in the Chinese city where the coronavirus emerged. When it began to spread, he chose to stay. So when Chubby, a 1-year-old Labrador, needs to go out, Mr. Perez pulls on gloves, straps on a mask, and wriggles into the special jacket and pants that are sprayed down with alcohol after every trip outdoors. Then he slides a yellow jacket over Chubby, too. The State Department has evacuated hundreds of Americans from Hubei Province, where the outbreak began. But some, like Mr. Perez, have decided not to leave. In his case, it is because he does not want to abandon his girlfriend, who is Chinese. They have spent more than two weeks in his apartment, along with his girlfriend’s brother. They cook, they watch television (three seasons of “The Sopranos” so far), and they clean — a lot. They scrub down surfaces, furiously wash their hands and disinfect their clothes after going out. “Sometimes I find I’m out of time, which is crazy,” Mr. Perez said. “You’d think I’d have all the time in the world, but with the coronavirus, a lot of time is spent cleaning.” Other Americans have also stayed in China because of loved ones. Gabrielle Autry, 26, from Georgia, lives in the eastern city of Hangzhou. She has looked into flights that would take her to the United States — but her fiancé, a Chinese citizen, would not be able to join her, since all foreign citizens are barred from entering the United States if they have recently been in China. If the two were married, it would be a different story. For now, they are mostly stuck at home, a little bored.  “Together it’s O.K., but alone it would be horrible,” she said. “I just couldn’t fathom it.” Mr. Perez has tried to make the best of the isolation, working on his coding skills and reading news about the virus. He talks to his family nearly every day. His parents have sent him masks.  “They’ve been supportive of my decision to stay,” he said. “They regret it, but they know me, and I guess they know I’m stubborn about some things.” His classes have been canceled, and he is not sure if he will be paid after February. The announcement of an American’s death in Wuhan was upsetting, as are the “rumors and mass hysteria” that he often sees on social media. To treat themselves, the household orders takeout now and again, even though they consider it safer to cook. “After a rough week, getting a pizza in is worth the risk,” Mr. Perez said.  Chinese academics, professionals and others have created digital petitions calling for freedom of speech amid a widespread outpouring of anger and grief online for Dr. Li Wenliang, who gave early warnings about the coronavirus in Wuhan, only to die of it last week himself. “Change, and only change, is the best commemoration of Dr. Li Wenliang,” said a petition that had been signed by 28 academics, lawyers and business figures by Sunday morning.  “Otherwise, all our outrage and all our tears will end up as bubbles,” it said. “And we will continue suffering from man-made disasters and our offspring will continue to live in fear.” Around the country, people have been mourning Dr. Li and engaging in soul-searching, both in private and online, as to whether they’ve been complicit under an authoritarian government that allows for little dissent. The petitions reflect concerns that the online expressions of frustration will fade, as in several past instances, including a 2008 earthquake in Sichuan Province and a train accident in 2011.  By Sunday, a petition on the site Matters had been signed by nearly 1,000 people. It urges the government to apologize to Dr. Li and seven other medical workers who were reprimanded for sharing knowledge about the virus. It also calls for the punishment of officials who suppressed information about the outbreak. “A healthy society should allow more than one voice,” one petition quoted Dr. Li as telling the Chinese magazine Caixin.  China’s ambassador to the United States sought Sunday to play down assertions that Dr. Li’s warnings had been quashed. “I don’t know who tried to silence him, but there was certainly disagreement,” Mr. Cui said on CBS’s “Face the Nation.” “You see, he was a doctor, and a doctor could be alarmed by some individual cases. But as for the government, you have to do more, you have to base your decisions on more solid evidence and science.” Mr. Cui added. For China’s leader, Xi Jinping, the outbreak is not just a health crisis, but a political one: a test of the authoritarian system he has built around himself. As his government struggles to contain the virus amid rising public discontent with its performance, the changes that Mr. Xi has ushered in could make it difficult for him to escape blame. “It’s a big shock to the legitimacy of the ruling party,” said Rong Jian, a writer about politics in Beijing. “I think it could be only second to the June 4 incident of 1989. It’s that big,” he said, referring to the armed crackdown on Tiananmen Square protesters that year. “There’s no doubt about his control over power,” he added, “but the manner of control and its consequences have hurt his legitimacy and reputation.” Mr. Xi has recognized what is at stake, calling the outbreak “a major test of China’s system and capacity for governance.” As China’s battle with the coronavirus intensified, Mr. Xi put the country’s No. 2 leader, Li Keqiang, in charge of a leadership group handling the emergency, effectively turning him into the public face of the government’s response. It was Mr. Li who traveled to Wuhan to visit doctors. Mr. Xi’s retreat from the spotlight, some analysts said, signaled an effort to insulate himself from a campaign that may draw public ire. Yet Mr. Xi has consolidated power, sidelining or eliminating rivals, so there are few people left to blame when something goes wrong. In an unusual move, a county in Hubei Province, the epicenter of the outbreak, is offering cash rewards to people who report a fever — whether their own or someone else’s. China has responded to the epidemic by sealing off large cities, quarantining people en masse and punishing people for failing to report flulike symptoms. Now, the Fang County government is trying “incentives,” according to a statement posted Saturday on its website. People who report their own fevers will receive 1,000 renminbi, the equivalent of $143 — a few days’ salary for the average Hubei resident.  The statement also said that people who report the fevers of others would get 500 renminbi, which raised the prospect of neighbors turning one another in. Communist Party cadres who investigate and verify such reports would receive the same amount. The measures are intended “to promote the early detection, early isolation, early reporting, and early treatment of fever patients,” the statement said. The first confirmed death of an American citizen in the coronavirus outbreak, which the United States Embassy in Beijing reported on Saturday, is likely to raise questions about whether the State Department has done enough to ensure the safety of Americans in China. Few details about the American, who died in Wuhan on Thursday, were immediately available. The embassy said the person was 60 years old. Two people familiar with the matter said the person was a woman and had underlying health conditions. It was not clear whether the person had tried to leave Wuhan on any of the flights organized by the State Department, which have evacuated diplomats and other American citizens from the city and other parts of China. In a statement, the State Department took a defensive tone, saying that since Jan. 29, it had evacuated around 850 people, most of them Americans, on five charter flights out of Wuhan. The agency said it had “no higher priority than the welfare and safety of U.S. citizens abroad,” but there are no current plans to conduct additional flights, even as some Americans elsewhere in China have been asking to be evacuated. The State Department said Americans should heed its Feb. 2 advisory not to travel to China. To show that its flights appeared to have met the immediate needs of Americans in Wuhan, the department said that its last charter flight, on Thursday, had extra seats after accommodating all Americans on the manifest, so officials were able to offer seats to more than 30 Canadians. 
As many people across China return to work today after an already-extended Lunar New Year break, the country is confronting two bleak statistics: Here are the latest updates and a map of where the virus has spread. The World Health Organization’s director general said on Sunday that an advance team was on its way to China to help the government contain the outbreak. Analysis: Officially, the virus has sickened 40,171 people in China. But experts say that deaths and infections are probably being undercounted because testing facilities are under severe strain. Inside the outbreak: In Wuhan, the center of the outbreak, our reporter met a family in which three generations have been sickened by the virus. In Beijing: The outbreak is testing an authoritarian system that President Xi Jinping has built around himself over the past seven years. A writer in the Chinese capital described the outbreak as “a big shock” to the ruling Communist Party’s legitimacy — second only to the government’s armed crackdown on Tiananmen Square protesters in 1989. Preliminary results from Ireland’s national elections over the weekend show that Sinn Fein, a party that was once the political wing of the Irish Republican Army, is on the doorstep of joining a coalition government. In doing so, Sinn Fein would break the hold that two center-right parties — Fianna Fail and Fine Gael — have held on the country’s politics for 90 years. “This is changing the shape and mold of Irish politics,” Mary Lou McDonald, Sinn Fein’s leader, told reporters in Dublin. “This is not a transient thing — this is just the beginning.” Why this matters: Sinn Fein has long been ostracized over its ties to sectarian violence. But many younger voters don’t remember that. Instead, they see the party as the only one responding to their day-to-day grievances on issues like soaring rental prices and corporate tax breaks. By the numbers: Fianna Fail was on track to win about 45 seats in the 160-seat Parliament, followed by Sinn Fein with 37 seats and Fine Gael with 36 seats. The final results are expected today or tomorrow, probably kicking off weeks of coalition negotiations over who will control Parliament. A political drama in Germany last week — in which the far-right Alternative for Germany party played kingmaker for a center-right candidate on the state level — set off spontaneous protests in a country that is still deeply conscious of its Nazi past. It also raises a question: Will mainstream parties ever feel pressured to break their own taboo against working with the AfD, the first far-right party to enter the national parliament since World War II? “For many Germans, allowing the far right to be kingmakers conjures up dark memories,” writes our Berlin bureau chief, Katrin Bennhold. “It is a red line that many do not want to see crossed.” Context: The drama took place in Thuringia, an eastern state where the Nazis first won power locally in the dying days of the Weimar Republic. They later won nationally, with the help of conservative parties. Related: A researcher in Germany discovered that a 17th-century painting, on view for years at the Metropolitan Museum of Art in New York, once belonged to a Jewish art dealer who fled the Nazis and lost court battles to win the artwork back. Egyptian and Ethiopian officials are set to reconvene in Washington this week to discuss a colossal hydroelectric project that some fear could bring the two countries to blows. For Ethiopians, the $4.5 billion project, the Grand Ethiopian Renaissance Dam, would confirm their country’s place as a rising African power. Ethiopia’s young leader, Abiy Ahmed, has said that “no force could prevent” the dam from being completed. But the Nile is under assault from pollution, climate change and population growth. And many Egyptians fear that the project, whose reservoir is about the size of London, will cut into their precious water supplies. Details: Egypt has justified its dominance over the Nile partly by citing a colonial-era water treaty that Ethiopia does not recognize. President Abdel Fattah el-Sisi of Egypt has insisted that he wants a peaceful resolution, but he has been accused of sponsoring anti-government protests and armed rebellions inside Ethiopia, among other destabilizing tactics. By becoming the junior partner in a coalition government led by conservatives, Austria’s progressive Green Party was able to put climate change on the country’s political agenda.  But now the party is also becoming complicit in Chancellor Sebastian Kurz’s hard-right immigration policy. That is particularly difficult for Alma Zadic, above, a daughter of Bosnian refugees and Austria’s first minister with a migrant background: The coalition charges her to defend policies that were designed to effectively keep people like her parents out of the country. U.S. budget: President Trump is expected to propose today a $4.8 trillion budget that includes billions for his wall along the border with Mexico and steep cuts to social programs like Medicaid. Congress can ignore the budget, but it will feature in Mr. Trump’s re-election campaign. Switzerland:Voters in Switzerland agreed on Sunday to greenlight an amendment to an anti-discrimination law that had not provided protection for lesbians, gay men and bisexual people. The national referendum had been forced by critics who said the amendment threatened freedom of expression. Thailand: The country’s deadliest mass shooting ended on Sunday, when a rogue soldier whose shooting rampage at a military base and a shopping mall left at least 29 people dead was killed during a firefight with the authorities. Rocket launch: Solar Orbiter, a European-built spacecraft that launched from Florida late Sunday, is expected to complete 22 orbits of the sun in 10 years — and perhaps help solve mysteries about how that fiery star works. Snapshot: Migrants play soccer at a refugee camp on the Greek island of Samos, where asylum seekers are waiting for approval to travel to the Greek mainland to pursue new lives. Few on the mainland want them, and other European governments have mostly closed their doors. Oscars: The South Korean film “Parasite” won best picture, a first for a foreign-language film. Follow our coverage and check out our roundup of red-carpet fashion. What we’re reading: This essay in Essence, addressing the attacks on the broadcast journalist Gayle King after she raised the question of a 2003 rape accusation against Kobe Bryant in the wake of his death. “The term misogynoir — the special type of hatred directed against women of color — says it all,” says the briefings editor, Andrea Kannapell. Cook: Italian pasta and chickpea stew cooks in just one pan and can be vegan by leaving off the final dusting of pecorino. Watch: The final season of the show “Homeland,” starring Claire Danes as a brilliant C.I.A. officer with bipolar disorder, is now playing on Showtime.  Smarter Living: Want to improve your sleep? Our Wirecutter colleagues present hacks, tips and products that actually help in their “Five Days to Better Sleep” Challenge. (Sign up here.) Seventeen African countries shed their colonial status in 1960. Sixty years later, our archival storytelling team, Past Tense, paired photography from collections at The Times and elsewhere with writers and thinkers of African descent for a special section, “A Continent Remade.” Veronica Chambers, the editor of Past Tense, spoke with Adriana Balsamo about the project. Here are a few lightly edited excerpts from their conversation. Can you speak to the decision to have more youthful writers be a part of the project? We really wanted a certain dynamism to the conversation. And we thought that it would be interesting to ask youngish people who are really connected to the continent … and who have a sense of pride about it. David Adjaye, for example, spent years cataloging the architecture of Africa in a way that had never been done before. But he grew up half his life off the continent. There’s always a period of discovery for someone who has a foot in a country but didn’t necessarily grow up there. And especially because the countries are so young, it felt like it’d be interesting to ask these young people who in some ways really benefited from all of the good of independence — their lives were shaped by everything that came after — to look at the pictures and respond. What is your favorite photo? I think the mother and baby picture [with Imbolo Mbue’s essay] and the Miss Independence picture [with Luvvie Ajayi’s essay] were really important to me because those were the two I found first, in October 2018. I held onto those two pictures as a kind of proof of concept. I also love the picture at the United Nations by Sam Falk [with Mr. Adjaye’s essay]. He’s so special to the history of The Times and just to know what it must have meant for those men to be able to go and represent new nations. To say, “Our country is three months old and here we are. Let’s talk about how we fit into the rest of the world.” I think that’s pretty powerful.  What do you hope readers take away from the section? We are really hoping that people on the continent will read the digital version, and we’ve worked really hard on the interactive. When you look at the news photographs, it was a time when very few New York Times readers would have been to the continent. And so when we look at where we are at 60 years later, there’s still a lot of people who have never been and may never go. And I hope what readers will take from it is a sense of possibility on the continent that I believe continues to this day. A sense of beauty, a sense of community. And I hope, interest: I hope they will continue to read some of the writers we featured. 
(Want to get this briefing by email? Here’s the sign-up.)  Good evening. Here’s the latest. 1. At least 20 Americans are among those who have been infected with the new coronavirus on a cruise ship quarantined in a Japanese port. More than 2,500 passengers on board are being kept in effective isolation, eating meals in their cabins and keeping at least six feet from each other during the few minutes each day they are allowed on deck. And the situation is worse for crew members, who live elbow to elbow in cramped quarters. China had extended its official Lunar New Year holiday by 10 days to help counter the virus’s spread. But when the extension ended today, stores and factories remained empty, suggesting it could be weeks — or months — before one of the world’s largest economies is humming again. Above, President Xi Jinping, who has remained conspicuously absent in recent weeks, made a rare public appearance to address the crisis. In our Opinion section, an epidemiologist who is heading to the World Health Organization’s emergency meeting on Tuesday lists what is known, and not yet known, about the virus. 2. New Hampshire is next. The state’s Democratic presidential primary, the second contest in the 2020 race, is on Tuesday. Bernie Sanders, above, is leading in the polls, and Pete Buttigieg isn’t far behind. The two are trying to capitalize on their strong showings in the troubled Iowa caucuses, while increasingly training their fire on each other. Elizabeth Warren is reviving her rallying cry (“Still, she persisted”), the political outsider Andrew Yang faces a make-or-break moment, and Joe Biden is already looking beyond to his “firewall” in South Carolina. Here are our live updates as candidates dash around New Hampshire. Iowa: The problems with the caucuses were bigger than one bad app. According to an investigation by our reporters, there was a total system failure. 3. President Trump released a $4.8 trillion budget proposal, but it has little chance of being fully enacted by Congress. As is usual, it’s more of a messaging document. The message: Keep shrinking the federal safety net, with deep cuts to student loan assistance, affordable housing, food stamps and Medicaid, and slash the E.P.A. Add funds to the military, national defense and border enforcement. Mr. Trump faces a secure spot in New Hampshire’s Republican primary, with just one opponent: Bill Weld, the former Massachusetts governor. We’ll be in Manchester, N.H., for Mr. Trump’s rally tonight. 4. Four members of China’s military were charged in the vast 2017 Equifax data breach, which exposed the personal information of about 145 million Americans. The U.S. government said the attack was part of a series of big data thefts organized by the People’s Liberation Army and Chinese intelligence agencies. Hackers stole names, birth dates and Social Security numbers of nearly half of all Americans — data that could be combined with artificial intelligence to help identify and target U.S. intelligence officers. And in Israel, a “grave” security lapse in an election app promoted by Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu led to the exposure of personal data of all 6.5 million eligible voters. 5. Angela Merkel’s chosen successor to lead Germany has stepped aside. Annegret Kramp-Karrenbauer, above, announced her resignation after a local chapter of her party, the center-right Christian Democrats, allied itself with a rising far-right party, Alternative for Germany. At a time when neighboring countries are looking to Berlin for leadership in a post-Brexit Europe, Germany is struggling with an uncomfortable sense of having lived through this before, as the growing power of the far right echoes the rise of the Nazis. 6. New rules at U.S. schools and colleges will shore up protections for victims of stalking and dating violence. The rules will for the first time cement domestic violence, dating violence and stalking as forms of gender discrimination that schools must address. Victims’ rights advocates say that while many schools have presumed such infractions fall under the broad umbrella of sexual harassment, not all have trained their staffs to address them. Above, a memorial to Lauren McCluskey, a University of Utah track star who was kidnapped on campus and killed by a former boyfriend in 2018, and whose case helped inspire the changes. 7. The Dart Container Corporation was an American success story. But it built its fortune on a modern environmental pariah: foam containers. As states like New York, Maine and Maryland outlaw polystyrene foam, which can harm fish and other marine life, the company that helped spur a revolution in cups and clamshells is struggling to find a path forward. And in Africa, researchers found that an increase in temperatures over the past seven decades correlates with bigger and more frequent thunderstorms. That increase, combined with poor infrastructure, could mean more fatalities and more economic damage. 8. California was about to lose its oldest weekly newspaper. And then in stepped Carl Butz. Since his retirement and his wife’s death in 2017, Mr. Butz had considered traveling to England or Latvia, or riding the Trans-Siberian Railway. But one night, he said, he was watching “Citizen Kane” on cable and thought, I can do that. So the 71-year-old cut a four-figure deal to buy The Mountain Messenger, earning himself a new career and saving Downieville, Calif., from becoming the latest small town to lose its newspaper. 9. Lessons from the “Parasite” landslide. The South Korean film’s triumph as the first non-English language best picture winner is a result in part of the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences’ efforts to diversify its voting base by race, gender, and nationality. It has added hundreds of new members from outside the U.S. “The success of ‘Parasite’ makes me wonder if the best picture win for a middlebrow nothing like ‘Green Book’ last year was more anomalous than it seemed,” said Manohla Dargis, in a conversation with fellow Times critics A.O. Scott and Wesley Morris. From the Oscars red carpet, our chief fashion critic, Vanessa Friedman, writes that “Janelle Monáe, in silver crystal-covered, hooded Ralph Lauren, had the best dress. She looked like the ruler of an entire galaxy.”  But the fashionista firepower wasn’t enough for TV viewers: The audience fell 20 percent, to an all-time low of 23.6 million. 10. What’s better than a bichon frisé? Four bichons frisés. Tomorrow night, the Westminster Dog Show will be a scene of high tension, as a handful of four-legged finalists compete for the coveted title of best in show. Until then, enjoy these photos of pampered Pomeranians, a meeting of Dalmatians and one very hairy Maltese. Have a doggone good evening. Your Evening Briefing is posted at 6 p.m. Eastern. And don’t miss Your Morning Briefing. Sign up here to get it by email in the Australian, Asian, European, African or American morning. Want to catch up on past briefings? You can browse them here. What did you like? What do you want to see here? Let us know at briefing@nytimes.com. 
(Want to get this briefing by email? Here’s the sign-up.) More than 60 new cases of the virus have been confirmed on a ship quarantined in Japan, bringing the total to 136, the ship’s captain told passengers today. Here are the latest updates and maps of where the virus has spread. The news comes a day after 97 people in China died from the virus, a daily record. The country’s death toll of 908 now exceeds that of the SARS epidemic 17 years ago, although the death rate from SARS was higher. Related: China said on Sunday that it would allow in a team from the World Health Organization, which first offered help weeks ago. Health experts say that deaths and infections are probably being undercounted because testing facilities are under severe strain. Closer look: In Wuhan, where the outbreak originated, our reporter met a family in which three generations have been sickened. Tips: There are more useful things to do than worry. To start, wash your hands, and get a flu shot. It was more than just a faulty app. A team of Times journalists in Des Moines reports: “As disastrous as the 2020 Iowa caucuses have appeared to the public, the failure runs deeper and wider than has previously been known, according to dozens of interviews with those involved. It was a total system breakdown that casts doubt on how a critical contest on the American political calendar has been managed for years.” Related: Nearly a week after the caucuses, the Iowa Democratic Party released results on Sunday indicating that Pete Buttigieg was the winner. But errors have led several news organizations, including The Times, to refrain from calling the race. Bernie Sanders’s campaign said it would call for a partial recanvass of results. What’s next: With the New Hampshire primary on Tuesday, Mr. Buttigieg and Mr. Sanders are escalating their rivalry. The comedy-thriller from South Korea on Sunday became the first film not in English to win the Academy Award for best picture. “Parasite,” which has earned $35.5 million at the North American box office since its release in October, also won awards for best director, original screenplay and international feature. The details: In the acting categories, Joaquin Phoenix won for “Joker”; Renée Zellweger for “Judy”; Brad Pitt for “Once Upon a Time … in Hollywood”; and Laura Dern for “Marriage Story.” Here’s a complete list of winners. Go deeper: The ceremony offered a grab bag of emotional moments and head-scratching choices, our chief TV critic writes. Closer look: View our collection of photographs from the red carpet. QAnon, which began online more than two years ago as an intricate, if baseless, conspiracy theory, has found a foothold offline, surfacing in political campaigns, criminal cases and at least one college class. About a dozen candidates for public office in the U.S. have promoted or dabbled in QAnon, and its adherents have been arrested in at least seven episodes, including the slaying of a New York City mob boss last year. Background: QAnon began in 2017, when cryptic posts written under the name Q Clearance Patriot appeared on the online message board 4chan. In more than 3,500 posts, Q — whose identity has never been determined — has claimed, among other things, that President Trump was recruited by the military to run for office in order to break up a global cabal of pedophiles, and that Robert Mueller’s investigation would end with prominent Democrats being imprisoned at Guantánamo Bay. Egyptians have controlled the river for thousands of years, but pollution, climate change and Egypt’s soaring population are taking a toll on the Nile. Now the country is sparring with Ethiopia over the construction of a $4.5 billion hydroelectric dam. The sides are scheduled to meet this week in Washington, where the White House has been mediating a dispute that threatens to break into a wider conflict. A $4.8 trillion budget: President Trump is expected to propose a spending plan today that will include billions of dollars for a wall along the southern border and steep cuts to safety net programs, including Medicaid. Amazon vs. Nazis: The retailer once said that it would sell “the good, the bad and the ugly,” but it has become increasingly proactive in removing Nazi material. In a book related to Amazon’s show “The Man in the High Castle,” swastikas and other Nazi-themed imagery were digitally erased. Snapshot: Above, a Nenets woman with a tray of stroganina, thinly shaved raw, frozen fish or meat that has long been a favorite snack in northern Siberia. Our correspondent calls it one of Russia’s hidden delicacies. Metropolitan Diary: In this week’s column, riding downtown, waking up from a dream and more reader tales of New York City. What we’re reading: This essay in Essence, addressing the attacks on the broadcast journalist Gayle King after she raised the question of a dropped rape accusation against Kobe Bryant. “The term misogynoir — the special type of hatred directed against women of color — says it all,” says the Briefings editor, Andrea Kannapell. Cook: Pasta and chickpea stew cooks in just one pan and is vegan without the final dusting of pecorino. Read: The writer Matthew Lopez discusses “The Inheritance,” his two-part play about gay culture and the legacy of AIDS. Listen: The indie rock duo Best Coast has a new song, “Everything Has Changed,” and a new outlook on life. Smarter Living: Our Wirecutter colleagues present hacks, tips and products in their “Five Days to Better Sleep” Challenge. (Sign up here.) Seventeen African countries shed their colonial status in 1960. Sixty years later, our archival storytelling team, Past Tense, paired photography from collections at The Times and elsewhere with writers and thinkers of African descent for a special section, “A Continent Remade.” Veronica Chambers, the editor of Past Tense, spoke with Adriana Balsamo about the project. Here are some edited excerpts from their conversation. Can you speak to the decision to have more youthful writers be a part of the project? We really wanted a certain dynamism to the conversation. And we thought that it would be interesting to ask youngish people who are really connected to the continent … and who have a sense of pride about it. David Adjaye, for example, spent years cataloging the architecture of Africa in a way that had never been done before. But he grew up half his life off the continent. There’s always a period of discovery for someone who has a foot in a country but didn’t necessarily grow up there. And especially because the countries are so young, it felt like it’d be interesting to ask these young people who in some ways really benefited from all of the good of independence — their lives were shaped by everything that came after — to look at the pictures and respond. What is your favorite photo? I think the mother and baby picture [with Imbolo Mbue’s essay] and the Miss Independence picture [with Luvvie Ajayi’s essay] were really important to me because those were the two I found first, in October 2018. I held on to those two pictures as a kind of proof of concept. I also love the picture at the United Nations by Sam Falk [with Mr. Adjaye’s essay]. He’s so special to the history of The Times and just to know what it must have meant for those men to be able to go and represent new nations. To say, “Our country is three months old and here we are. Let’s talk about how we fit into the rest of the world.” I think that’s pretty powerful. What do you hope readers take away from the section? We are really hoping that people on the continent will read the digital version, and we’ve worked really hard on the interactive. When you look at the news photographs, it was a time when very few New York Times readers would have been to Africa. And so when we look at where we are at 60 years later, there’s still a lot of people who have never been and may never go. And I hope what readers will take from it is a sense of possibility that I believe continues to this day. A sense of beauty, a sense of community. And I hope, interest: I hope they will continue to read some of the writers we featured. 
(Want to get this briefing by email? Here’s the sign-up.) More than 60 new cases of the virus have been confirmed on a ship quarantined in Japan, bringing the total to 136. A woman told us that her mother was on board and feverish — but hadn’t been seen by doctors. Here are the latest updates and maps of where the virus has spread. “Let’s not shake hands in this special time,” said President Xi Jinping of China as he reappeared in public in a show of leadership. Much of China remains idle, its economy frozen. Though the country faces stigma for being at the center of some of the world’s biggest viral epidemics, its health system has made strides.  Closer look: While the world’s most trafficked mammal, the pangolin, may be involved in the outbreak, the evidence is far from clear. The success of “Parasite” at the Academy Awards led to an outpouring of national pride in South Korea on Monday, after the comedy-thriller directed by Bong Joon Ho became the first film not in English to win the award for best picture. The victory made front-page news. “The South Korean movie industry became 100 years old last year,” said a 50-year-old office worker in Seoul, “and this is a momentous event that makes South Koreans proud.” “Parasite” also won awards for best director, original screenplay and international feature. Sharon Choi, an aspiring filmmaker, is the interpreter who has followed Mr. Bong and the “Parasite” team throughout their successful awards season. Watch: Mr. Bong narrated one of the scenes from “Parasite” last year for our “Anatomy of a Scene” series. Other Oscars: In the acting categories, Joaquin Phoenix won for “Joker”; Renée Zellweger for “Judy”; Brad Pitt for “Once Upon a Time … in Hollywood”; and Laura Dern for “Marriage Story.” Here’s a complete list of winners. The red carpet: View our collection of photographs from before and after the awards show. The U.S. announced that it had charged four Chinese military officers with hacking Equifax, a major credit reporting agency, and making off with sensitive personal data on about 145 million Americans. The Justice Department suggested that the hack was part of a string of major thefts organized by the People’s Liberation Army and Chinese intelligence agencies, including the hacking of the U.S. government’s personnel office in 2015. Motive: Law enforcement officials have not yet found evidence that the Chinese government has used the data from the Equifax hacking. But the U.S. suspects Beijing of developing databases on Americans for use in espionage. New Hampshire is voting Tuesday in its Democratic presidential primary, with Senator Bernie Sanders of Vermont leading recent polling averages and former Mayor Pete Buttigieg of South Bend, Ind., not far behind. The two are trying to capitalize on their strong showings in the Iowa caucuses and zoom past rivals. Senator Elizabeth Warren of Massachusetts is reviving an earlier rallying cry: “Nevertheless, she persisted.” Former Vice President Joe Biden is expected to have a bad night, and the political outsider Andrew Yang faces a make-or-break moment. Here are our live updates as candidates dash around the state. Go deeper: The problems with the Iowa caucuses were bigger than one bad app. According to an investigation by our reporters, there was a total system failure. “Our entire concept of how to control the North’s financial engagement with the world is based on an image of the North that is fixed in the past.” That’s a former National Security Agency analyst whose new study says that North Korea’s internet use has surged about 300 percent since 2017 — and that the bandwidth has allowed the country to move money around the world in defiance of international sanctions, to mine and steal cryptocurrencies and to unleash its hackers. Our national security correspondent David Sanger examines the study and the implications. Thai gunman: Sgt. Jakrapanth Thomma, who killed 29 people in a devastating mass shooting over the weekend, held a grudge against his superior officer, a colonel, and the colonel’s mother-in-law, according to those who knew him. His belief that the pair cheated him highlights a transactional side of the Thai military. Germany: Chancellor Angela Merkel’s handpicked successor, Annegret Kramp-Karrenbauer, bowed out of seeking the country’s top position after opposing a decision by a branch of their party, the Christian Democratic Union, to make common cause in the country’s east with the far-right Alternative for Germany. The Philippines: The government moved to end the franchise of ABS-CBN Corp., the country’s leading broadcast network. It’s the latest push by President Rodrigo Duterte against media outlets that have been critical of his leadership. Snapshot: Above, a lightning storm over Pretoria, South Africa. Researchers say that Africa is experiencing bigger and more frequent thunderstorms as global temperatures rise. What we’re reading: “The 10,000-Year Clock Is a Waste of Time,” in Wired. “The piece takes a look at the complicated device being built in Texas — mind-boggling not just because of its ambition, but as an emblem of the hubris of tech mega-billionaires.” Cook: Sesame noodles with chicken and peanuts is quick and spicy. (Our Five Weeknight Dishes newsletter has more recommendations.) Read: The writer Matthew Lopez discusses “The Inheritance,” his two-part play about gay culture in New York and the legacy of AIDS. Listen: The indie rock duo Best Coast has a new song, “Everything Has Changed,” and a new outlook on life. Smarter Living: Better coffee at home is within reach. Here are five cheap(ish) things to make it happen. Some members of our politics team have been on the ground in New Hampshire for weeks. We talked to one of them, Matt Stevens, about the mood in the state ahead of Tuesday’s primary. We just came off a messy run in Iowa. Are there fears that New Hampshire’s vote could also go awry? Short answer: Yes, absolutely. There are many, many things that could go wrong. But as some of our colleagues have pointed out, New Hampshire has a history of running elections smoothly, whereas the Iowa caucuses have now encountered problems in three consecutive cycles. How are New Hampshire voters feeling about their primary system? Perhaps because of those divergent histories, the voters I have talked to here in New Hampshire have both expressed confidence in their system and given the side-eye to Iowa. Caucuses and primaries are very different, and the folks here are pretty darn sure their system is best. Last week, as the mess was unfolding in Iowa, a woman in Hampton, N.H., told me: “This is a national level campaign. You have all these years to get it straight and this is the embarrassment you’re causing the party?” How is your team managing back-to-back primaries? Some of us went to Iowa; most of the rest of us came to New Hampshire. And a handful did both. (Bless them!) The consensus among the people who have been to both places seems to be that the workroom at our hotel here in Manchester has windows, and is therefore far superior to the one in Des Moines, but the food options around our New Hampshire hotel are way more limited. I personally have already been to the Olive Garden next door twice. 
Workers are stuck in their hometowns. Officials want detailed health plans before factories or offices can reopen. Assembly lines that make General Motors cars and Apple iPhones are standing silent. More than two weeks after China locked down a major city to stop a dangerous viral outbreak, one of the world’s largest economies remains largely idle. Much of the country was supposed to have reopened by now, but its empty streets, quiet factories and legions of inactive workers suggest that weeks or months could pass before this vital motor of global growth is humming again. The global economy could suffer the longer China stays in low gear. It has been hampered by both the outbreak and its own containment efforts, a process that has cut off workers from their jobs and factories from their raw materials. The result is a slowdown that is already slashing traffic along the world’s shipping lines and leading to forecasts of a sharp fall in production of everything from cars to smartphones. “It’s like Europe in medieval times,” said Jörg Wuttke, the president of the European Chamber of Commerce in China, “where each city has its checks and crosschecks.” New figures show the authorities still have a long way to go before the outbreak can be tamed. On Tuesday, they reported a milestone: the overall death toll from coronavirus in China had topped 1,000. On Monday, the number was 908.  In a sign that China’s leaders feel increasing pressure to look like they are in control, Xi Jinping, the country’s top leader, toured a Beijing neighborhood and hospital, in what state media described as an inspection of the front line of the outbreak. Chinese officials have been roundly criticized online even in the face of tough censorship for what many see as a slow initial response and the suppression of early warnings. On Monday, a team from the World Health Organization landed in Beijing to work with Chinese researchers battling the coronavirus. Their arrival could signal a shift in attitude among China’s leaders, who had balked at a visit and have long worked to show that they do not need foreign assistance to tackle problems. The organization’s director general, Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, cited with concern instances of infections among people who had not traveled to China, suggesting that even more cases could emerge. “In short, we may only be seeing the tip of the iceberg,” he wrote on Twitter. Chinese health officials have been encouraged that the pace of recoveries among victims has outpaced deaths for more than a week. The rate of infection, however, has continued to soar, suggesting that the worst is still to come. It is becoming increasingly clear that restarting China — the world’s largest manufacturer and a titan of global trade — would be difficult even if the country made major strides in the next few days toward containing the outbreak. Until then, the damage is spreading. On Monday, Nissan of Japan said it would shut down its plant in Kyushu, Japan, for four days beginning later this week “due to supply shortages of parts from China.” Other carmakers, like FCA in Italy and Hyundai in South Korea, have already warned that a lack of parts from China could force them to curtail production in their home markets. The China Development Forum, the country’s premier gathering of business leaders and economists, said its annual meeting, set for next month, had been postponed indefinitely. Government officials had extended China’s official Lunar New Year holiday by three days to Feb. 3 to keep people home. Major business hubs, like the cities of Beijing and Shanghai and the provinces of Guangdong and Shandong, then further extended holidays until Monday. As the day dawned, it was clear that business as usual had not resumed. Traffic in Beijing was much lighter than normal, stores remained closed and many residents worked from home or did not work at all. Daimler, the German maker of Mercedes cars, said it began gradually ramping up production at its Chinese factories on Monday. But other major companies said their factories remained closed or were running slower than usual. Ford Motor said that its joint venture with one of China’s biggest state-owned firms was restarting some production, but that it would “ramp up our production over the following weeks.” General Motors said it would reopen the first of its huge assembly plants in China on Saturday, and would gradually reopen the rest over the next two weeks, “based on local employees’ safety readiness, supply chain readiness and product inventory needs.” China’s containment efforts are contributing to the disruptions. The authorities have locked down a region of central China around Wuhan, the city at the center of the outbreak. The local authorities are taking a tough stance with traffic, meaning workers are struggling to return to their jobs. Many towns and cities have begun imposing two-week mandatory quarantines on arriving truck drivers who picked up cargos in cities with disease outbreaks or even just drove through these areas. Wu Lin, an associate director at a Shanghai advertising company, returned to Wuhan, her hometown, for the holidays on Jan. 21 and had a high-speed train ticket back to Shanghai on Feb. 2. But her ticket was canceled soon after Wuhan was locked down, and she has tried and failed repeatedly since then to find a way out. “There is no point to keep looking,” she said. Shipyards around the country have run into labor shortages, said Tim Huxley, the chief executive of Mandarin Shipping, a Hong Kong freighter shipping company. Shipbuilders and ship repair providers have begun citing these labor shortages to invoke clauses in their contracts that allow them to delay completion of projects for events beyond their control, he said. Aside from fear of disease, the country’s nearly 300 million migrant workers — almost two-fifths of the labor force — now have another reason to be reluctant to travel to distant cities: Their children are still home. Depending on the province, many schools are not scheduled to resume until Feb. 25 or even March 1. Even factories with enough workers are running into further problems. The packaging industry is almost shut down, so everything from plastic packing to steel drums is running out, Mr. Wuttke said. Local regulators are putting up even more barriers. Before businesses in big manufacturing hubs like Shanghai, Shenzhen, Suzhou or Nanjing can reopen, they must now verify the travel history and health of every employee over the past two weeks. They must have frequent temperature checks of employees, hand-washing procedures and a plan to isolate and refer to hospitals anyone showing even fevers as low as 99.1 degrees Fahrenheit. Most difficult of all, businesses cannot reopen without approval of their health plans by municipal officials — and larger operations also have to wait for a site visit from a health official. Shenzhen, a vast sprawl of electronics factories and skyscrapers next to Hong Kong, issued new health and safety rules on Sunday and said factories that made iPhones and other Apple products would have to meet them before opening. Foxconn Technology, a Taiwanese company that owns the factories, said it met all health and hygiene rules but declined to comment on when production would restart at specific locations. Apple declined to comment. Apple’s iPhone production, which is heavily concentrated in China, could drop by 10 percent in the first three months of the year, projected TrendForce, a technology forecasting firm in Taiwan. The municipal government in Shanghai, home to more than 20 million people and a vast array of businesses, said only 70 percent of the city’s manufacturers were taking steps to resume production. Few have actually received permission to do so. Businesses “want to protect staff, but also nobody wants to get caught offsides when it comes to the labor law or the daily announcements from the government,” said Ker Gibbs, the president of the American Chamber of Commerce in Shanghai. It is not yet clear how the ripples from China’s slowdown will affect the United States. Businesses that rely on assembling a lot of different parts from various suppliers could become the hardest hit. At the top of that list is the auto industry — a single car may require as many as 30,000 parts from various suppliers. American businesses have been trying to diversify away from China as President Trump’s trade war with Beijing has made it less economical to manufacture there. But a lot of steering parts, electronics and even door hinges still come to the United States from China, said Razat Gaurav, the chief executive of Llamasoft, a company in Ann Arbor, Mich., that handles supply chain logistics for big automakers and aerospace companies in North America. “If the current coronavirus crisis continues to impact production capacity in China," he said, “it will ultimately impact auto assembly plants in the U.S. and Mexico.” 
The death toll from the coronavirus epidemic is continuing to climb, Chinese officials said Tuesday. The government put the nationwide figure at 1,016. That was up 108 from the day before, when it was 908. The number of cases of infection also grew, to over 42,638. The figure for the day before was put at 40,171. Deaths in Hubei drove the increase — there were 103 — though the number of infections reported there actually declined somewhat. One of the people evacuated from Wuhan to the United States last week is infected with the coronavirus, an American health official confirmed. The patient, one of 167 passengers on a State Department-arranged flight from China that mostly carried American citizens, has been taken to a hospital near Marine Corps Air Station Miramar in San Diego. It is the 13th confirmed case in the United States, and the seventh in California. Other government-arranged evacuation planes from China have taken passengers — more than 500 in all — to Nebraska, Texas and other bases in California in the last two weeks. Those evacuated are expected to be quarantined for 14 days, with frequent checks from medical personnel to determine whether they have developed fevers, coughs and other early signs of the virus. Hong Kong officials evacuated some residents of an apartment building after two people living on different floors were found to be infected with the coronavirus, the authorities said early Tuesday. Officials from the city’s Center for Health Protection said the decision to partially evacuate the building was made after the discovery of a leaky bathroom pipe in the apartment of a newly confirmed patient, a 62-year-old woman. She lives 10 ten floors below a resident who was earlier found to be infected. Dr. Wong Ka-Hing, the health center’s director, said the government was investigating the possibility of environmental transmission in the building and called the evacuation a “precautionary measure.” The initial report prompted comparisons to an incident in 2003 when 329 residents of a housing estate in Hong Kong became infected with SARS, or severe acute respiratory syndrome. The virus was later found to have spread through defective piping. Forty-two of the infected residents died. At a government-organized briefing on Tuesday, Professor Yuen Kwok-yung, a microbiologist at the University of Hong Kong, said the situation this time appeared to be different. But he said the authorities were not ruling out the possibility of airborne transmission of the virus.  Sixty-five more infections have been confirmed on a cruise ship quarantined in Yokohama, Japan, raising the total number on board to 135, the ship’s captain told passengers on Monday. At least 20 of the infected passengers are from the United States, according to a Princess Cruises spokeswoman. In all, 416 American passengers boarded the vessel, the Diamond Princess, at the start of the voyage according to the spokeswoman. In a statement Sunday the cruise line detailed the countries of origin of what was then 66 infected passengers: 45 were Japanese, four were from Australia, three were from the Philippines, one was Canadian, one was from England, one was from Ukraine and 11 were from the United States. The outbreak on the ship, which has been docked at the Yokohama port since Monday, is the largest outside China. About 3,700 people, including about 2,600 passengers and more than 1,000 crew members, are quarantined on the ship, with passengers largely confined to their cabins. The Japanese authorities have tested a few hundred people for the coronavirus who were believed to be at particular risk, but as the number of cases has risen, some passengers have pressed for everyone on board to be screened. President Xi Jinping of China, the authoritarian leader who had been noticeably absent from public view since the coronavirus outbreak escalated into a crisis, toured several public places in Beijing on Monday afternoon. The appearances seemed aimed at countering criticism that Mr. Xi has been aloof amid rising public discontent with his government’s struggle to contain the crisis. The last time Mr. Xi had appeared in public was at a meeting last week with Cambodia’s prime minister. Mr. Xi has yet to visit the epicenter of the outbreak, Wuhan, 600 miles to the south in Hubei Province. Chinese press reports said Mr. Xi traveled first to a neighborhood roughly five miles north of his residence near the Forbidden City and toured a local government office. He later visited a city hospital, where he took part in a video conference with officials and workers at a hospital in Wuhan. Mr. Xi, wearing a powder blue surgical mask and a black suit, made no public remarks, at least according to initial reports. But state media said his visits demonstrated Mr. Xi’s central role in directing the response, as well as his empathy for the ordinary people it has affected most. Workers stuck in their hometowns. Assembly lines that make General Motors cars and Apple iPhones standing silent. More than two weeks after China locked down a major city to stop the outbreak, one of the world’s largest economies remains largely idle. Much of the country was supposed to have reopened by now, but its empty streets, quiet factories and legions of inactive workers suggest that weeks or months could pass before this vital motor of global growth is humming again. China has been hampered by both the outbreak and its own containment efforts, a process that has cut off workers from their jobs and factories from their raw materials. The result is a slowdown that is already slashing traffic along the world’s shipping lines and leading to forecasts of a sharp fall in production of everything from cars to smartphones. “It’s like Europe in medieval times,” said Joerg Wuttke, the president of the European Chamber of Commerce in China, “where each city has its checks and crosschecks.” A lot of epidemics seem to come out of China, leading some to point accusing fingers. President Trump’s trade czar, Peter Navarro, for one, once went so far as to describe the country as a “disease incubator,” and that was before the latest outbreak. But those perceptions are outdated. While some of the most serious outbreaks have been traced to Chinese origins, others associated with China may have started elsewhere. Old stereotypes have also contributed to unfounded portrayals of China as a source of contagion, when in fact it has progressed further than many countries in eradicating scourges that can flourish in developing regions. Still, China’s recent history of what are known as zoonotic infections — viruses, bacteria and parasites that spread between animals and humans — have raised questions about public-health practices in the world’s most populous country. And while the Chinese government has strengthened disease detection and monitoring capabilities, its tendency to play down or even cover up mass outbreaks may play a role in their severity and scope. Here are five basic questions and answers on China and infectious diseases. A team of experts from the World Health Organization arrived in Beijing on Monday evening, nearly two weeks after the organization’s director general met with China’s leader and praised the country’s handling of the coronavirus crisis. The team was led by Bruce Aylward, a Canadian doctor and epidemiologist who has overseen international campaigns to fight Ebola and polio. The arrival of the team came the same day China said it had set a new daily record for deaths from the virus. It said 97 people had died the day before. The overall death toll is now 908 people, which surpasses the toll from the SARS epidemic of 2002-03, according to official data. The number of confirmed infections in the country rose to 40,171, and 3,062 new cases were recorded in the preceding 24 hours, most of them in Hubei Province. Since W.H.O.’s director general, Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, visited Beijing in January, the organization had tried to send a team, but the Chinese government balked. The delay raised questions about China’s sensitivity to accepting outside help in combating the epidemic. In a series of posts on Twitter, Dr. Tedros said countries that have seen only a few cases with no direct connection to China could yet see a jump in new infections. “We may only be seeing the tip of the iceberg,” he wrote. He called on all countries to share information about the coronavirus “in real time” with the organization. In the search for the animal source or sources of the epidemic in China, the latest candidate is the pangolin, an endangered, scaly, ant-eating mammal that is imported in huge numbers to Chinese markets for food and medicine. The market in pangolins is so large that they are said to be the most trafficked mammals on the planet. All four Asian species are critically endangered, and it is far from clear whether being identified as a viral host would be good or bad for pangolins. It could decrease the trade in the animals, or it could cause a backlash. It is also far from clear whether the pangolin is the animal that passed the new virus to humans. Bats are still thought to be the original host of the virus. If pangolins are involved in disease transmission, they would act as an intermediate host. In any case, the science so far is suggestive rather than conclusive, and because of the intense interest in the virus, some claims have been made public before the traditional scientific review process. Read more about it in our report in Science. The latest business casualty of the epidemic in China: Esports. Gaming tournaments have come to a halt in the country in what had been expected to be a banner year for competitive video gaming. China, which is projected to have 768 million active video game players by 2022, was expected to generate $210.3 million in 2019 from industry, overtaking Western Europe as the second-largest region for esports in terms of revenue. The first is the United States. Multiple esports events in China for games like League of Legends and Counter-Strike: Global Offensive have either been postponed or canceled. Even the Pokémon Video Game Championship that was set to take place Feb. 2 in Hong Kong was canceled. Public safety concerns have rippled across the globe. PUBG announced that it was canceling an event in Berlin because a large chunk of its competitive players are in China. And the Overwatch League, a global league run by Blizzard Entertainment, a video game developer based in Irvine, Calif., canceled its matches in China, where it has four teams. Given that many Chinese residents are stuck inside their homes, viewing esports events might have offered something of a reprieve amid the nationwide health crisis. Britain’s health secretary on Monday declared the coronavirus an “imminent threat” to public health and announced a series of measures to combat its spread even as four more cases were confirmed in the country. The declaration will allow the health authorities to forcibly quarantine people, and designates one hospital and one conference center as isolation facilities. So far, eight people in England have tested positive for the virus, according to a statement on Monday from Prof. Chris Whitty, the chief medical officer for England. The new cases in Britain are believed to be linked to cases in France and Spain, according to the French health authorities, which all connect to a group of British citizens staying in a chalet in the Alpine village of Les Contamines-Montjoie. At least five others who stayed in the chalet and are still in France have tested positive for the virus, according to French officials. Conflicting views on whether the coronavirus can be spread through the air underscore the confusion surrounding the outbreak. Zeng Qun, the deputy head of Shanghai’s Civil Affairs Bureau, said at a news conference on Saturday that the virus could be spread that way, meaning it might be transmitted more easily — even if people are not in proximity — than previously thought. But Shen Yinzhong, the medical director of the Shanghai Public Health Clinical Center, disputed that. He told The Paper, a Shanghai newspaper, that although the virus might spread through the air “in theory,” confirmation required further research. The Chinese government and the World Health Organization have said that most infections occurred among people in close physical contact. Experts have suggested that a related virus in 2003 that caused an outbreak of SARS could be spread through the air under some circumstances. An outbreak in Hong Kong occurred, experts said, when the wind carried the virus from an apartment complex in which several people were infected. The China Development Forum, an annual economic policy conference that China has used to project an image as an economically open country, has been postponed indefinitely. In past years, members of the Communist Party’s Politburo Standing Committee and the governor of China’s central bank have used the event to seek more foreign investment for the country. But this year, global companies are instead grappling with having a supply chain deeply embedded in China as the coronavirus spreads across the nation. On Monday, Nissan of Japan said it would shut down its plant in Kyushu, Japan, for four days beginning later this week, “due to supply shortages of parts from China.” Other carmakers, like Fiat Chrysler in Italy and Hyundai in South Korea, have already warned that a lack of parts from China could force them to curtail production in their home markets. Even trade shows further afield are taking a hit with companies like Amazon and Sony choosing to stay away from this month’s Mobile World Congress technology conference in Barcelona. The organizers said new safety measures would be put in place, including prohibiting any visitors from Hubei Province in China from attending. And security officials will also take visitors’ body temperatures and check passports stamps in order to keep out anybody who visited China in the previous 14 days. The coronavirus has helped push inflation to an eight-year high, the Chinese government said on Monday, adding to Beijing’s problems. Consumer price inflation rose to 5.4 percent year on year in January, compared with a 4.5 percent rise in December. That is the highest level since November 2011, according to China’s statistics bureau. The outbreak has disrupted China’s supply chains, making it difficult in many places to get products to market. While nonfood related prices, including energy, rose slightly, food prices pushed inflation up. The price of pork, which has surged for months, has now more than doubled over the past year after an outbreak of African swine fever led to a shortage of pigs. The latest inflation figures mark a new challenge for China’s central bank. The People’s Bank of China has opened the spigots to provide money to local governments that are trying to contain the outbreak.  The government has told banks to extend favorable terms to companies that have been closed by efforts to contain the outbreak. Chinese efforts to stop the coronavirus outbreak have hit even those companies that make essential equipment for medical and emergency workers, gear that is in short supply in many parts of the country. Officials in the city of Xiantao in Hubei Province notified companies making protective clothing and medical masks that they needed to produce the proper paperwork before they could reopen. Unless they can prove their products have been cleared for sale within China, the notice said, the factories cannot not open until Feb. 14. The notice caused an uproar online. Xiantao is a major industrial hub for what are known as nonwoven products. That includes the suits and gloves used by emergency workers to protect themselves during outbreaks. The area is especially important for making protective masks. The notice said local officials made the move to ensure quality standards were upheld and to root out counterfeit gear makers. But officials relented after a public outcry. On Monday, the government said it approved 73 protective product manufacturers to resume operations, while others are being certified. 
(Want to get this briefing by email? Here’s the sign-up.) The World Health Organization is holding a meeting today as Chinese officials said the death toll from the coronavirus has climbed to 1,016, with 42,638 confirmed cases in total. Here are the latest updates and maps of where the virus has spread. In Britain, where four more cases linked to a cluster of transmissions at a ski resort in France were confirmed, the health authorities on Monday declared the virus an “imminent threat” to public health and announced new measures to combat its spread. That includes the ability to forcibly quarantine people — a sign of how seriously they are treating the outbreak.  Related: Sixty-five new cases were confirmed on a cruise ship quarantined in Yokohama, Japan, bringing the total on board to 135. Quote of note: “Let’s not shake hands in this special time,” said China’s leader, Xi Jinping, as he reappeared in public in Beijing on Monday. The visit came after Mr. Xi had been criticized for appearing aloof amid increasing public discontent with his government’s response to the crisis and an idled economy. Go deeper: In our Opinion section, an epidemiologist heading to the W.H.O. meeting today lists what is known, and not yet known, about the virus. Annegret Kramp-Karrenbauer, Chancellor Angela Merkel’s handpicked successor, said on Monday she would not seek Germany’s top position after a local chapter of her party, the center-right Christian Democrats, allied itself with a rising far-right party, Alternative for Germany. If you missed it: Last Wednesday protests broke out after the Christian Democrats and AfD voted together to elect the governor of the tiny eastern state of Thuringia, where the Nazis first won power locally before taking power nationally. The vote exposed Ms. Kramp-Karrenbauer’s lack of authority over her party and the creeping influence of the far right on the country’s political direction. Context: Germany’s weakened traditional parties and increasingly powerful far right are an uncomfortable echo of the rise of the Nazis, at a crucial time when a post-Brexit Europe looks to Berlin for leadership. Looking ahead: The Christian Democrats, expected to elect a new leader in December, face the choice of whether to join forces with the far right or to draw a red line against any collaboration. A Russian military court on Monday sentenced a group of left-wing activists to up to 18 years in prison on terrorism and other charges; some of the activists claimed they had been forced to testify and had been brutally tortured. The seven men were accused of plotting attacks ahead of the World Cup soccer tournament in Russia and presidential election in 2018. All denied the charges. Context: Russia’s security and law enforcement agencies are under immense pressure to produce results, say critics who see a parallel with 2018, when the authorities were accused of entrapping members of a chat group. Above, lightning over Pretoria, South Africa, in 2016. Researchers said an increase in temperatures in Africa over the past seven decades was leading to bigger and more frequent thunderstorms. In a continent that already experiences destructive storms and has many of the world’s lightning hot spots, that can mean more fatalities and more economic damage. Storm Ciara: At least five people were killed as a powerful winter storm tore through western and northern Europe. The storm, which also caused flooding, transport disruptions and power outages, was particularly destructive because of its very strong and widespread winds, according to a British meteorologist. New Hampshire: The state’s Democratic presidential primary, the second contest in the 2020 race, takes place today. Senator Bernie Sanders of Vermont and former Mayor Pete Buttigieg of South Bend, Ind., are trying to capitalize on their strong showings in the troubled Iowa caucuses, while also increasingly training their fire on each other. Israel: A software flaw that has exposed the personal data of every eligible voter in the country has raised concerns about identity theft and electoral manipulation, just three weeks before a national election. The Netherlands: Slave labor in the South American nation of Suriname generated vast wealth for Amsterdam. Now a movement has grown to press the city to apologize for slavery in the former colony. Snapshot: Above, poodles wait to be judged at the Westminster Dog Show in New York City. The finale takes place tonight, when the best in show emerges from a shortlist of seven. What we’re reading: “The 10,000-Year Clock Is a Waste of Time,” in Wired. Adam Pasick, of the Briefings team, writes: “The piece takes a look at the complicated device being built in Texas — mind-boggling not just because of its ambition, but as an emblem of the hubris of tech mega-billionaires.” Cook: Sesame noodles with chicken and peanuts is quick and spicy. (Our Five Weeknight Dishes newsletter has more recommendations.) Indulge: Our critics discussed the impact that the success of the South Korean movie “Parasite” at the Oscars could have on the film industry. And we collected some of the best and worst moments from Sunday’s ceremony. Listen: Christine and the Queens — the French songwriter Hélöise Letissier — couldn’t be more straightforwardly melancholy than she is in the ballad, “People, I’ve Been Sad,” our critic Jon Pareles writes. It’s one of our picks of recent releases. Smarter Living: Better coffee at home is within reach. Here are five cheap(ish) things to make it happen. Some members of our politics team have been on the ground in New Hampshire for weeks. We talked to one of them, Matt Stevens, about the mood in the state ahead of today’s primary. We just came off a messy run in Iowa. Are there fears that New Hampshire’s vote could also go awry? Short answer: Yes, absolutely. There are many, many things that could go wrong. But as some of our colleagues have pointed out, New Hampshire has a history of running elections smoothly, whereas the Iowa caucuses have now encountered problems in three consecutive cycles. How are New Hampshire voters feeling about their primary system? Perhaps because of those divergent histories, the voters I have talked to here in New Hampshire have both expressed confidence in their system and given the side-eye to Iowa. Caucuses and primaries are very different, and the folks here are pretty darn sure their system is best. Last week, as the mess was unfolding in Iowa, a woman in Hampton, N.H., told me: “This is a national level campaign. You have all these years to get it straight and this is the embarrassment you’re causing the party?” How is your team managing back-to-back primaries? Some of us went to Iowa; most of the rest of us came to New Hampshire. And a handful did both. (Bless them!) The consensus among the people who have been to both places seems to be that the workroom at our hotel here in Manchester has windows, and is therefore far superior to the one in Des Moines, but the food options around our New Hampshire hotel are way more limited. I, personally, have already been to the Olive Garden next door twice. 
Chinese health officials said today that the death toll from the coronavirus had passed 1,000. Here are the latest updates and maps of where the virus has reached.  In Hong Kong, two people living 10 floors apart were found to be infected, suggesting the virus may have spread through their apartment building, perhaps through a pipe. Similar fears came after several confirmed cases in Tianjin, a city near Beijing, were linked to one department store. Indonesia has yet to announce a case — something experts find astonishing, considering Bali alone hosts some 5,000 Chinese tourists a day. Another angle: President Trump has so far kept his distance from the issue, but public health experts are now concerned that a president who has spoken openly about his phobia of germs might overreact to the coronavirus crisis. Perspective: In an opinion piece for The Times, an epidemiologist discusses what is known, and not known, about the virus. The governing Bharatiya Janata Party, or B.J.P., won far fewer seats than expected in elections in New Delhi on Tuesday — showing some cracks in the support for the party behind contentious laws seen as discriminatory toward Muslims. Prime Minister Narendra Modi had set his sights on winning big in the capital. And while his party won five more seats there than it did in the last election, it still fell short of the seats needed to beat the opposition. Context: During the campaign, the B.J.P. focused on Hindu-centric initiatives and sectarian identity issues, rather than issues specific to the city. The incumbent Aam Aadmi Party, or A.A.P., did just the opposite, but still avoided discussing the protests sweeping the nation. T-Mobile’s takeover of Sprint cleared a major hurdle in the U.S., as a judge ruled in favor of the deal years in the making. The new telecommunications giant would take on companies like AT&T and Verizon. SoftBank, the Japanese conglomerate, has pumped billions into Sprint over nearly a decade, and the deal turned out to be its best hope of offloading the debt-laden company.  It’s unclear how consumers will be affected, and it might take years to figure that out. States in the U.S. have argued that the merger would reduce competition and raise prices. Related: The U.S. Federal Trade Commission ordered five big tech companies — Google, Amazon, Facebook, Apple and Microsoft — to provide information on mergers that were too small to report to regulators. It came as several government bodies were investigating the platforms for potential anti-competitive behavior. Polls for the first primary of the 2020 U.S. presidential campaign are set to close in a few hours. The vote in New Hampshire, which follows last week’s Iowa caucus, has the potential to narrow the unsettled Democratic field. Here’s what to expect. Though New Hampshire’s primary doesn’t lend much in terms of delegates — only 24 are up for grabs today — it can provide momentum for the top performers as they head into the Nevada caucuses next week and the South Carolina primary on Feb. 29. Here’s how important today’s contest is for each candidate. The details: Senator Bernie Sanders of Vermont and former Mayor Pete Buttigieg of South Bend, Ind., began the day as the favorites, according to recent polls. We’ll have live results for the Democratic race, as well as the Republican primary, which President Trump is expected to win handily. Our writer tracked down Gabriel Matzneff, the French writer under investigation for his promotion of pedophilia, after he was abandoned by the same powerful people who had protected him until a few weeks ago. His longtime support from elite circles, along with many members of the public, reflects an enduring French contradiction: an egalitarian nation that nevertheless lets the rich play by a different moral code. Thailand: The nation is struggling to understand how a soldier’s rage turned into a mass killing at a Buddhist temple and a shopping mall over the weekend. Germany: Europe could be left leaderless now that the front-runner to replace Angela Merkel as chancellor has announced she is stepping aside. It’ll be a major focus of the Munich security conference this week. Chocolate: Here’s everything you ever wanted to know about chocolate, including how to choose the best and most ethically produced bar. Snapshot: Above, “A Concise Passage,” an art installation at Desert X AlUla, a new Saudi art festival in the desert that is attracting the Coachella crowd. Some locals are worried about damaging the area’s archaeological jewels, and outsiders have called the collaboration with Saudi Arabia “morally corrupt.” What we’re reading: This story in Bitter Southerner about the busboy in the iconic 1960 photo of four young black men defiantly sitting at a Woolworth’s lunch counter in Greensboro, N.C. Dan Saltzstein, our senior editor for Special Projects, calls it a “lovely piece about a supporting character in the history of civil rights.” Cook: There are few dips as satisfying as a classic queso. Watch: Our critics discussed what the Oscars success for the South Korean movie “Parasite” could mean for the film industry. Listen: Sharon Van Etten’s new single, “Beaten Down,” is all deliberation and determination, our critic writes, hovering between dirge and homily. Here are a few more new songs we recommend. Smarter Living: Save more money by automating the process so you don’t have to actively think about it. Every year at this time, dog fanciers and fancy dogs get together at Madison Square Garden for a few days of mutual admiration. The competitors, human and canine, have been working toward the Westminster Dog Show for months. It will reach its peak in a few hours with the judging of Best in Show. We spoke with Sarah Blesener, one of a number of photographers who has helped us cover the show. Have you covered anything like this before? Oh my, no. This is my first time, and there’s nothing like it. It feels like there’s too much to photograph. It’s visually overwhelming — that’s a better way to put it. The activities are quite redundant, the grooming and the competition, but the people and the dogs are unique. You turn a corner and there’s hair spray in the air and a dog in a new outfit, or people are dressed in ’40s sequins. How do you work with the other photographers? We cover different shifts. Somebody will be there in the morning, somebody in the afternoon, somebody in the evening. Somebody is doing video. It feels nice, you have more confidence to have your own vision. What are you looking to capture? The people are so quirky and interesting, and their relationships with the dogs are remarkable. That’s what I was drawn to. But it’s hard, because you have to make it not look too kitschy, to get something that’s more than just another cute dog. And you don’t want to disturb or overwhelm anyone. People are really emotional, they’re really stressed. It was more challenging than I realized. 
(Want to get this briefing by email? Here’s the sign-up.) As it works to contain the spread of a dangerous epidemic, one of the world’s largest economies has been largely idle, threatening a sharp reduction in the production of everything from cars to smartphones. Chinese health officials said today that the death toll from the new coronavirus had passed 1,000. In Hong Kong, two people living on different floors of an apartment building were found to be infected, raising fears about how the virus can spread. Here are the latest updates and maps of where the virus has reached. Quotable: “Let’s not shake hands in this special time,” said China’s leader, Xi Jinping, as he toured Beijing on Monday after facing criticism for his relatively low profile. Another angle: During an Ebola outbreak in 2014, Donald Trump, then a private citizen, called for measures like canceling flights and forcing quarantines. Public health experts are now concerned that a president who has spoken openly about his phobia of germs might overreact to the coronavirus crisis. Perspective: In an opinion piece for The Times, an epidemiologist discusses what is known, and not known, about the virus. Three precincts voted just after midnight in the state’s primaries, kicking off a day that could help narrow down a Democratic presidential field that has remained unchanged since last week’s troubled Iowa caucuses. Here’s what to expect. Only 24 delegates are up for grabs today, but New Hampshire offers the potential for momentum going into the Nevada caucuses next week and the South Carolina primary on Feb. 29. The details: Most polls close at 7 p.m. Eastern. We’ll have live results for the Democratic race and the Republican primary, which President Trump is expected to win handily. Closer look: Senator Elizabeth Warren has largely avoided engaging her opponents, even as the Democratic contest has gotten fiercer. Before a primary that she had hoped to win (and probably won’t, according to polls), we examined the state of her campaign. “The Daily”: Today’s episode discusses how the uncertain results from Iowa have affected the campaign in New Hampshire. The record $4.8 trillion budget proposal that was released on Monday would spend more on restricting immigration and bolstering the U.S. nuclear arsenal and less on safety net programs and student loan initiatives. Here’s a look at what’s in the plan. Like most administrations’ budget proposals, it’s unlikely to be approved in its entirety by Congress. Closer look: Mr. Trump’s budget assumes significantly faster U.S. economic growth than most analysts predict. His last budget predicted that the economy would grow 3.2 percent in 2019; actual growth was 2.3 percent, according to the Commerce Department. At the beginning of the year, California’s oldest weekly, The Mountain Messenger, looked like it would become the latest American newspaper to go out of business and turn its rural hometown, Downieville, into a “news desert.” In stepped Carl Butz, above, a 71-year-old retiree, who bought the paper to save what he said was “something we need in order to know ourselves.” T-Mobile-Sprint merger: A judge today ruled in favor of the deal, which would combine the nation’s third- and fourth-largest wireless carriers and further concentrate corporate ownership of technology. Indictment in Equifax hack: The Justice Department charged four members of China’s military with the 2017 breach at the credit reporting agency, which exposed the personal data of about 145 million Americans. More brain injuries: The Defense Department has again raised the number of U.S. service members it says suffered traumatic brain injuries from Iranian airstrikes last month. Of the 109 troops with diagnosed injuries, 76 have returned to duty, officials said.  Surprise in Germany: Annegret Kramp-Karrenbauer, the chosen successor of Chancellor Angela Merkel, said she would step aside after party representatives in one German state defied her by voting with the far right. Her decision leaves the race to replace Ms. Merkel wide open. Snapshot: Above, Dane Jackson, a 26-year-old national kayaking champion from Tennessee, who recently traveled over Salto del Maule, a 134-foot waterfall in central Chile. “It’s just one of the most photogenic waterfalls I’ve ever seen,” he said. “And it’s also quite tall.” Watch video from his descent. Late-night comedy: “That’s right, ‘Parasite’ is the first non-English speaking film to win best picture, though some Arnold Schwarzenegger movies come close,” Jimmy Fallon said. What we’re reading: “The 10,000-Year Clock Is a Waste of Time,” in Wired. Adam Pasick of the Briefings team writes: “The piece takes a look at the complicated device being built in Texas — mind-boggling not just because of its ambition, but as an emblem of the hubris of tech megabillionaires.” Cook: These spicy sesame noodles with peanuts can take a choice of proteins: ground chicken, pork or beef, plant-based crumbles or tofu. (Our Five Weeknight Dishes newsletter has more recommendations.) Watch: Our critics discussed what the Oscars success for the South Korean movie “Parasite” could mean for the film industry. Listen: Sharon Van Etten’s new single, “Beaten Down,” is all deliberation and determination, our critic writes, hovering between dirge and homily. Here are other recent releases we recommend. Smarter Living: Better coffee at home is within reach. These five cheap(ish) things might help. Members of our politics team have been in New Hampshire for weeks. We talked to one, Matt Stevens, about the mood there ahead of today’s events. We just came off a messy run in Iowa. Are there fears that New Hampshire’s vote could also go awry? Short answer: Yes, absolutely. There are many, many things that could go wrong. But as some of our colleagues have pointed out, New Hampshire has a history of running elections smoothly, whereas the Iowa caucuses have encountered problems in three consecutive cycles. How are New Hampshire voters feeling about their primary system? Perhaps because of those divergent histories, the voters I have talked to here have both expressed confidence in their system and given the side-eye to Iowa. Caucuses and primaries are very different, and the folks here are pretty darn sure their system is best. Last week, as the mess was unfolding in Iowa, a woman in Hampton, N.H., told me: “This is a national level campaign. You have all these years to get it straight and this is the embarrassment you’re causing the party?” How is your team managing back-to-back votes? Some of us went to Iowa; most of the rest of us came to New Hampshire. And a handful did both. (Bless them!) The consensus among the people who have been to both places seems to be that the workroom at our hotel here in Manchester has windows, and is therefore far superior to the one in Des Moines, but the food options around our New Hampshire hotel are way more limited. I, personally, have already been to the Olive Garden next door twice. 
Good morning. (Here’s the sign-up, if you don’t already get California Today by email.) Veronica Hamilton’s days as a third-year social psychology Ph.D. student and graduate student teaching assistant at the University of California, Santa Cruz, often last more than 12 hours. From roughly 8:30 a.m. until 8 p.m., she crams in department-level meetings and prep work for her two sections, where she has a total of 60 students. Added to that are office hours with some of those students about their papers, followed by her own research, about the dehumanization of fast-food workers. The day caps off with lectures from 5:20 p.m. to 8 p.m. It’s a long day for any worker. But this past Monday was different. Ms. Hamilton, who is the U.C. Santa Cruz unit union chair, was on strike, along with hundreds of her graduate student colleagues. They picketed and marched, joined by some faculty members and undergrads, blocking traffic near the famously forested campus about an hour southwest of downtown San Jose. [Read more about Monday’s protest from The Santa Cruz Sentinel.] The action — known as a wildcat strike, because it’s taking place without the backing of the union that represents the university’s graduate student academic employees at campuses across the state — follows months of back and forth between administrators and graduate student educators who have demanded a cost of living adjustment of $1,412 per month. That amount, graduate students have said, would help pull student educators — many of whom are spending the majority of their income on rent — from the brink of homelessness. “We shouldn’t have to live this way,” said Ms. Hamilton, 28. Campus administrators have said it would be illegal for them to negotiate with strikers because the protest is unauthorized by the broader union, and their contract prohibits such work stoppages. Cynthia Larive, the chancellor of U.C. Santa Cruz, was unavailable for an interview, a spokesman told me in emails. In a message to the campus community late last month, she acknowledged the university’s “proud history of activism,” but condemned the strike. “While I commend our students for drawing attention to a very real problem,” she said in a statement, “I am extremely disappointed that some graduate students chose to do so in a way that was unsanctioned by their union and is harmful to our undergraduate students, many of whom are struggling themselves.” The strike is the result of long building frustrations. Housing costs have made academic careers increasingly untenable in a state whose public universities are its crown jewels, its economic engines and most highly touted vehicles for upward mobility. Graduate students I talked with described a kind of Catch 22: They are often recruited for their potential contributions to the work of a top-tier research university. A half-time job working as a teaching assistant is supposed to subsidize their study, so graduate student employees are discouraged from getting additional jobs. The problem is that while graduate students’ overall compensation includes tuition remission and some other benefits, like health care, students say that the money they take home to use for rent ends up being more in line with a 20-hour-per-week job than a full-time position. Ms. Hamilton, for example, estimated that she makes about $2,100 per month. And in a place like Santa Cruz, which is well within a long-but-not-outrageous commute to Silicon Valley, that doesn’t go far. [Read more about who got into the University of California last year.] Ms. Hamilton and her husband’s rent is $1,900 per month — and she said she was set to move to a place that’s half the size. They’ll still be paying $1,800 each month. Santa Cruz, students say, is an unaffordable market, which is why they started the unauthorized strike. Their contract sets pay across the University of California statewide. So, a graduate student teaching assistant in Santa Cruz or Berkeley is paid about the same as graduate students in Riverside or Merced, which have much lower housing costs. In Santa Cruz County, the median rent is $1,685, according to the most recent data from the American Community Survey. That’s compared to $1,374 in Riverside County. Of course, those are rough comparisons. In Santa Cruz, a tourist destination, the crisis is compounded by a particularly tight supply. And Santa Cruz, unlike, say, Berkeley, has rejected efforts to implement rent control. Yulia Gilich, a 31-year-old international student from Russia who is co-president of the graduate student association, said they’ve moved four times since they came to Santa Cruz; it’s been cheaper for them to fly home than to stay in California during the summers. They added their visa doesn’t allow them to get another job while they’re a graduate student. So what’s next? Administrators have said they may discipline protesters. But organizers said the strike would go on indefinitely. Sarah Mason, 33, said she saw the strike as part of a broader struggle for public education. “It involves teachers and students at every level,” Ms. Mason said. “We are all in this together.” Ms. Hamilton said in a text message that students were set to picket again today. We often link to sites that limit access for nonsubscribers. We appreciate your reading Times coverage, but we also encourage you to support local news if you can. California Today goes live at 6:30 a.m. Pacific time weekdays. Tell us what you want to see: CAtoday@nytimes.com. Were you forwarded this email? Sign up for California Today here. Jill Cowan grew up in Orange County, graduated from U.C. Berkeley and has reported all over the state, including the Bay Area, Bakersfield and Los Angeles — but she always wants to see more. Follow along here or on Twitter, @jillcowan. California Today is edited by Julie Bloom, who grew up in Los Angeles and graduated from U.C. Berkeley. 
For the cruise industry, the coronavirus is a public-relations nightmare. For more than a week, the world has watched as the Diamond Princess ship has been quarantined in the Japanese port of Yokohama, its 3,600 passengers and crew stuck and the number of people infected by the coronavirus climbing to 218. A second ship has been sailing the South China Sea like a modern-day version of the Flying Dutchman, turned away from five ports over fears that a person onboard was infected. Even thousands of miles from the outbreak, in Bayonne, N.J., four Chinese passengers aboard a cruise liner were briefly quarantined after health officials screened more than two dozen passengers. They turned out not to have the coronavirus. The cruise lines have faced crises before, from their ongoing battles with the norovirus, which can tear through an entire boatload of passengers causing gastrointestinal problems, to the 2012 sinking of the Costa Concordia, whose captain ran it aground off the coast of Italy, killing 32 people. But COVID-19, as the disease has been named, and whose ultimate worldwide spread is still to be seen, could be its biggest challenge yet.  “The longer ships like the Diamond Princess stay in the press, the more people who have never taken a cruise before think of cruising as a less than ideal vacation,” said James Hardiman, the managing director of equity research for Wedbush Securities, who follows the industry. The cruise companies have been reluctant to release any data about whether there has been any impact on bookings in the $45.6 billion global industry in the weeks since the outbreak began in the Chinese city of Wuhan, but some travel advisers say they are off by 10 to 15 percent. The companies, including the biggest lines like Norwegian Cruise Lines and Carnival Corp., which includes Princess Cruises, have either declined to comment or have released statements reiterating that their priority is passenger safety. Each cruise line also listed the precautions it is taking to keep passengers safe: Because they typically have thousands of people in a small space over an extended period of time, cruise ships are known to be incubators for illnesses. Royal Caribbean offered a glimpse into the situation in a Feb. 4 statement, but would only go so far as to say, “the Wuhan Coronavirus and the efforts to contain it are expected to negatively affect our results.” The company, whose ship was briefly stopped in Bayonne, announced that no one with a Chinese passport would be allowed to embark on a Royal Caribbean cruise, a decision later rescinded after an outcry. But Erika Richter, the senior director of communications for the American Society of Travel Advisors, an industry group, said that demand for cruises, which had been on an upward trajectory before news of the coronavirus broke, was off from 10 to 15 percent according to some advisers. Not surprisingly, cruises in Asia and the Pacific were especially hard hit. Alex Sharpe, president and chief executive of Signature Travel Network, a consortium of 7,000 travel advisers said, “New demand for these cruises is very low currently” and that spring sailings were “unlikely to sell from our market.” “If the industry doesn’t get its arms around this it could affect customer confidence in China toward cruises for a very long time,” said Mr. Hardiman, of Wedbush Securities. China has been one of the travel industry’s biggest growth markets in recent years, and, trips in the Asia-Pacific region make up about 10 percent of the industry, according to the Cruise Lines International Association, a trade group. Between 8 and 9 percent of passengers on cruise lines represented by the trade group are from China, Macau or Hong Kong and the number of ships deployed in Asia grew 53 percent between 2013 and 2017. A growing number of ports across the Pacific, from Busan, South Korea to the New Caledonian ports of Lifou, Mare and Isle of Pines, are banning cruise ships. Hong Kong has been closed since Feb. 6. Passengers say that rather than trying to accommodate them, the cruise companies have been uncommunicative and unhelpful. Maranda Priem, 24, of Washington, D.C., and her 53-year-old mother, from Minnesota, were supposed to be aboard the Norwegian Jade, a 2,200-passenger ship operated by Norwegian Cruise Lines, which was originally scheduled to depart from Hong Kong on Feb. 17 for a cruise stopping in Singapore, Vietnam and Thailand. As her concerns about the coronavirus grew, Ms. Priem repeatedly emailed and called the company asking if she could switch to a different cruise or receive a refund or future credit. Her requests were denied. In an email on Feb. 4, Roxane Sanford, coordinator of guest relations for the cruise line, reminded Ms. Priem that “mainland China does not include Hong Kong, Macau or Taiwan,” and added that, “Regrettably we are unable to proceed with cancellation and refund.” When the Hong Kong port closed, the company moved the sailing to Singapore, a change in itinerary that required Ms. Priem and other passengers to rebook their flights and absorb any extra costs. On Wednesday she decided to cancel, without knowing if she will get the nearly $1,700 she paid for the cruise back. “It’s been a bit of a nightmare dealing with Norwegian,” she said. “Norwegian won’t tell us what they will reimburse and they haven’t been helpful.” Norwegian Cruise Line did not respond to requests for comment. When a ship’s itinerary is changed, “passengers have little recourse as a practical matter,” said Jim Walker, a maritime lawyer who represents people suing cruise lines. “Cruise lines are able to freely alter their itineraries and if you don’t have insurance you’re just stuck, and the trouble with insurance is it often has exceptions for pandemics and things like this.” Mr. Walker said that he has received a “significantly higher” volume of calls from travelers looking for guidance on how to deal with cruise lines changing itineraries without offering refunds or the chance to reschedule. Cruises tend to be expensive, with an average nine-day sailing in Asia running about $1,800, travel advisors said, and booked long in advance. Angela Jones, 56, from Canton, Ga., a passenger on the MS Westerdam, the Holland America ship that was stuck in limbo looking for a port that would take it, booked her trip a year and a half ago. When news about the coronavirus broke, her daughter, Jordan Jones Dorman, said on Tuesday, “She considered canceling, but the company said repeatedly that they’d be OK and wouldn’t offer a refund if she canceled. She’d been saving up for this trip. Hindsight is 2020, but why was the cruise still happening?” Sihanoukville, in Cambodia, finally agreed to let the ship dock on Wednesday. Holland America Line said that it will arrange and pay for all passengers’ flights home, in addition to giving a full refund for the cruise. Mr. Hardiman, of Wedbush Securities, estimated that it cost Royal Caribbean about $4 million to cancel a recent four-day cruise, a number that could differ depending on ship size and other factors. “Cruise companies have never seen this before and just don’t know what to do,” said Ross Klein, a sociologist at Memorial University of Newfoundland who studies the cruise industry. “For the cruise lines and the industry a lot of these decisions are based on economics. They are asking themselves, ‘How do we get by spending the least amount of money and losing the least amount of money?’” 
Jeju Island, with white sand beaches and a volcanic landscape, is a slice of paradise off the coast of South Korea, but Iris Yao has not found it particularly relaxing. Ms. Yao, a 22-year-old student, arrived on the resort island last month for a short stay on her way back to her university in Sydney, Australia, from her hometown in Zhoushan, China. Since then, she has been virtually marooned. She is one of tens of thousands of Chinese travelers whose plans have been upset by rapidly changing regulations thrown up across the region as the coronavirus has spread. But instead of the warm welcome once extended to wealthy Chinese tourists, the island’s locals have met her and other Chinese visitors with worry, discrimination and fear. Some restaurants on the resort island have banned Chinese citizens. Employees at one asked her not to speak Mandarin while eating there, fearing she would scare away customers. “The fear toward the virus is everywhere,” she said. “I think it’s unfair for all Chinese citizens; they are not allowed to go into restaurants or cannot speak Mandarin.” What was supposed to be a short detour on her way to begin another semester of studies in Australia turned into an anxious limbo when that country joined others in banning travelers arriving directly from mainland China. Now, she must wait. According to the current regulations she cannot make her way to Australia until she has been out of China for at least 14 days. Alone in a foreign country and made to feel like a pariah has left Ms. Yao depressed and frustrated. “I just want to stay in a safe place,” she said. Fears over the virus have fueled discrimination around the world. In Japan, the hashtag #ChineseDon’tComeToJapan trended recently on Twitter. In Singapore, thousands of residents signed a petition calling on the government to ban Chinese nationals from entering the country. Even in China, people listen for accents distinctive to Hubei Province, the center of the outbreak, and shun residents: avoiding them on public transportation and denying them entry to restaurants and other public spaces. Ms. Yao landed on Jeju last month after spending the Lunar New Year in Zhoushan, in the coastal province of Zhejiang. The province is one of the hardest hit by the new coronavirus outbreak, with more than 1,100 confirmed cases. One day after arriving in Jeju, the Australian government restricted entry for travelers who had recently been to mainland China — a ban it is set to extend on Saturday. The ban has caused problems for thousands of Chinese students, who make up a significant portion of the international student population at Australian universities. Now in online chat groups, students are debating the merits of staying in third countries, including Thailand or Dubai, for 14 days in an attempt to make the start of a new semester. Ms. Yao considers herself luckier than her friends who are in trapped in Hubei Province or elsewhere in mainland China. As a fix, some universities have said that they will provide online courses or allow students to defer the semester. Still, she has added her name to a petition along with thousands of others calling for a delay to the start of the semester. On Feb. 2, Jeju Island also indefinitely suspended its visa waiver program for Chinese nationals, leaving Ms. Yao, who arrived before the restriction went into effect, in uncertain territory. As of Wednesday, there had been 28 confirmed cases of COVID-19, the disease caused by the coronavirus, in South Korea. Since her arrival on Jeju Island, Ms. Yao has rarely ventured outside, choosing instead to play games online with friends and study for a driving test. At one point, she posted on social media about the prejudice she had experienced, saying that while she supported measures like self-quarantining, the enactment of hasty travel bans had been “hurtful.” She received responses from several Chinese people, some of whom called her emotional and uneducated. On Friday, confident that she would be able to return to Australia once she has spent two weeks outside of China, she finally booked a ticket to Sydney, transiting through Malaysia. But since then, Malaysia has banned visitors from Zhejiang Province, where she visited last month. She is worried now that even a layover in Malaysia will be problematic and she could be turned around. “This is really troubling for me,” she said. “But it is my only chance.” 
This briefing has ended. Read the latest updates in the coronavirus outbreak here.  China’s ruling Communist Party fired the leader of the province at the center of the new coronavirus outbreak on Thursday amid widespread public anger over the handling of the epidemic. Jiang Chaoliang, the party secretary of Hubei Province, is the highest-ranking official to lose his job over the handling of the coronavirus outbreak, which has killed more than 1,100 people in recent weeks. Mr. Jiang will be replaced by Ying Yong, the mayor of Shanghai. The selection of Mr. Ying may underline the continued political control of Xi Jinping, China’s top leader. Before being transferred to Shanghai in a fairly senior role in 2008, Mr. Ying had come up through the political ranks in Zhejiang Province, which is Mr. Xi’s political base as well. After the outbreak first emerged in Wuhan, the capital of Hubei Province, the leadership came under intense scrutiny for playing down the virus and delaying reports of its spread. The province then took drastic measures that included imposing a lockdown not only on Wuhan but also on tens of millions of people in surrounding areas. For hospitals in Wuhan, already overwhelmed with patients, that cordon worsened a shortage of medical supplies that has continued. Early on Thursday, officials announced that nearly 15,000 new cases and 242 new deaths were recorded in a single day in Hubei Province, the center of the coronavirus outbreak, largely because the authorities there had expanded their diagnostic tools for counting new infections. Until now, only infections confirmed by specialized testing kits were considered accurate. But those kits have been in such short supply — and so many sick people have gone untested — that the authorities in Hubei have started counting patients whose illness have been screened and identified by doctors. The result was a sudden — and large — spike in the overall tally for the coronavirus: more than 1,300 people killed and well over 50,000 infected. The change in how cases are counted is only one factor that has made it difficult for experts to determine the true scale of the epidemic. In fact, the shifting landscape of how infections are defined and confirmed has led to significant variations in the estimates for the extent of outbreak. As Japan announced 44 new coronavirus cases on a cruise ship quarantined in the waters off Yokohama, bringing the total to 218, the country’s health minister said on Thursday that the authorities would begin allowing some passengers to disembark and serve out the remainder of the quarantine period on shore. The minister, Katsunobo Kato, said that, if they first test negative for the virus, passengers 80 or older, those with existing medical conditions and those assigned to cabins without windows or balconies would be taken to facilities for confinement until the quarantine is scheduled to end on Feb. 19. Those who test positive will be taken to hospitals. Of the newly confirmed cases, Mr. Kato said, 43 were passengers and one was a crew member.  The cruise ship, the Diamond Princess, arrived in Yokohama on Feb. 3, and passengers were expecting to go home the next day. But after learning that a man who got off the ship in Hong Kong had tested positive for the coronavirus, the Japanese government quarantined all 3,700 passengers and crew members on board. The quarantine period is scheduled to last for two weeks. Separately, the Cambodian government said on Wednesday it would allow another cruise ship, the Westerdam, to dock in Sihanoukville. The ship had been denied permission to stop in Japan, Guam, Taiwan and the Philippines, despite having no diagnoses of coronavirus. The Dalai Lama has canceled his public events because of the coronavirus outbreak, his office says. “As a precautionary measure, in view of the coronavirus (Covid-19) outbreak, all engagements of His Holiness the Dalai Lama remain indefinitely postponed,” a statement says. On March 9, the Dalai Lama was scheduled to appear at a teaching event in Dharamsala, India. No other events appear on the schedule. The Dalai Lama’s office has also issued an appeal, urging Tibetans across the world to “collectively pray for the speedy resolution to the crisis and the well-being of humanity.” The coronavirus outbreak has infected more than 45,000 people in Asia, according to statements from health officials. India, where the Dalai Lama lives, has at least three confirmed cases so far, according to the World Health Organization. One of the world’s biggest technology trade shows was canceled on Wednesday as the coronavirus outbreak continued to disrupt the global business calendar. Every year since 2006, Mobile World Congress has drawn representatives of major tech companies to Barcelona to gather in giant conference halls to launch products, hobnob with industry luminaries and discuss deals and partnerships. The event typically draws more than 100,000 attendees from nearly 200 countries across the world. This year’s event was scheduled to begin later this month. But on Wednesday, the industry group that organizes the trade show, the Global System for Mobile Communications Association, said it was canceling the event because of “the coronavirus outbreak, travel concern and other circumstances.” The cancellation of the show became inevitable when major companies including Nokia, Ericsson and Vodafone pulled out. The association had announced safety measures to try to keep the show on track, including not admitting people who had been to affected parts of China. Last year, Mobile World Congress carried political significance when the U.S. government sent a delegation to warn wireless companies against using equipment sold by the Chinese tech giant Huawei. Canceling the event is a blow to the city of Barcelona, which has hosted the conference for years and enjoys a strong economic boost from the thousands of attendees putting their company expense accounts to work at restaurants, hotels and corporate events. United Airlines said Wednesday that it would not resume flights connecting the United States with mainland China and Hong Kong until April 24, extending an earlier suspension, after a similar announcement by American Airlines. Demand for such flights declined sharply in late January as concern over the severity of the coronavirus outbreak began to take hold, according to data from the Airlines Reporting Corporation, an industry-owned transaction clearinghouse. In the first few weeks of January, sales of tickets from the United States to mainland China were down slightly compared to the same weeks the year before, but by the fourth week of January, demand was down 59 percent year over year. Ticket refunds that week were up 534 percent, according to data based on 1.8 million tickets sold in January 2019 and 2020. Some of the coronavirus testing kits sent to states have flaws and do not work properly, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention said on Wednesday. The C.D.C. began sending the kits to states to allow them to conduct their own testing and get results faster than they would by shipping samples to the C.D.C. in Atlanta. The failure of the kits means that states still have to depend on the C.D.C., which will delay results by several days. On trial runs in some states, the kits produced results that were “inconclusive,” Dr. Nancy Messonnier, director of the National Center for Immunization and Respiratory Diseases, said at a news conference on Wednesday. Dr. Messonnier told reporters that the kits had been sent to 30 other countries as well, but said later Wednesday that she was mistaken. There have been 13 confirmed cases of the infection in patients in the United States so far. What was supposed to be a short detour on her way to begin another semester of studies in Australia has turned into an anxious limbo for one Chinese student when that country joined others in banning travelers arriving from mainland China. Now, Iris Yao must wait on Jeju Island, off the coast of South Korea. According to the current regulations, she cannot make her way to Australia until she has been out of China for at least 14 days. Alone in a foreign country and made to feel like a pariah has left Ms. Yao, 22, depressed and frustrated. She is one of tens of thousands of Chinese travelers whose plans have been upset by rapidly changing regulations thrown up across the region as the coronavirus has spread. Ms. Yao arrived on the resort island last month for a short stay on her way back to her university in Sydney, Australia, from her hometown in Zhoushan, China. Since then, she has been virtually marooned on Jeju Island, known for its white sand beaches and volcanic landscape. It might be slice of paradise, but she has not found it relaxing. Instead of the warm welcome once extended to wealthy Chinese tourists, the island’s locals have met Ms. Yao and other Chinese visitors with worry, discrimination and fear. Some restaurants on the resort island have banned Chinese citizens. Employees at one asked her not to speak Mandarin while eating there, fearing she would scare away customers. “The fear toward the virus is everywhere,” she said. “I think it’s unfair for all Chinese citizens; they are not allowed to go into restaurants or cannot speak Mandarin.” London is experiencing its first case of coronavirus, the British authorities said on Wednesday. The patient, who is the United Kingdom’s ninth case, contracted the virus in China and is being treated at Guy’s and St Thomas’ Hospital in London. Britain has confirmed nine cases of coronavirus infections, with five believed to be linked to a British businessman who may have contracted the virus in Singapore. The man, Steve Walsh, is believed to be the cause of five additional cases in France. On Wednesday, Mr. Walsh released a statement saying he has been released from the hospital and returned home, even as public health officials continue to try to trace the contacts of some of the people he is believed to have infected. The strategic incident director of Britain’s National Health Service, Prof. Keith Willett, said Mr. Walsh had developed only “mild” symptoms of the virus and had made a full recovery. “He is no longer contagious and poses no risk to the public,” Professor Willett said in a statement. “He is keen to return to his normal life and spend time with his family out of the media spotlight.” The Chinese authorities have approved a broad strategy for trying to bring the coronavirus outbreak under control while restarting economic production, state news outlets reported Wednesday evening. President Xi Jinping ordered that tax cuts be drafted and put into effect. Premier Li Keqiang, the country’s No. 2 official, and the country’s cabinet called for major construction projects to begin across the country as soon as possible. State-owned enterprises were told to cut rents. Banks were ordered to keep interest rates low. City governments were told to make sure that workers who went home for the Lunar New Year holiday could reach their jobs. The two most powerful political bodies in China — the Standing Committee of the Communist Party Politburo and the government’s cabinet of ministers — each issued similar orders. Both groups produced hints of the fairly broad stimulus program that many economists expect soon. None of the announcements directly addressed the difficult balancing act that China now faces: how to put more than 700 million workers back on the job without creating conditions that could allow the virus to spread. . The Ministry of Education in China instructed schools on Wednesday to find ways to keep the country’s 190 million primary and secondary students busy during the suspension of the school year, but it discouraged any significant efforts to provide classes online. In a notice posted on its website, the ministry urged provincial school administrators to draw up detailed study plans for students who, like everyone else, are largely confined to their homes. The ministry encouraged reading and physical exercises and, if possible, online tutoring, though it also warned that primary-school students especially should not spend too much time online. It also announced that special programing on China’s national education television channel, CETV 4, would begin next week; the network had a similar role during the SARS epidemic in 2003. The coronavirus epidemic that began in Wuhan has now thrown the country’s schools and universities into chaos. Some provinces, including Liaoning and Sichuan, plan to reopen primary and secondary schools on Feb. 17, at least for now, while others have already postponed the school year until at least March, including Shanghai, Zhejiang and Guangdong. The delays could have the greatest impact on those students preparing for the major national exams for high school and college held at the end of spring. The United States will allow nonemergency consulate employees in Hong Kong and their families to leave because of the coronavirus outbreak, a State Department official said on Wednesday. The decision to allow voluntary departures was made in response to continuing uncertainty surrounding the outbreak and practical considerations such as school closings, the official said. The consulate in Hong Kong will remain open and continue to provide regular services. A similar decision was made to allow nonemergency State Department personnel and their families to leave mainland China in late January. The State Department chartered flights and evacuated about 850 people from Wuhan, where the outbreak began late last year, including employees of the United States Consulate in the city. Hong Kong has 50 confirmed coronavirus cases and one death. The State Department’s travel advisory for the city is at Level 2, the second-lowest of four levels, and recommends that visitors to Hong Kong “exercise increased caution” because of the outbreak. This month, the warning for mainland China was raised to 4, the highest level. “Do not travel to China due to the novel coronavirus,” it said. The coronavirus outbreak in China has generated economic waves that are rocking commodities markets and disrupting the supply networks that act as the backbone of the global economy. In Australia, after hauling hundreds of thousands of tons of iron ore to China, returning freighters can face a 14-day quarantine. One of the world’s largest copper mining companies, BHP, has been in talks to possibly delay shipments to Chinese ports. And China is turning back deliveries of liquefied natural gas, potentially disrupting shipments from Qatar to Indonesia. “We’re seeing a rippling out,” said Ed Morse, global head of commodities research at Citigroup in New York. “And we don’t see it stopping.” Prices for key industrial raw materials such as copper, iron ore, nickel, aluminum and liquid natural gas have plummeted since the virus emerged. And manufacturers, mining companies and commodity producers of all stripes are weighing whether they will be forced to cut back on production for fear of adding to a growing inventory glut. Airbnb will suspend bookings in Beijing until May 1, the company said on Wednesday. The decision was made “in accordance with guidance issued by the government to all companies in the short-term rental industry,” a spokesman for the company said. He added that existing reservations would be refunded. Airbnb has also waived cancellation fees for travel to and from mainland China until the end of February. Travelers who had booked stays in Hubei, the province at the center of the outbreak, can cancel reservations without charge until April 1. The company had continued to accept reservations throughout China during the busy travel season before and after the Lunar New Year holiday, even as the government started to lock down cities and impose road restrictions to stop the spread of the virus. The company also said it would set aside $10 million “to support hosts in the next few years, during the recovery period of the local tourism industry.” 
China’s leader, Xi Jinping, fired two top Communist Party officials in charge of Hubei, the province at the center of the coronavirus epidemic, replacing them with two of his protégés in an attempt to bring the crisis under control. After the coronavirus infection rate seemed to be leveling off earlier this week, the number of deaths and infections suddenly skyrocketed, setting a daily record. Context: A change in how health officials diagnose the illness may partly explain the spike, with new criteria that include the use of CT scans along with specialized testing kits. The new method — while not perfect — should catch more cases and get people into treatment earlier, but the scale of the epidemic will remain unclear for a while. The latest: Japan confirmed its first death from the virus: a woman in her 80s in Kanagawa Prefecture. Ripple effects: International students at Chinese universities are facing difficult decisions, and the cruise industry is suffering. A U.S. citizen described life in a Chinese province that has barricaded itself from the outside world: “People here tend to believe the government. Not me. I’ve watched too many episodes of ‘The X-Files.’” Top officials in Beijing expanded their mass quarantining of sick people — and those possibly infected — to include other cities beyond Wuhan, according to China’s state-run broadcaster. Confirmed coronavirus patients showing mild symptoms are put into large quarantine spaces, while suspected cases are isolated in converted hotels and schools. Quotable: “This is really like a prison,” Deng Chao, 30, told a Times reporter by phone after being quarantined in a hotel room for nearly a week. He said that he was getting progressively sicker and that there were no doctors or medicine available. Mobile surveillance: Chinese mobile phone providers have asked users to send a text message that generates a list of provinces they have visited in the past several weeks. Officials in some cities are demanding to see the texts before allowing visitors to enter. The Trump administration significantly ramped up a pressure campaign against the Chinese telecommunications giant by accusing it of federal racketeering and conspiracy to steal trade secrets. The alleged stolen information included source code and the manuals for wireless technology. A Huawei spokesman did not immediately respond to a request for comment. Takeaway: “The biggest piece of news here is the RICO federal racketeering charge — which essentially alleges that Huawei and its affiliates are a criminal enterprise,” says David McCabe, our tech policy reporter. “This is a law that has historically been used to take down crime bosses.” Context: Last year the Justice Department filed charges against Meng Wanzhou, the company’s chief financial officer, outlining a decade-long attempt to steal trade secrets and evade economic sanctions on Iran. Our Climate reporters looked at the way the sprawling metropolitan areas of Manila and San Francisco are handling the climate crisis and rising sea levels. Will they try to redirect water to adapt to their needs, or reimagine their coastlines? Their decisions could offer crucial lessons for coastal cities around the world. In Manila: The ground has been subsiding because of the rapid extraction of ground water, and sea levels have risen by as much as 5 to 7 centimeters a year — double the global average. Residents have responded with Band-Aid fixes, like pouring layers of cement and sand on the floor. Many have nowhere else to go. In San Francisco: Wealthy Bay Area municipalities can afford costly sea walls and new infrastructure, staving off destruction for a few more years. But even so, some quickly eroding communities are running out of options. One result of the booming success of Bong Joon Ho’s “Parasite,” which took home the Oscar for best picture over the weekend, is that tourists from around the world are flocking to the streets of the South Korean capital to pay homage. Above, people posing for a photo in a tunnel featured in the movie. Seoul is as much a character in “Parasite” as its actors — and the city’s role in Mr. Bong’s youth, when he witnessed class strife tear apart society, proved crucial to how he makes movies. Barclays: The British bank said regulators were investigating the relationship between its chief executive, Jes Staley, and Jeffrey Epstein, the convicted sex offender who killed himself in August. British Government: What was expected to be a routine cabinet reshuffle took a dramatic turn when Sajid Javid, the chancellor of the Exchequer abruptly resigned.  The 1619 Project: The Times Magazine looked at the locations in the U.S. where enslaved people were bought and sold. Today, many of those sites are forgotten and unmarked. Read the rest of our series examining the legacy of slavery in America here. Snapshot: Above, objects from London’s past recovered by so-called mudlarks, who scour the edges of the River Thames at low tide. (The term originally referred to the Victorian-era poor who hunted items to sell.) What we’re listening to: This week’s episode of The New Yorker Radio Hour. Sam Sifton, our food editor, writes: “I enjoyed listening to Hilton Als talk about Louis C.K.’s return to the stage, and about how it might have gone differently, had Louis attempted art and not commerce.” Cook: Take time this weekend for stuffed shells. Go: Sublime skiing, snowboarding and “snow-surfing” are only part of the story in Niseko, a Japanese resort. Read: “Open Book,” a memoir by the entertainer Jessica Simpson, is a No. 1 debut this week on our hardcover nonfiction and combined print and e-book nonfiction best-seller lists. Smarter Living: There are good ways and bad ways for colleagues with different circadian rhythms to approach working together. Here are some tips. Donald G. McNeil Jr., a science reporter for The New York Times, has covered infectious diseases since 2002. He’s part of a team of science reporters working to make sense of the spread of the latest coronavirus and the medical response. The following is a condensed version of a conversation about his observations and concerns. What do we know, and what don’t we know, about the coronavirus? In the beginning of every epidemic, there is the fog of war. I’d say we’re still in that fog. We know this virus is much more transmissible than SARS or MERS. We don’t know if it’s quite as transmissible as the flu. We know it can kill people. We know it’s not nearly as lethal as MERS or SARS. One of the things we don’t know is what the Chinese aren’t saying. We know that they’re reluctant to let in outside experts to root around and wouldn’t share samples of the earliest cases with the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. When you ask scientists, “What’s your fear for the Big One, the pandemic that’s going to kill us all?” — not that there is a pandemic that’s going to kill us all — but if you ask them that, they say, “Flu.” They worry about some new flu, bird flu or swine flu, that’s highly lethal but becomes very transmissible between humans. I only know one or two scientists who have said, “You know, I also worry about coronaviruses being the Big One.” I don’t want to raise alarm that this is the Big One. But this is a new, scary and confusing one, and we don’t yet know how far it’s going to spread and how many people it’s going to kill. What do you think about the public’s reaction to your reporting? I’m always trying to figure out, “Am I being alarmist or am I not being alarmist enough?” I was too alarmist about H5N1 back in 2005, the bird flu. I was not alarmist enough about West Africa and Ebola in its early days. All previous Ebola outbreaks had killed a few hundred people. That one killed 11,000. A big part of my beat is debunking the panicky stories. It actually consumes almost as much of my time as reporting does. I try to spread truth instead of panic, even if it takes me a little longer to get it right. 
To combat the spread of the coronavirus, Chinese officials are using a combination of technology and policing to track movements of citizens who may have visited Hubei Province. Mobile phone owners in China get their service from one of three state-run telecommunications firms, which this week introduced a feature for subscribers to send text messages to a hotline that generates a list of provinces they have recently visited. That has created a new way for the authorities to see where citizens have traveled. At a high-speed rail station in the eastern city of Yiwu on Tuesday, officials in hazmat suits demanded that passengers send the text messages and then show their location information to the authorities before being permitted to leave the station. Those who had passed through Hubei were unlikely to be allowed entry. Other cities were taking similar measures. Companies in China generally shy away from sharing location data with the local authorities, over fears it could be leaked or sold. And there were some signs that the companies were uncomfortable with the new rule. China Mobile cautioned that the data should be used cautiously, because it indicates where the phone has been, not its owner. It also doesn’t differentiate between people who briefly passed through a province and those who spent significant time there. Top officials in Beijing on Thursday expanded their mass roundup of sick or possibly infected people beyond Wuhan, the city at the center of the outbreak, to include other cities in Hubei Province that have been hit hard by the crisis, according to the state-run CCTV broadcaster. The move comes even amid reports that the mass quarantines in Wuhan have been marked by instances of chaos and disorganization, deepening anxiety and frustration in a city already on edge from a prolonged lockdown. [Update: More than 500 coronavirus cases confirmed in China’s prisons.] Last week, the government ordered officials in Wuhan to “round up everyone who should be rounded up,” as part of a “wartime” campaign to contain the outbreak. In the rush to carry out the edict, officials are haphazardly rounding up sick patients, in some cases separating them from their families and placing them in the makeshift medical facilities, sometimes without providing the medicine or support they need. Deng Chao, 30, has been in government-imposed quarantine in a Wuhan hotel room for nearly a week. In a telephone interview, he said that although doctors had told him he almost certainly had the coronavirus, he hadn’t yet received the official results from the test that he needed to be admitted to a hospital. In the meantime, he was getting progressively sicker and finding it more difficult to breathe. He said that several security guards had been stationed at the entrance to his hotel to prevent patients from escaping and that there were no doctors or medicine available. “This is really like a prison,” he said angrily. “Send me to a hospital, please, I need treatment,“ he said, in between bouts of coughing. “There is no one to take care of us here.” Chinese officials reported Friday that a surge in new infections was continuing, though not as markedly as the day before, when the number of people confirmed to have the virus in Hubei Province skyrocketed by 14,840 cases. That set a new daily record, but it came after the authorities changed the diagnostic criteria for counting new cases. On Friday, using the same counting method, Hubei officials disclosed about 4,800 new cases and 116 additional deaths. Nationally, the virus has infected almost 60,000 people and killed more than 1,300. The jump in new cases puts extra pressure on the government to treat thousands of patients, many of whom are in mass quarantine centers or in isolation facilities. The sudden uptick is a result of the government taking into account cases diagnosed in clinical settings, including with the use of CT scans, not just those confirmed with specialized testing kits. After the sudden change, epidemiologists warned that the true picture of the epidemic is muddled. Health experts said the change in reporting was meant to provide a more accurate view of the transmissibility of the virus. The new criteria is intended to give doctors broader discretion to diagnose patients, and more crucially, isolate patients to quickly treat them. For a moment on Thursday, it seemed as if there might be some good news from the Diamond Princess, the cruise ship being held in the port of Yokohama in Japan, when the authorities said they would release some passengers to shore to finish their quarantine. Instead, Japanese health officials announced the first death from the virus in the country, of a woman in her 80s. It was third death from the virus outside mainland China. The woman had no record of travel there. Officials also announced 44 new confirmed cases of infection on the ship, raising the total to 218. Although some passengers will be released early, the pool of those eligible for offshore quarantine is quite narrow: guests 80 or older who have existing medical conditions or are stuck in cabins without windows or balconies. On Thursday, another cruise ship, the Westerdam, which had been denied permission to stop in Japan, Guam, Taiwan and the Philippines despite having no diagnoses of coronavirus, was able to dock in Cambodia. The outbreak is upending travel plans in the Asia-Pacific region well into the spring. ForwardKeys, a Spanish company that says it analyzes 17 million booking transactions a day, reported Thursday that the number of flights booked out of China for March and April is about 56 percent lower than at the same point last year. China’s neighbors are starting to pull back, too. As of Feb. 9, such bookings out of other countries in the Asia-Pacific region were down about 11 percent year over year, excluding trips to mainland China and Hong Kong, which are depressed by travel restrictions and fears over the outbreak. For the cruise industry in particular, the coronavirus is a public-relations nightmare. The world has looked on as 3,600 passengers and crew members have been quarantined on the Diamond Princess in Yokohama. “The longer ships like the Diamond Princess stay in the press, the more people who have never taken a cruise before think of cruising as a less than ideal vacation,” said James Hardiman, the managing director of equity research for Wedbush Securities, who follows the industry. The coronavirus outbreak is expected to result in a drop in global oil demand over the first three months of 2020, the first quarterly drop in more than 10 years. The International Energy Agency’s report of oil demand, released Thursday, projects a drop of about 435,000 barrels a day over the January-March period — or roughly one-half of 1 percent — compared with the quarter in 2019. Even with its usual sober language, the agency painted a gloomy picture of the Chinese economy and the broad impact of the outbreak on energy consumption. In the early stages of the emergency, the agency estimated, China’s domestic air travel fell by 50 percent, while its international air travel fell by an 70 percent If the epidemic “can be brought under control” in the second quarter, the agency said, the economy will gradually “come back to normal.” Movie releases have been canceled in China and symphony tours suspended. A major art fair in Hong Kong was called off. And spring art auctions half a world away in New York have been postponed because well-heeled Chinese buyers may find it difficult to travel to them. As China struggles to get the epidemic under control, the country is essentially closed for business to the global arts economy, exposing the sector to deep financial uncertainty. China was the third-biggest art market in the world in 2018, according to last year’s Art Basel and UBS Global Art Market Report. But last week, Art Basel Hong Kong, an annual art fair scheduled for mid-March, was canceled. “It’s the center of the artistic universe for a week, and it leads to other things during the year,” said Ben Brown, a gallery owner. China is also critical for the movie business. Releases of “Jojo Rabbit” and “Dolittle” — a box-office bomb in the United States that desperately needs foreign sales — are among those postponed in China so far. The Centers for Disease Control said Thursday that a person under quarantine at a military base in San Antonio had tested positive for the virus, bringing the number of confirmed coronavirus patients in the United States to 15. The person, who was not identified, arrived at the base last week on a State Department-chartered flight and is now being treated in isolation at a hospital. The patient is the third person under quarantine to test positive; two people at a base in San Diego were also confirmed to have the virus. The C.D.C. said that there would most likely be more cases over the next few days and weeks. More than 600 people who left Wuhan after the outbreak began remain under quarantine at military bases in the United States. China’s leader, Xi Jinping, on Thursday summarily fired two top Communist Party officials from Hubei Province, exacting political punishment for the regional government’s handling of the crisis. The reshuffling of the party leadership in the province, and its capital, Wuhan, reflected an aggressive effort by Mr. Xi to contain not only the political and economic damage of the epidemic but also any simmering public anger among millions of people locked down now for more than three weeks. Jiang Chaoliang, the party secretary of Hubei Province, is the highest-ranking official to lose his job over the handling of the outbreak.The party also ousted Ma Guoqiang, the top official in Wuhan. . The decision to install new officials underscored the challenge the epidemic has created for Mr. Xi and for his ambitions as the country’s most powerful leader since Mao Zedong. Wu Qiang, an independent political analyst in Beijing, said, “To cope with a crisis that may become more serious in the future, the first thing that they need is highly loyal people.” A video blogger in the city of Wuhan who had been documenting conditions at overcrowded hospitals at the heart of the outbreak has disappeared, raising concerns among his supporters that he may have been detained by the authorities. The blogger, Fang Bin, is the second citizen journalist in the city to have gone missing in a week after criticizing the government’s response to the coronavirus epidemic. Mr. Fang began posting videos from hospitals in Wuhan on YouTube last month, including one that showed a pile of body bags in a minibus. In early February, Mr. Fang said he had been briefly detained and questioned. A few days later, he filmed an exchange he had with strangers who showed up at his apartment claiming to bring him food. Mr. Fang’s last video, posted on Sunday, was a message written on a piece of paper: “All citizens resist, hand power back to the people.” Last week, Chen Qiushi, a citizen-journalist and lawyer in Wuhan who recorded the plight of patients and the shortage of hospital supplies, vanished, according to his friends. About 740 South Korean soldiers were under quarantine on Thursday as the country’s military tried to prevent an outbreak of the coronavirus among its ranks. The quarantined soldiers included those who have visited mainland China, Hong Kong or Macau in recent weeks, and those who have been in close contact with relatives or others who have been to China or tested positive for the virus. [Read: A shadowy church is at the center of South Korea’s coronavirus outbreak.] South Korea keeps a 600,000-strong army as a bulwark against the threat from North Korea. Most of these soldiers live in communal barracks. So far, no South Korean soldier has tested positive. The rest of the country has reported 28 confirmed cases, and no deaths. North Korea has said it was also taking measures against the virus but has not released any official figures. 
 When I left my five-year post as restaurant critic for LA Weekly in 2017 to move back to Australia, the final review I filed was for a restaurant called Vespertine, an immersive experience in a multistory glass building that is as much performance art as it is restaurant. That description might sound familiar to anyone who read my Australia Fare column this week, a review of the d’Arenberg Cube in McLaren Vale, South Australia. I thought a lot about Vespertine while considering the d’Arenberg Cube. The two restaurants have many similarities: they both are inspired by — and in fact inseparable from — the architecture of the buildings they are in, and they both invite us to experience dinner (or, in the case of the d’Arenberg Cube, lunch) as far more than a meal. Vespertine’s most notable flaw is undoubtedly its rigid self-seriousness. Atonal music grinds while unsmiling waiters wearing dark-colored sacks deliver preposterous dishes, giving no hint that they understand the absurdity of the setting and situation. The d’Arenberg Cube, on the other hand, revels in its own silliness and sense of fun. And it challenges the diner to give in to that joyous folly, or risk wasting $210 and a few hours on a meal (and an experience) that is as ridiculous as it is delicious. As I point out in my review of the Cube, the restaurant succeeds in large part because of that ridiculousness, not in spite of it. I also quoted a neighboring winemaker as saying that the Cube would be unbearable if it weren’t “kind of daggy.”  Daggy is one of those words that, during my quarter-century living in the United States, were difficult to explain to American friends. Uncool but lovable? A little bit shabby but in a human, endearing way? (I recognize that the word conveys slightly varied levels of distain, depending on geography and the social class of the user, but in Melbourne’s northern suburbs — where I grew up — it had a decidedly affectionate connotation.) In my opinion, dagginess is one of Australia’s defining strengths. It is certainly a huge part of who I am, and that fact made life in America hard on me at times. The pressure to be perfect in American culture is real, and I was never interested in conforming to that aspiration. My house was messy, my clothes were from the op shop (or thrift store, as they’re known there), my yard was overgrown and besmirched by a (gasp!) clothesline.  Those things often stood in the way of friendships in America. I’m glad to be back in Australia, where it is understood that even if you spend $17 million on something, it might still turn out daggy — and could be all the better for that ineffable, ridiculous quality. What other Australian words and qualities do you find difficult to describe to non-Australians? Tell us at nytaustralia@nytimes.com. Now on to this week’s stories. 
(Want to get this briefing by email? Here’s the sign-up.) Attorney General William Barr said in an interview on Thursday that President Trump’s attacks on the Justice Department had made it “impossible for me to do my job,” adding, “I’m not going to be bullied or influenced by anybody.” Mr. Trump has repeatedly criticized officials in the department and denounced a sentencing recommendation for his associate Roger Stone. Here’s a transcript of excerpts from Mr. Barr’s interview with ABC News. Mr. Trump did not immediately respond on Twitter, but his press secretary, Stephanie Grisham, said, “The president wasn’t bothered by the comments at all.” The attorney general’s office had let the president know some of what Mr. Barr planned to say and is remaining in his job, a person familiar with the events told The Times. Another angle: Critics of Mr. Barr dismissed his comments as mainly a way to deflect responsibility for carrying out Mr. Trump’s political wishes. “The tell here will be Trump’s reaction,” said Joe Lockhart, a White House press secretary under former President Bill Clinton. “If he doesn’t lash out, we’ll all know this was pure political theater.” The Chinese authorities disclosed for the first time today that 1,716 medical workers had contracted the coronavirus and that six had died. Here are the latest updates and maps of where the virus has spread. The news comes a day after China widened a mass roundup of potential patients, as the government conducts what it has called a “wartime” campaign to stamp out the epidemic. Related: The U.S. said it would approve humanitarian assistance to North Korea to help fight the coronavirus. There are fears the country may be hiding an outbreak. Go deeper: Psychologists say that differing responses to the virus and the flu illustrate our shortcomings in evaluating danger. Our Interpreter columnist Max Fisher explains. The experience that he gained as the leader of South Bend, Ind., is a central part of Mr. Buttigieg’s pitch to be president, while his rivals try to sow doubts about whether he is prepared for the Oval Office. His record in trying to turn the Midwestern city around has also been challenged by some residents and activists, particularly on problems facing black residents. Our correspondent traveled to South Bend to learn more about how Mr. Buttigieg, 38, governed and grew over his eight years in office. Yesterday: Elizabeth Warren criticized Michael Bloomberg after video emerged of a lecture he gave 12 years ago in which he linked the 2008 financial crisis to the end of a discriminatory housing practice. A nine-month period that shook up the already tense relationship between the two countries began with the Trump administration’s escalation of sanctions and ended with Washington and Tehran in a direct military confrontation. A team of our reporters has traced the path to last month’s violent standoff, finding a story of miscalculations by both sides. Yesterday: The Senate voted to require that President Trump seek congressional authorization before taking further military action against Iran, a mostly symbolic measure that lacked the support needed to override a promised veto. An estimated 600 million people worldwide live on coastlines — hazardous places in an era of climate change. The Times examined how two metropolitan areas, Manila, above left, and San Francisco, are handling rising sea levels. Will they try to hold back the waters or move people away? Their decisions could offer crucial lessons for coastal cities around the world. Billions diverted for wall: The Pentagon said it would devote $3.8 billion that Congress had designated for other purposes to building a wall at the southwestern border. Harvey Weinstein’s defense: A lawyer for the former Hollywood producer told jurors at his rape trial that he was the victim of an “overzealous prosecution” and that his accusers had engaged in consensual relationships with him. Australian fires controlled: The wildfires that began in September and consumed millions of acres are finally out in most of New South Wales, Australia’s most populous state, emergency services said today. The Weekly: The latest episode of The Times’s TV show is about the police crackdown on protesters at a university in Hong Kong last year. It premieres today on FX at 10 p.m. Eastern and will be available on Hulu starting Saturday. Snapshot: Above, the German city of Dresden in 1945, the year it was bombed by the Allies. On Thursday, Germans commemorated the 75th anniversary of the devastating attack, which a resurgent far right has used to promote a revisionist history of World War II. News quiz: Did you follow the headlines this week? Test yourself. Modern Love: In this week’s column, how a woman’s worst date became her best one. Late-night comedy: The hosts watched as President Trump and Michael Bloomberg traded insults. “This is crazy,” Trevor Noah said. “Two mega-rich dudes dissing each other in the most personal way. It would be like if a rap battle was on CNBC.” What we’re listening to: This episode of “The New Yorker Radio Hour.” Sam Sifton, our food editor, writes: “I enjoyed listening to Hilton Als talk about Louis C.K.’s return to the stage, and about how it might have gone differently, had Louis attempted art and not commerce.” Cook: Take time this weekend for stuffed shells. See: Two paintings of Napoleon, one wearing Timberlands, are on display at the Brooklyn Museum. It’s a face-off between two visions of the political power of art, our critic Jason Farago writes. Read: In honor of Valentine’s Day, we’ve listed works of fiction from each of the 50 states that explore matters of the heart. Smarter Living: There are good ways and bad ways for colleagues with different circadian rhythms to work together. Here are some tips. Donald McNeil, a science reporter for The Times, is part of a team covering the spread of the virus. This is a condensed version of a conversation about his observations and concerns. What do we know, and what don’t we know, about the coronavirus? In the beginning of every epidemic, there is the fog of war. I’d say we’re still in that fog. We know this virus is much more transmissible than SARS or MERS. We don’t know if it’s quite as transmissible as the flu. We know it can kill people. We know it’s not nearly as lethal as MERS or SARS. One of the things we don’t know is what the Chinese aren’t saying. We know that they’re reluctant to let in outside experts and wouldn’t share samples of the earliest cases with the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. When you ask scientists, “What’s your fear for the Big One, the pandemic that’s going to kill us all?” — not that there is a pandemic that’s going to kill us all — but if you ask them that, they say, “Flu.” They worry about some new flu, bird flu or swine flu, that’s highly lethal but becomes very transmissible between humans. I know only one or two scientists who have said, “You know, I also worry about coronaviruses being the Big One.” I don’t want to raise alarm that this is the Big One. But this is a new, scary and confusing one, and we don’t yet know how far it’s going to spread and how many people it’s going to kill. What do you think about the public’s reaction to your reporting? I’m always trying to figure out: Am I being alarmist, or am I not being alarmist enough? I was too alarmist about H5N1 back in 2005, the bird flu. I was not alarmist enough about West Africa and Ebola in its early days. All previous Ebola outbreaks had killed a few hundred people. That one killed 11,000. A big part of my beat is debunking the panicky stories. It actually consumes almost as much of my time as reporting does. I try to spread truth instead of panic, even if it takes me a little longer to get it right. 
It has become an iconic image of the coronavirus outbreak in China: a masked official aiming what appears to be a small white pistol at a traveler’s forehead. For weeks, this ominous-looking device has been deployed at checkpoints across China — tollbooths, apartment complexes, hotels, grocery stores, train stations — as government officials and private citizens screen people for fevers in an effort to prevent the spread of the deadly coronavirus. Sometimes described as a “thermometer gun,” the device is equipped with an infrared sensor that can quickly measure surface temperature without making any contact with a person’s skin. In recent years, it has become an important tool for countries scrambling to contain viral outbreaks. It was widely used to try to slow the spread of SARS in China in the early 2000s and to curb the Ebola outbreak in West Africa a decade later. But for all of its powerful sensing technology, the thermometer has ultimately proved to be an ineffective defense mechanism, according to medical officials and experts on infrared devices. Like the surgical masks that have become ubiquitous in China, thermometer guns tend to be unreliable outside carefully controlled health care settings. The thermometers determine temperature by measuring the heat emanating from the surface of a person’s body. Often, however, those wielding the tools don’t hold them close enough to the subject’s forehead, generating unusually low temperature readings, or hold them too close and get a high reading. The measurements can be imprecise in certain environments, like a dusty roadside, or when someone has taken medication to suppress a fever. “These devices are notoriously not accurate and reliable,” said Dr. James Lawler, a medical expert at the University of Nebraska’s Global Center for Health Security. “Some of it is quite frankly for show.” When he traveled in West Africa during the Ebola outbreak, Dr. Lawler was frequently tested with infrared thermometers outside hospitals or at roadside checkpoints. The results suggested he was dying of hypothermia. “My temperature was often 35 degrees Celsius or lower, which starts to become incompatible with life,” Dr. Lawler said. “So I’m not sure those were accurate.” In theory, the thermometers, as well as more complex cameras that can also measure the heat coming off a person, allow local officials to quickly determine who may have a fever and then pull those people aside for further testing. So far, tens of thousands of people have contracted the coronavirus, and this week the death toll passed the 1,000 mark. Last month, the World Health Organization said temperature screenings could reduce “the risk of importation.” But on social media in China, people passing through the checkpoints have complained that the thermometers are producing unrealistically low readings in some situations and artificially high readings in others, like when a traveler is tested from inside a hot car. “You know the temperature gun is inaccurate,” wrote one person on Weibo, the Chinese social media service, after getting a reading from a guard. “I know the temperature gun is inaccurate. He also knows the temperature gun is inaccurate. But nobody says anything because it’s part of the process. Such formalism!” Just because an infrared tool says someone has a high temperature does not mean the person is sick, let alone carrying the virus. “They could have been exercising, they could be taking certain drugs,” said Jim Seffrin, an expert on infrared devices at the Infraspection Institute in New Jersey. “A person who’s been trying to catch a flight in an airport for which they are late — they may have run down a concourse.” The growing demand for thermometer guns and infrared cameras that can detect fevers has caused shortages across the world, from the center of the outbreak in Wuhan to a small supplier in Texas. A host of Chinese companies make thermometer guns, which have become more expensive as demand has increased from both government and private customers like schools and factories. Alicn Medical (Shenzhen), a manufacturer in the Chinese city of Shenzhen, makes 2.5 million thermometer guns a year and is one of only a handful of companies in China that can achieve that level of production, said Mo Yingchun, its general manager. Still, raw material costs have surged and many workers can’t get around China’s outbreak containment efforts to show up for their jobs, meaning the company isn’t producing at full capacity. “Even the governments are fighting for the products among themselves,” Mr. Mo said, noting that prices had climbed to three to five times the usual level. “Local governments want to guarantee their own needs first.” Typically, he added, the company’s thermometers are used indoors to check on babies. “The thermometer guns are used only for quick screening and are not as accurate as traditional thermometers,” Mr. Mo said. “It was a small industry, and if it weren’t for the outbreak, it will not be put in the spotlight.” Thousands of miles from the heart of the outbreak, a small technology supplier in Beaumont, Texas, has also been feeling the crush of demand. The company, Infrared Cameras, makes high-tech imaging equipment as well as infrared thermometers, which cost $25 apiece. In a normal month, the company sells about 100 infrared cameras, according to its chief executive, Gary Strahan. Since January, the company has sold more than 1,000, supplying schools, cruise ships, factories, offices, hospitals and theaters in countries like China and South Korea. Mr. Strahan said he had been working every day from 4 a.m. to 10 p.m. to keep up with the orders. “It’s the most overwhelming thing I’ve had to deal with in my life,” he said. “We’ve got people coming to us directly, saying: ‘Can you supply 1,000 cameras? Can you supply 2,000 cameras?’” The company’s cameras and thermometer guns have a margin of error of 0.1 to 0.2 degrees Celsius, according to Mr. Strahan, who has been selling infrared cameras since the 1990s. But many products on the market are less reliable. During past outbreaks, some checkpoints have used cameras or thermometer guns that were designed for industrial purposes, like measuring the temperature of a vehicle, rather than finely calibrated medical tools. “If you’re going to use the technology, you have to come at it with the proper equipment,” said Mr. Seffrin of the Infraspection Institute. “What we saw during the SARS outbreak is people were quick to pick up industrial instruments.” Even a perfectly precise temperature sensor would not necessarily catch everyone carrying the coronavirus. Infected people can take several days to develop a fever, according to The New England Journal of Medicine. And travelers who already have a fever might take Tylenol to suppress their symptoms, sometimes in a deliberate effort to deceive the authorities. In Qinghai Province in China, the police are investigating one man on suspicion that he passed through checkpoints by covering up his ailments. Still, Mr. Strahan said he hoped his company would help slow the spread of the virus, even if temperature screenings are unlikely to stop the outbreak altogether. “Because of the inaccuracy of a lot of the systems being sold out there, people are missed and then the infection spreads,” he said. “It’s a very real situation, and I feel like I’m right in the middle of it.” That was certainly the case on Thursday morning: At the company’s office in Beaumont, Mr. Strahan’s team was packing 300 thermometer guns into boxes, all of them bound for China. 
Growth in Germany came to a halt in the last quarter of 2019 as consumers became more cautious about spending, leaving the economy vulnerable as it begins to feel the effects of the coronavirus outbreak in China. Economic growth in Germany was zero from October through December, the Federal Statistics Office said on Friday, down from 0.2 percent growth in the previous quarter. The chances that Germany will bounce back during the current quarter are slim because of the coronavirus outbreak in China, which has hobbled one of Germany’s most important customers and suppliers. Disruptions caused by the outbreak are becoming more visible in Europe. Fiat Chrysler Automobiles said Friday that it had stopped production at a factory in Serbia because of shortages of parts made in China. The shutdown, apparently the first by a carmaker in Europe, will add to concerns that the coronavirus could sap what little growth the Continent has been able to muster recently. “The crisis risks delivering a substantial blow to the battered industrial sector,” Ángel Talavera, an economist at Oxford Economics, said in a note to clients Friday. The eurozone grew only 0.1 percent during the last three months of 2019 compared with the previous quarter, the European Union’s official statistics office said Friday, confirming an earlier estimate. That was the slowest rate of expansion in six years. Growth for the full year was 1.2 percent, down from 1.9 percent in 2018. Germany’s economic performance was not as bad as some economists had expected. A steep decline in orders for industrial goods had led to predictions of a recession. Overall growth for 2019 was 0.6 percent, compared with 1.5 percent in 2018. Until recently, spending by German consumers had helped compensate for a slump in manufacturing. But consumers became more cautious at the end of the year, perhaps unsettled by headlines about major job losses at German automakers. Companies like Daimler, which reported a quarterly loss this week, have been cutting jobs because of slack demand and the cost of developing new technology they need to remain competitive. Problems in the car industry are not limited to Germany. The French carmaker Renault said on Friday that profit practically evaporated in 2019. The company acknowledged that it had been “a troubled year.” Net profit in 2019 plunged to 19 million euros, or about $21 million, from €3.5 billion in 2018, Renault said. Renault also warned that its goal of keeping sales steady at €56 billion during 2020 could be endangered by “the possible impacts related to the coronavirus health crisis.” Renault shut down a factory in Busan, South Korea, on Tuesday because of supply chain problems. Renault plans to reopen the factory, a joint venture with Samsung, next week. But a factory in Wuhan, China, the center of the outbreak, will remain closed at least until next Friday on government orders, a Renault spokeswoman said. In China, two German carmakers, BMW and Volkswagen, were preparing to reopen factories that have been closed since the beginning of the Lunar New Year holiday. The automakers are eager to resume production in China to avoid any more lost sales in the world’s largest car market. Volkswagen, which gets almost half its sales from China, said all of its factories would be running by Monday. The company acknowledged that it was “facing challenges due to delayed nationwide restarting of supply chains as well as limited travel options for production employees.” Fiat said supply problems had prompted it to move forward the dates of a planned shutdown at the plant in Kragujevac, Serbia, which produces Fiat 500 subcompact cars. The company said it did not expect the impact to be too dire. “We are in the process of securing future supply of those affected parts, and production will be restarted later this month,” Fiat said in a statement. “We do not expect this change in scheduling to impact the total production forecast for the month.” 
HONG KONG — The beige van squatted outside of a Wuhan hospital, its side and back doors ajar. Fang Bin, a local clothing salesman, peered inside as he walked past. He groaned: “So many dead.” He counted five, six, seven, eight body bags. “This is too many.”  That moment, in a 40-minute video about the coronavirus outbreak that has devastated China, propelled Mr. Fang to internet fame. Then, less than two weeks later, he disappeared. Days earlier, another prominent video blogger in Wuhan, Chen Qiushi, had also gone missing. Mr. Chen’s friends and family said they believed he had been forcibly quarantined.  Before their disappearances, Mr. Fang and Mr. Chen had recorded dozens of videos from Wuhan, streaming unfiltered and often heartbreaking images from the center of the outbreak. Long lines outside hospitals. Feeble patients. Agonized relatives.  The footage would have been striking anywhere. But it was especially so coming from inside China, where even mild criticism of the authorities is quickly scrubbed from the online record, and those responsible for it often punished.  The appetite for the videos reflects, in part, the shortage of independent news sources in China, where professional newspapers are tightly controlled by the authorities. Earlier this month, the state propaganda department deployed hundreds of journalists to reshape the narrative of t [Read: A shadowy church is at the center of South Korea’s coronavirus outbreak.] But the videos also reflected the growing call for free speech in China in recent weeks, as the coronavirus crisis has prompted criticism and introspection from unexpected corners across the country. Several professional news organizations have produced incisive reports on the outbreak. A revolt against government censorship broke out on Chinese social media last week after the death of Li Wenliang, the Wuhan doctor who had tried to warn of the virus before officials had acknowledged an outbreak.  Mr. Fang’s and Mr. Chen’s videos were another manifestation of the dissatisfaction that the government’s handling of the outbreak has unleashed among ordinary Chinese citizens. “When suddenly there’s a crisis, they want to have access to a wider array of content and reporting,” said Sarah Cook, who studies Chinese media at Freedom House, a pro-democracy research group based in the United States.  The disappearance of the two men also underscores that the ruling Communist Party has no intention of loosening its grip on free speech. China’s leader, Xi Jinping, said last month that officials needed to “strengthen the guidance of public opinion.” While Chinese social media has overflowed with fear and grief, state propaganda outlets have emphasized Mr. Xi’s steady hand, framed the fight against the outbreak as a form of patriotism and shared upbeat videos of medical workers dancing. More than 350 people across China have been punished for “spreading rumors” about the outbreak, according to Chinese Human Rights Defenders, an advocacy group. Mr. Chen, a fast-talking, fresh-faced lawyer from eastern China, was already well-known online before the outbreak. He traveled to Hong Kong during the pro-democracy protests last year and disputed the Chinese authorities’ depiction of the demonstrators as a riotous mob.  The Beijing authorities summoned him back to the mainland and deleted his social media accounts, Mr. Chen told his followers later. But when the coronavirus led officials to seal off Wuhan last month, he raced to the city of 11 million, citing his duty as a self-declared citizen journalist. “What sort of a journalist are you if you don’t dare rush to the front line?” he said. In his videos, which drew millions of views on YouTube, Mr. Chen interviewed locals who had lost loved ones, filmed a woman breaking down as she waited for care and visited an exhibition center that had been converted into a quarantine center. He was blocked from WeChat, a major Chinese social media app, for spreading rumors. But he was adamant that he shared only what he himself had seen or heard. As time went on, Mr. Chen, usually energetic, began to show strain. “I am scared,” he said on Jan. 30. “In front of me is the virus. Behind me is China’s legal and administrative power.” The authorities had contacted his parents to ask for his whereabouts, he said. He teared up suddenly. Then, his finger pointing at the camera, he blurted: “I’m not even scared of death. You think I’m scared of you, Communist Party?” On Feb. 6, Mr. Chen’s friends lost contact with him. Xu Xiaodong, a prominent mixed martial arts practitioner and a friend of Mr. Chen, posted a video on Feb. 7 saying that Mr. Chen’s parents had been told that their son had been quarantined, though he had not shown symptoms of illness. Unlike Mr. Chen, Mr. Fang, the clothing salesman, was fairly anonymous before the coronavirus outbreak. Much of his YouTube activity had involved producing enthusiastic videos about traditional Chinese clothing. But as the outbreak escalated, he began sharing videos of Wuhan’s empty streets and crowded hospitals. They lacked the slickness of Mr. Chen’s dispatches, which were often subtitled and tightly edited. But, as with Mr. Chen’s videos, they showed a man growing increasingly desperate — and defiant. On Feb. 2, Mr. Fang described how officials had confiscated his laptop and interrogated him about his footage of the body bags. On Feb. 4, he filmed a group of people outside his home, who said they were there to ask him questions. He turned them away, daring them to break down his door.  In his final videos, Mr. Fang turned explicitly political in a way rarely heard inside China, at least in public. Filming from inside his home — he said he was surrounded by plainclothes policemen — he railed against “greed for power” and “tyranny.” His last video, on Feb. 9, was just 12 seconds long. It featured a scroll of paper with the words, “All citizens resist, hand power back to the people.” Despite the worldwide audience for Mr. Fang’s and Mr. Chen’s videos, it is hard to know how much reach they had domestically, said Fang Kecheng, an assistant professor of journalism at the Chinese University of Hong Kong. Both men relied heavily on YouTube and Twitter, which are blocked in China. But unlike the torrent of grief and anger online in response to the death of Dr. Li, news of Mr. Chen’s and Mr. Fang’s disappearances has been swiftly stamped out on Chinese social media. Their names returned almost no results on Weibo, China’s Twitter-like platform, on Friday.  Still, Ms. Cook said the power of Mr. Chen’s and Mr. Fang’s videos, as well as the reporting done by professional journalists in Wuhan, should not be underestimated. She pointed to the Chinese authorities’ decision this week to loosen diagnostic requirements for coronavirus cases, leading to a significant jump in reported infections, as evidence of their impact.  That decision might not have come “if you didn’t have all these people in Wuhan sending out reports that what you’re hearing is an underestimate,” Ms. Cook said. “These very courageous individuals can, in unusual circumstances, push back and force the state’s hand.” Mr. Fang, in one of his last videos, seemed struck by a similar sentiment. He thanked his viewers, who he said had been calling him nonstop to send support. “A person, just an ordinary person, a silly person,” he said of himself, “who lifted the lid for a second.” 
An article on Friday about Attorney General William P. Barr’s rebuke of President Trump’s attacks on the Justice Department misstated who informed Mr. Trump of what Mr. Barr planned to say in an ABC News interview. The attorney general’s office, not Mr. Barr himself, sent word to a White House official.  An article on Tuesday about the pangolin as a possible animal source of the coronavirus misspelled the surname of a scientist. He is Benjamin Neuman, not Neumann. An article on Wednesday about Pakistani students told to stay in Wuhan amid the coronavirus outbreak misstated the status of Nepalis in the city. They were awaiting evacuation; they had not been evacuated. An article on Thursday about a Chinese student in South Korea facing prejudice because of coronavirus fears misstated the name of the disease caused by the virus. It is COVID-19, not CORVID-19. An article on Friday about an American citizen living with his mother in a locked down Chinese town misspelled the name of the place. It is Zhicheng, not Zhichang. The error was repeated in a picture caption. A Last Chance article on Friday about the exhibition “Pen, Lens & Soul: The Story of the Beautiful Project” at the Met misspelled the given name of the director of “Dear Black Girl.” Her name is Cristin Stephens, not Christin. It also misstated the age of the subject of the portrait titled “Damola.” She is in her 20s, not a teenager. An article on Page 4 about whether to stick with TV shows with mediocre pilots describes incorrectly the online availability of the series “Murder, She Wrote.” The first five seasons were streaming on Amazon Prime Video at the time of publication; it was not unavailable on all three so-called Big 3 streamers. An article on Page 12 about a sequel to the film “To All the Boys I’ve Loved Before” misidentifies Jenny Han’s debut novel. It is “Shug,” not “To All the Boys I’ve Loved Before.” The article also misstates the source of the yogurt brand used in the film. It is from Japan, not Korea. An article on Page 16 about the actress Zoë Kravitz misidentifies the song she sang as a child. It was “The Boy Is Mine” by Brandy and Monica, not “The Girl Is Mine.” An article on Page 54 about the ultrarunner Jim Walmsley misspells the name of the Athenian herald said to have run the original marathon. It is Philippides, not Phillipedes. The article also omits one of the men who qualified for the Olympic team trials in the marathon with times below 2 hours and 10 minutes. In addition to Scott Fauber, Galen Rupp and Leonard Korir, Jared Ward qualified with a time of 2:09:25 at the 2019 Boston Marathon. Errors are corrected during the press run whenever possible, so some errors noted here may not have appeared in all editions. To contact the newsroom regarding correction requests, complaints or other comments about our coverage, please email nytnews@nytimes.com or call 1-844-NYT-NEWS (1-844-698-6397). Comments on editorials may be emailed to letters@nytimes.com or faxed to (212) 556-3622. For newspaper delivery questions: 1-800-NYTIMES (1-800-698-4637) or email customercare@nytimes.com. 
SEOUL, South Korea — The United States said it would approve humanitarian assistance to North Korea to help international aid agencies fight the coronavirus there, amid fears that the impoverished country may be hiding an outbreak. North Korea has not reported any cases of the new coronavirus. But in the past week, some South Korean news reports, citing unnamed sources within the secretive North, said there had been deaths that were suspected to be related to the virus. The reports could not be confirmed. North Korea shares a 930-mile border with China, where the coronavirus emerged. It has since spread to numerous countries; more than 1,500 deaths have been reported, almost all of them in China. North Korea has taken aggressive steps to keep the virus out, including suspending all flights and trains to and from China. But the border has long been porous for smugglers, who ferry goods across the shallow river frontier that separates the two countries. North Korea’s public health system is dysfunctional, and the travel restrictions have made it harder for the North to buy or smuggle medicine, goods or other supplies from China. Relief organizations have complained that American-led international sanctions against the North, imposed because of its nuclear weapons program, have prevented them from providing aid quickly. This week, the Red Cross called for a sanctions exemption that would let it transfer money to its office in North Korea, describing it as “a lifesaving intervention.” It cited an urgent need for personal protective gear and testing kits to prepare for a possible outbreak in the North. The United States has also expressed alarm, and it encouraged American and international aid groups to help the North counter and contain the virus. “The United States is deeply concerned about the vulnerability of the North Korean people to a coronavirus outbreak,” Morgan Ortagus, a State Department spokeswoman, said in a statement. So far, North Korea has said nothing about how many people it may have quarantined or tested for the virus. But it is clearly taking the threat seriously, having suspended international tourism and, more recently, extended the quarantine period for people with coronavirus symptoms, from 14 days to 30 days. Its state media has carried photos of mask-wearing officials holding emergency meetings at disease-control centers and disinfecting ports and train stations. The North also asked South Korean officials to vacate a joint liaison office in the North Korean city of Kaesong as a precaution against the virus. ​Earlier this month, state media said health officials had stepped up inspections on “all routes leading to the capital city,” Pyongyang, which is home to North Korea’s elite, including the top leader, Kim Jong-un. It said the authorities were requiring all people passing through Pyongyang’s main train station to wear masks. Amid the many signs that North Korea fears an outbreak, its state media has reported no public appearances by Mr. Kim since he watched a concert​ in Pyongyang a few weeks ago. North Korea has also shut its ports and borders to foreign goods and summoned back​ officials who had been earning hard currency​ in China​, quarantining them on the border, Daily NK said. North Korea’s military​ has also been smuggling in​ large ​quantities of South Korean face masks​ through China, it ​said. Kim Seung-eun, a ​Christian ​pastor​ and human rights activist​ in South Korea who ​works with informants inside the North, said on Friday that he had not heard of any deaths from the coronavirus in the country. He said the North Korean authorities had drastically stepped up border controls, even ordering guards to fire at those attempting to cross the border illegally. That draconian measure has made it impossible for groups like his to smuggle refugees out of North Korea, he said. “North Korea has to take such an extreme step because their medical infrastructure is so bad that if an epidemic breaks out, it could run out of control,” Mr. Kim said. The coronavirus emerged as North Korea seemed to be retreating from a period of relative openness, with the diplomacy between Kim Jong-un and President Trump having produced no concrete agreements on ending the North’s nuclear arms program or the international sanctions. In recent months, North Korea has opened resort towns ​in hopes of attracting Chinese visitors ​and badly needed tourist cash. But the coronavirus has halted that effort. The disruptions in border trade could hurt the national economy. More than 90 percent of North Korea’s official external trade goes through China. “North Korea is under increasing stress because of the coronavirus outbreak in China,” said Leif-Eric Easley, a professor in the international studies division at Ewha Womans University in Seoul. “The revenue stream Kim was anticipating from tourism is running dry and the informal economy is suffering from draconian border and travel restrictions.” “North Korea may be on lockdown now, but it will soon be in need of economic concessions,” he added. That raises the possibility that Pyongyang could return to diplomacy — or resume weapons tests to strengthen its negotiating hand, analysts said. ​ 
China’s mishandling of the coronavirus outbreak has imperiled itself and the world because it is a land of 21st-century science and 19th-century politics. Scholars in China predicted a year ago in an article in the journal Viruses that it was “highly likely” that there would be coronavirus outbreaks, calling it an “urgent issue.” Once the outbreak occurred, other Chinese scientists rapidly identified the virus and sequenced its DNA, posting it on Jan. 10 on a virology website for all to see. That was extraordinarily good and fast work. Meanwhile, the Communist Party instinctively organized a cover-up, ordering the police to crack down on eight doctors accused of trying to alert others to the risks. National television programs repeatedly denounced the doctors as rumormongers. One of those eight doctors, Li Wenliang, caught the virus and died — causing public outrage. Some Chinese make the point that if Li had been in charge of China, rather than President Xi Jinping, many lives might have been saved. “The coronavirus epidemic has revealed the rotten core of Chinese governance,” a law professor in Beijing, Xu Zhangrun, wrote this month in an online essay that was immediately banned. “The level of popular fury is volcanic, and a people thus enraged may, in the end, also cast aside their fear.” Xu certainly cast aside his own fear, predicting that he would face new punishments but adding, “I cannot remain silent.” He called on his fellow Chinese citizens to demand free speech and free elections and urged: “Rage against injustice; let your lives burn with a flame of decency; break through stultifying darkness and welcome the dawn.” Xu is now incommunicado, but it is remarkable to see the groundswell of anger online toward the dictatorship. Citizens can’t denounce Xi by name, but they are skilled in evading censors — such as by substituting President Trump’s name for Xi’s. It’s difficult to know where this goes, but this incongruity between 21st-century science and 19th-century politics is what a Marxist might call a contradiction. This creates long-term challenges that are growing with a swelling middle class (now larger than America’s) that is impatient with the corrupt, thuggish and narcissistic leadership. Ordinary Chinese see through government propaganda and realize that the mishandling of the coronavirus is only one example of the regime’s ineptitude. Xi’s government also mishandled a swine fever outbreak that began in 2018 and has now killed almost one-quarter of the world’s pigs. Earlier, China fumbled SARS. And at the beginning of the 2000s, it covered up an AIDS outbreak spread by government-backed blood collection efforts. Vast numbers of impoverished farmers and workers died, for the government response was not to help those infected but to punish doctor whistle-blowers. I will never forget a woman then who tried to give me her 4-year-old son because she was dying of AIDS and her husband had already died. Granted, we Americans must have some humility in critiquing the regime, for it’s a tribute to China’s progress that a baby born in Beijing today has a longer official life expectancy (82 years) than a baby born in Washington, D.C. (78), or New York City (81). Still, the progress came from China’s technocrats, doctors and scientists, the result in part of opening one new university a week for years. The peak of that technocratic, pragmatic approach came under Prime Minister Zhu Rongji in the late 1990s and early 2000s. More recently, Xi has tugged China backward, stifling social media and journalism while cultivating something approaching a North Korea-style personality cult around himself. Xi’s propaganda apparatus extols him for personally directing the efforts against the virus and claims that the World Health Organization sent experts to learn from China’s wise handling of the coronavirus. China’s economic and educational success has created a savvy middle class that feels betrayed when the government spouts nonsense and targets doctors rather than a coronavirus. Doctors on the front line are working almost around the clock with limited supplies, taping up masks, using goggles made of plastic folders and eating only one meal a day or wearing diapers so as to go to the bathroom less often (for that means removing protective clothing that can’t be replaced). So far, more than 1,700 medical workers have been infected and at least six have died. The contrast between heroic doctors and bumbling political leaders could not be more stark. It’s thus strange to find Trump repeating Xi’s talking points: “I spoke with President Xi,” Trump said, “and they’re working very, very hard, and I think it’s going to all work out fine.” Xu’s take is harsher, and his essay is reverberating around China through surreptitious copies. “Faced with this virus, the Leader has flailed about,” Xu wrote. “Although everyone looks to The One for the nod of approval, The One himself is clueless.” “Regardless of how good they are at controlling the internet,” Xu added, “they can’t keep all 1.4 billion mouths in China shut.” 
TOKYO — Japan’s economy has already been staggered by a devastating typhoon and a wallet-shutting tax increase. Now, the coronavirus that has brought business in neighboring China to a virtual standstill threatens to knock Japan into a full-blown recession. Japan said on Monday that its economy had shrunk at an annualized rate of 6.3 percent in the three months that ended in December, the worst contraction since mid-2014. The results predated the virus epidemic but were affected by a monthslong slump in Chinese demand for Japanese exports. Officials had been optimistic that an easing of the effects of Typhoon Hagibis and the consumption tax increase would return the country to growth as the new year began. But then the coronavirus began its deadly spread in China, halting the lucrative flow of tourists from that country and further imperiling Japanese exports. If Japan’s economy — the world’s third largest after the United States and China — shrinks again in the first quarter of 2020, the country will officially fall into recession for the first time since a brief dip in 2015. A recession is generally defined as two straight quarterly contractions. It’s unclear how long the virus outbreak will continue, but the entire global economy could suffer from a prolonged shock in China, and some economists are already predicting slower growth for the year. The virus’s ripple effects are hitting Japan particularly hard: China is its largest trading partner and by far its biggest source of visitors, many of whom come ready to shop. The spread of the coronavirus inside Japan itself also presents a wild card. The country has had the most confirmed cases outside China, with more than 400, including those from a cruise ship quarantined in Yokohama. Last week, Japan recorded its first death from the virus. But China’s ban on group travel as it tries to contain the outbreak is the more immediate economic threat to Japan. The effects can already be seen in places like Shun Natori’s sweets shop in what is normally one of Tokyo’s busiest tourist districts. The Lunar New Year holiday is high season for Chinese tourism to Japan, but the small streets and alleys surrounding Mr. Natori’s business have been unusually quiet for weeks. The nearby Sensoji temple — famous for its enormous red lanterns and throngs of selfie-taking tourists — is nearly empty. The last time things were this slow, Mr. Natori said, was in March 2011, after an earthquake and tsunami caused a nuclear meltdown, scaring tourists away from Japan for months. “The best thing would be if things get busy again,” he said. That seems unlikely to happen soon. At least 400,000 travelers from China are expected to cancel trips through March, according to data from the Japan Association of Travel Agents. Japanese airlines have suspended flights as demand has plummeted. Officials have begun to express concern about the outbreak’s effect on their country’s fragile economy, which in recent quarters had defied gloomy projections and eked out modest growth even as sales of Japanese goods and services abroad continued to decline. Japan is “starting to see a large impact on the tourist industry and regional small and medium-size enterprises,” Prime Minister Shinzo Abe recently told lawmakers. Japan on Friday announced a limited $96 million package of emergency funds that will be used in part to help businesses struggling because of the outbreak. That followed the government’s approval of a $120 billion stimulus package late last year, an economic injection that came as Japan tried to stave off recession after the tax increase and the typhoon. The country’s consumption tax was raised to 10 percent from 8 percent in October, a move that officials said was necessary to support expanded public services as the population rapidly ages and pay down the national debt, the highest among developed nations. But it has also depressed consumer spending. Days after the tax increase went into effect, Typhoon Hagibis slammed into Japan, battering its main island, causing enormous damage and further suppressing economic activity. As Japan has recovered from the storm, its industrial output rose slightly in December. But now the coronavirus poses a serious threat to a crucial market for the goods being produced. Japanese manufacturers are major suppliers to Chinese companies, sending them everything from precision machine tools to components for smartphones and cars. Even before the outbreak, Japanese companies were struggling to cope with the effects of China’s economic slowdown, a result in part of its trade war with the United States. Japanese exports to China were down 7.6 percent in 2019 from the previous year. The epidemic has also affected operations of Japanese companies inside China. In response to the virus, the Chinese authorities extended the Lunar New Year holiday, effectively shutting down manufacturing work for many Japanese companies. The toymaker Tomy lowered its earnings estimates for the end of the financial year, which closes March 31, because of a slowdown in production in China, Japan’s national broadcaster, NHK, reported. Nintendo has said it will delay shipments of its Switch console to Japanese consumers as a result of the outbreak. Addressing investors this month, Hiroki Totoki, a top executive at Sony, warned that the outbreak could have a “major impact on our supply chain, logistics and sales,” potentially erasing a projected increase in earnings growth. But perhaps no businesses in Japan are feeling the effects of the epidemic as much as those dependent on tourism, which has grown significantly in importance to the Japanese economy in recent years. The number of visitors to Japan has more than tripled over the last decade, reaching 31 million in 2018, according to government statistics. More than 30 percent of those visitors came from China — almost nine in 10 for vacation — making the country the largest source of tourists to Japan. While visitors from South Korea and Taiwan — second and third in Japan’s tourism rankings — spend most of their money on sightseeing, Chinese travelers tend to shop. Busloads of Chinese bargain hunters — leery of high taxes and knockoff products at home — descend on Tokyo’s upscale shopping districts to buy foreign and domestic goods in a flurry of consumption known in Japan as bakugai, or “explosive shopping.” By propping up domestic consumption as Japan’s population declines, visitors from China make an outsize contribution to the country’s bottom line. “If you look at consumption patterns of Chinese visitors to Japan, a lot of people are buying things like makeup,” said Keiji Kanda, a senior economist at the Daiwa Institute of Research, adding that “places like department stores and drugstores are likely to be heavily impacted.” Some hope, though, could be around the corner. Mr. Natori, who owns the sweets shop near the Sensoji temple, said he was looking forward to the cherry blossom season, when tourism usually booms. In anticipation of that, he plans to use the downtime to “think up a seasonal menu.” 
(Want to get this briefing by email? Here’s the sign-up.) Australia, South Korea and other countries were preparing to evacuate their citizens from the cruise ship in Japan that has been quarantined for two weeks to prevent the spread of the coronavirus. Fourteen evacuated Americans were found to have the virus shortly before they boarded a chartered flight to the U.S. And the Japanese Health Ministry announced that 99 more cases had been confirmed on the ship, bringing the total to 454. China signaled a delay of the most important political event of the year, the full meeting of the National People’s Congress — a sign of deepening anxiety within the Communist Party about the threat posed by the epidemic. Here are the latest updates and maps of where the virus has spread. The latest: The Tokyo Marathon was canceled for everyone except elite athletes, raising questions about what will happen to the Olympic Games in the city this summer. Separately, a prominent legal activist who accused China’s leader, Xi Jinping, of trying to cover up the outbreak was detained over the weekend, according to his friends. Impact: Japan’s economy shrank in the last quarter of 2019, its worst contraction in more than five years. The results predated the coronavirus epidemic but were affected by a monthslong slump in Chinese demand for Japanese exports. There’s no evidence for it, and scientists dismiss it. But a rumor about the coronavirus has nevertheless gained traction: that the outbreak was somehow manufactured by the Chinese government as part of a biowarfare program. It’s the kind of story that resonates with those who see Beijing as a threat to the West. The theory has gained an audience with the help of powerful critics of the Chinese government, including right-wing media outlets and a U.S. senator, Tom Cotton of Arkansas, who later walked his claims back. Reality: Experts dismiss the idea that the virus was created by human hands, saying it resembles SARS and other viruses that come from bats. Here’s a reminder of what scientists know and don’t know. ‘Infodemic’: The World Health Organization is fighting a flood of misinformation about the coronavirus in partnership with tech companies. Going on religious pilgrimages, praying, attending funerals, wearing a beard, having too many children. These are all acts, among other signs of piety, that would have been flagged by the Chinese government and warranted monitoring or even detention for Uighurs living in the western Xinjiang region, according to a leaked government document obtained by The Times. The document, one of numerous files kept on more than one million people who have been detained, illuminates another piece of the Chinese government’s coercive crackdown on ethnic minorities and what Beijing considers to be wayward thinking. Details: The document, a 137-page spreadsheet, outlines the kind of minute detail that the authorities in Karakax County (also spelled Qaraqash) in southwestern Xinjiang collected on more than 300 detainees and hundreds of their relatives and neighbors from 2017 to March 2019. Follow-up: Three-fourths of the detainees listed have been released, according to an expert who studied the spreadsheet. But the document also shows that many of those released were later assigned work in tightly controlled industrial parks. Somalia has endured three decades of crises, making its government incapable of providing even basic services. So young Somalis have sprung into action as volunteer medics, road-builders, educators and more. After a 2017 truck bombing in Mogadishu killed 587 people and injured 316 others, hundreds of volunteers, like Dr. Amina Abdulkadir Isack, above right, identified victims, created social media campaigns to appeal for global attention and collected tens of thousands of dollars to help with ambulance services. “It showed us we could do something to save lives,” she said. Burkina Faso shooting: A gunman attacked a church during Sunday Mass and killed at least 24 people in the country’s northwest, security sources said. It was not immediately clear who was responsible, but jihadist groups have been seeking control over rural areas of the country. Michael Bloomberg campaign: As the billionaire and former New York mayor rises to the upper tier of Democratic presidential candidates, political reporters at his news media outlet are increasingly feeling pressure over a perceived conflict of interest. Caroline Flack: Fans of the “Love Island” host, who died by suicide over the weekend, are calling for a new law to stop British tabloids from publishing articles that reveal “private information that is detrimental to a celebrity, their mental health and those around them.” Snapshot: Above, an orangutan in Tanjung Puting National Park in Indonesia. Our correspondent and his family developed a special understanding of Indonesia’s island jungles with the help of a network of one-man conservationist organizations. What we’re reading: This collection of letters. “British newspapers’ letters pages are a peculiar sort of joy,” writes Peter Robins, an editor in our London newsroom. “Recently, readers of The Guardian have been debating how old you have to be before it’s eccentric to keep boiling up your annual 18-pound batch of homemade marmalade. Bidding started at 77 and has escalated rapidly.” Cook: Cheesy baked pasta with sausage and ricotta is like lasagna, but faster. (Our Five Weeknight Dishes newsletter has more recommendations.) Read: “Apeirogon,” the latest novel from Colum McCann, delves into the Israeli-Palestinian conflict through the eyes of two grieving fathers. “I think people wouldn’t have trusted it as much if it wasn’t real,” he said. Smarter Living: We collected a few items that will help you make the most of an off-season getaway. Abdi Latif Dahir is The Times’s East Africa correspondent. A Kenyan of Somali descent, he reports in and about some dozen countries. We reached him in Nairobi, to talk about this briefing’s featured read: his story about the young Somalis who are filling in the gaps their government can’t. This is such a powerful story of resilience and hope. How did you find it? Late last year, there was a big attack in Mogadishu, the worst by Al Shabab in two years. And one thing stood out. Almost all the news stories mentioned that a lot of university students had died, young people who wanted to be doctors or were studying other specialities that would help the country. On Jan. 1, I flew to Mogadishu, to follow up on the attack and to write about these students and what they mean to Somalia. My first story was about that, but also on how things had been getting so much better in Mogadishu — and it was all these young people doing it. What else inspired you? I went to this crisis center. They were collecting the names of the victims, and reaching out to their families. I wanted to sit amongst them and see what it was like. They were checking in, asking the families, how are you today? And maybe they’d hear that the hospital bill had been paid so that was OK but the family hadn’t eaten breakfast that day. So they would corral someone to get food over to them. I wanted to write about the chutzpah to invent these systems, to stay strong with all that was happening. People could rattle off all these names of people they’ve known who’ve been killed. But then they would say, we want to stay here and be the ones to fix this country. They’re creating tech hubs, and restaurants and delivery services that are thriving. Because of the attacks on hotels and restaurants, it’s safer to stay home, have friends over and order a meal. How is it being the East Africa correspondent? I’ve had the job since November. It’s incredible. This is a dynamic, evolving region that’s changing socially, geopolitically, economically. It’s a great place to be a journalist. Honestly, you could write a story every hour. 
TOKYO — The ground rules were clear. A day before 328 Americans were to be whisked away from a contaminated cruise ship in Japan, the U.S. Embassy in Tokyo told passengers that no one infected with the coronavirus would be allowed to board charter flights to the United States. But as the evacuees began filing onto two reconfigured cargo planes early Monday for departures to military bases in California or Texas, some noticed tented areas separated from the rest of the cabin. Then reality hit: After 12 days stuck on the cruise ship where more and more people were testing positive for the virus, they were now sharing planes with people carrying the same pathogen they were desperate to escape. “I didn’t know until we were in the air,” said Carol Montgomery, 67, a retired administrative assistant from San Clemente, Calif. “I saw an area of plastic sheeting and tape.” While the planes were aloft, the State Department and the Department of Health and Human Services said in a joint statement that the results for 14 passengers who had been tested two or three days earlier had come back positive — just as they were heading to the airport in buses. American officials, it turned out, had started bringing the passengers home without actually knowing their test results. But because the evacuation had already begun by the time Japanese officials relayed those results, officials decided to let the infected evacuees, who were not yet exhibiting symptoms, board the planes and sit in the back, separated from other passengers by plastic sheets about 10 feet tall. The reversal was the latest chaotic turn in a two-week quarantine of the ship that has become an epidemiological nightmare. Even as the Americans were flying home and countries like Australia, Canada and South Korea were preparing to evacuate their own citizens, the Japanese Health Ministry announced on Monday that 99 more cases had been confirmed on the cruise ship, bringing the total to 454. Among them was the third Japanese public health official to contract the virus while tending to passengers and crew members aboard the ship, the Diamond Princess. The unstinting rise in infections — and the scramble to bring American passengers home, even after some were discovered to be infected — has led to tough questions, and some withering criticism, about the handling of the outbreak aboard the ship, home to the largest number of coronavirus cases outside China. “The quarantine on the ship ended up being an unprecedented failure,” said Eiji Kusumi, a doctor specializing in infectious diseases at Navitas Clinic in Tokyo. “We should learn from this lesson that a quarantine on a ship is impossible, and we should not repeat this in the future.” Countries around the world are now struggling to figure out what to do with cruise ships during the coronavirus outbreak. Another ship, the Westerdam, was turned away from port after port in Asia until it was welcomed in Cambodia. The cruise line insisted that no one was ill and passengers started heading home, yet one of them, an American woman, later tested positive for the virus, worrying experts that the epidemic will get only worse. After the long quarantine in Japan, the U.S. authorities had strongly encouraged American passengers on the Diamond Princess to accept the offer of a flight out. Getting them off the ship took days of planning and hours of screening, checking passports and loading passengers onto buses for the 40-minute bus ride from the port of Yokohama to Haneda Airport in Tokyo. The goal was to ensure that passengers who were symptomatic remain in Japan, American officials said. Medical experts examined American passengers on the ship and determined that at least 328 of them could be evacuated. Meanwhile, Japanese medical experts had done testing of the passengers, but did not have all the results ready. In the end, 61 Americans remain on board, officials said. Asked why American officials began evacuating passengers without knowing their test results, Dr. William Walters, managing director of operational medicine at the State Department, told reporters on Monday that it was “unpredictable” when the results would come back. The Americans were put on about 15 buses to the airport. Once it became clear that some had the coronavirus, the State Department said, the infected passengers “were moved in the most expeditious and safe manner to a specialized containment area” in the rear of the planes. “In the isolation area, they posed no additional risk,” Dr. Walters said. After landing, the 14 infected evacuees went to hospitals for monitoring and treatment. Most ended up being flown to Omaha for medical treatment by experts at the University of Nebraska. Another five returning passengers were also put into isolation because they had developed fevers. The remaining American passengers stayed at Travis Air Force Base in California or Lackland Air Force Base in Texas, where they had landed and where they will remain under quarantine for an additional 14 days. When one of the planes landed in California, a line of officials from the military, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, and the Department of Homeland Security greeted passengers with banners that read “Welcome home.” After being ushered through an isolation tent, they were assigned to apartments on the base. “They have flown in specialists from across the country,” said one evacuee, Sarah Arana, 52, a medical social worker from Paso Robles, Calif. “It’s a phenomenal amount of resources. I’m kind of blown away.” Epidemiologists said American officials had made a difficult decision in allowing infected passengers onboard the charter flights. “You don’t want to expose anyone on the plane who hadn’t otherwise been exposed before on the boat,” said Dr. Allen Cheng, an infectious disease specialist at Monash University in Melbourne, Australia. Australia is planning to take approximately 200 passengers off the Diamond Princess on Wednesday. Dr. Cheng said that Australia had decided that “anyone who is sick or becomes sick in the next 48 hours will stay in Japan and stay in the hospital.” With Australia and other countries preparing to help transport their citizens off the boat, the captain told the more than 2,000 people still on board that the Japanese health authorities could swab everyone for the coronavirus by the end of Monday and begin letting guests leave the ship on Wednesday. “This disembarkation will be an ongoing process” until Feb. 22, the captain said in an onboard announcement. The captain said the cruise line was “coordinating closely with your embassies.” In a briefing on Monday, Shigeru Omi, president of the Japan Community Healthcare Organization, said that Japan had made the right decision to put the ship in quarantine based on the information available when the ship arrived in Yokohama on Feb. 3. “At that time, the international community was trying to contain the virus,” Mr. Omi said. According to the Japanese Health Ministry, at least 71 Americans on the ship were infected with the coronavirus. Many of them remain in hospitals around Japan. John Haering, 63, a retired operations manager for Union Pacific Railroad who lives in Tooele, Utah, was taken to a hospital in Chiba Prefecture last week with a fever and tested positive for the virus. He said he felt stranded as he lay in an isolation room. His wife, Melanie, left on one of the charter flights. “I’m happy for her that she got out of here and that she’s going to get some attention in the U.S.,” said Mr. Haering, who retired in November and was about a third of the way through a six-month trip around the world. “But at the same time I’m sad. You feel that loss of somebody leaving.” Mr. Haering, who said that he no longer had any symptoms or a fever but that a CT scan showed signs of pneumonia, was not sure how much longer he would have to stay. “They did swab me today again, and I’ll get my test back tomorrow,” he said. “I asked the doctor if the swab shows that I’m negative, and he just shook his head and said, ‘I don’t know.’ There’s a lot of stuff that they don’t know.” Mr. Haering said he had not heard from anyone at Princess Cruises, the company that operates the Diamond Princess, since he arrived at the hospital. Until Sunday, he had not heard from anyone at the U.S. Embassy in Tokyo, either. He received a call and a follow-up email urging him to get in touch with the cruise ship company for further information about how he will get home. “It’s very scary,” he said. “It feels like a little bit of abandonment.” Tung Pi Lee, 79, a retired physician, was left in a Tokyo hospital with a coronavirus infection while his wife, Angela, flew to California on one of the charter flights. Several of her siblings and their spouses were among the 14 infected passengers who flew home. Two were taken to Nebraska, and another was in California for treatment. “I am glad for my aunts and uncles to be in the U.S. and to be receiving treatment here,” said JoAnn LaRoche Lee, one of Mr. Lee’s daughters. “Had they been left in Japan, I wonder what would have happened to them.” Trying to coordinate her father’s care in Tokyo with her siblings in the United States, she said, “feels like a never-ending nightmare.” 
China on Tuesday reported 72,436 total cases of coronavirus infections, while the death toll now stands at 1,868. Here are the latest updates and maps of where the virus has spread. In Europe, where wealthy Chinese tourists have become mainstays of hotels, shops and cultural destinations, the outbreak has dealt a blow to businesses after Beijing banned overseas group tours and many countries restricted or barred entry to people from China. Flight and hotel bookings have been canceled over fears of the virus, and there has also been a drop in tourists from other nations who want to avoid crowded spaces. Apple cut its sales forecast Monday, as both production and demand for its products have been slowed in China because of the outbreak.  The latest: Australia, South Korea and other countries are preparing to evacuate their citizens from the cruise ship Diamond Princess, which has been quarantined in Japan for almost two weeks. Fourteen evacuated Americans were found to have the virus shortly before they boarded chartered flights to the U.S. Go deeper: China signaled a delay of the most important political event of the year, the full meeting of the National People’s Congress. Separately, a prominent legal activist who accused China’s leader, Xi Jinping, of trying to cover up the outbreak was detained over the weekend, according to his friends. Prime Minister Boris Johnson of Britain came under fire after his office said on Monday that he had no plans to visit areas with severe flooding after a storm that battered the country over the weekend. Storm Dennis, classified as a “weather bomb” by the national weather service, slammed areas that were still recovering from heavy rains and strong winds brought by another storm last week. At least one person has died, while hundreds of others have been forced to leave their homes. The response: Despite more rain predicted on Wednesday, Mr. Johnson has not called a meeting of the government’s emergencies committee to discuss the situation. Background: Britain is experiencing more frequent and serious flooding because of global warming, experts say. Mohammad Heidarzadeh, a coastal engineering academic, said floods that were once seen every 15 to 20 years are now occurring every two to five years and that the country’s flood defense systems are “not fit to address the current climate situation.” Another angle: The pressure is piling up on Mr. Johnson after his office appointed an aide who once said black people have lower I.Q.s than white people. The adviser, Andrew Sabisky, quit on Monday after the ensuing uproar, complaining of “media hysteria.” Germany appears poised to follow Britain in allowing Huawei, the Chinese tech giant, to build next-generation 5G networks, despite warnings from the United States. U.S. officials have lobbied their allies to ban the company out of fear that its equipment could be used by China to spy on or control European and American communication networks. But as those countries are forced to choose between the U.S., a key intelligence ally, and China, a critical trading partner, some like Britain have taken the risk and cooperated with Huawei. Context: The Huawei issue is part of a broader fight between the U.S. and China as they vie to dominate advanced technologies. The U.S. is now shifting its approach by looking to cut off Huawei from access to American technology and trying to build a credible competitor — but its officials have often contradicted each other’s ideas. Quote of note: “Many of us in Europe agree that there are significant dangers with Huawei, and the U.S. for at least a year has been telling us, do not use Huawei. Are you offering an alternative?” asked Toomas Hendrik Ilves, Estonia’s former president. “What is it that we should do other than not use Huawei?” Going on religious pilgrimages, praying, attending funerals, wearing a beard, having too many children. These are all acts, among other signs of piety, that would have been flagged by the Chinese government and warranted monitoring or even detention for Uighurs living in the western Xinjiang region, according to a leaked government document that was shared with several news media organizations, including The Times. The document, one of numerous files kept on more than one million people who have been detained, illuminates another piece of the Chinese government’s coercive crackdown on ethnic minorities and what Beijing considers to be wayward thinking. Follow-up: Three-fourths of the detainees listed have been released, according to an expert who studied the document. But it also shows that many of those released were later assigned work in tightly controlled industrial parks. Adorable characters like Hello Kitty are used to sell everything in Japan, and fading towns have long used mascots to lure visitors and investment. Above, Sanomaru, a dog with a ramen bowl on its head, represents the city of Sano. But as their tax bases dwindle along with their populations, communities are increasingly questioning whether the whimsy is worth the expense. Libya arms: The European Union said it would launch a naval and air mission to stop arms from reaching Libya, currently embroiled in civil war. Austria and Hungary had initially objected out of concern that ships could enable more migrants to reach Europe. Burkina Faso shooting: A gunman attacked a church during Sunday Mass and killed at least 24 people in the country’s northwest, security sources said. It was not immediately clear who was responsible, but jihadist groups have been seeking control over rural areas of the country. Caroline Flack: Fans of the “Love Island” host, who died by suicide over the weekend, are calling for a new law to stop British tabloids from publishing articles that reveal “private information that is detrimental to a celebrity, their mental health and those around them.” Snapshot: Above, Michael Bloomberg on the campaign trail. He has risen in the polls after entering the race for the U.S. Democratic presidential candidacy, raising the pressure on political reporters employed by his news media outlet. Artificial intelligence: Mark Zuckerberg, Facebook’s chief executive, met with European Union officials on Monday as the E.U. prepares to release a draft of an artificial intelligence policy. That will have important consequences for tech giants like Apple, Facebook and Google. What we’re reading: This collection of letters. “British newspapers’ letters pages are a peculiar sort of joy,” writes Peter Robins, an editor in our London newsroom. “Recently, readers of The Guardian have been debating how old you have to be before it’s eccentric to keep boiling up your annual 18-pound batch of homemade marmalade. Bidding started at 77 and has escalated rapidly.” Cook: Cheesy baked pasta with sausage and ricotta is faster to make than lasagna. (Our Five Weeknight Dishes newsletter has more recommendations.) Read: “Apeirogon,” the latest novel from Colum McCann, delves into the Israeli-Palestinian conflict through the eyes of two grieving fathers. “I think people wouldn’t have trusted it as much if it wasn’t real,” he said. Watch: It may feel as if Zoë Kravitz has always been famous, but you can now watch her in her first lead role, as the heartbroken Rob in Hulu’s TV adaptation of “High Fidelity.” She spoke with our reporter about her acting and her life. Smarter Living: We collected a few items that will help you make the most of an off-season getaway. Abdi Latif Dahir is The Times’s East Africa correspondent. A Kenyan of Somali descent, he reports in and about some dozen countries. We reached him in Nairobi, to talk about his latest story, about the young Somalis who are filling in the gaps their government can’t. This is such a powerful story of resilience and hope. How did you find it? Late last year, there was a big attack in Mogadishu, the worst by Al Shabab in two years. And one thing stood out. Almost all the news stories mentioned that a lot of university students had died, young people who wanted to be doctors or were studying other specialties that would help the country. On Jan. 1, I flew to Mogadishu, to follow up on the attack and to write about these students and what they mean to Somalia. My first story was about that, but also on how things had been getting so much better in Mogadishu — and it was all these young people doing it. What else inspired you? I went to this crisis center. They were collecting the names of the victims and reaching out to their families. I wanted to sit amongst them and see what it was like. They were checking in, asking the families, how are you today? And maybe they’d hear that the hospital bill had been paid so that was OK, but the family hadn’t eaten breakfast that day. So they would corral someone to get food over to them. I wanted to write about the chutzpah to invent these systems, to stay strong with all that was happening. People could rattle off all these names of people they’ve known who’ve been killed. But then they would say, we want to stay here and be the ones to fix this country. They’re creating tech hubs, and restaurants and delivery services that are thriving. Because of the attacks on hotels and restaurants, it’s safer to stay home, have friends over and order a meal. How is it being the East Africa correspondent? I’ve had the job since November. It’s incredible. This is a dynamic, evolving region that’s changing socially, geopolitically, economically. It’s a great place to be a journalist. Honestly, you could write a story every hour. 
MOSCOW — Last year, Russia set a goal to quicken its economic expansion — to grow faster than the world as a whole — as a way to secure the country’s position as a dominant global power. So far, the plan is off to a sputtering start. President Vladimir V. Putin’s proposal, which struck some economists as a throwback to the command economy of the Soviet period, called for state spending of $400 billion over six years in specific areas. Among the items were 900 pianos for music schools and 40 covered ice rinks, along with money for roads and airports. But this month, the government reported that Russia’s gross domestic product grew only 1.3 percent in 2019, down from 2.5 percent the previous year. Bureaucratic delays in spending the money were blamed. In contrast, the global average for growth last year was 2.9 percent, according to the International Monetary Fund. A goal of lifting growth above the global average by next year now appears untenable. Six years since Western sanctions restricted access to Western banks and the price of oil, a major Russian export, fell to historic lows, the growth rate shows the economy crawling along, hampered by critically low private investment and a stumbling state bureaucracy that dominates Russia’s biggest industries. Still, by many other measures, the economy looks robust. The government boasts bulging foreign currency reserves, success in taming inflation (now at an annual rate of 2.4 percent) and a budget surplus of 500 billion rubles, or $8 billion, last year. Many economists are now pointing, paradoxically, to the budget surpluses and huge foreign currency and gold reserves, which totaled $562 billion at the end of last month, as a problem. The government’s reluctance to spend money on economic stimulus has sent a signal to private industry. “Nobody wants to invest,” said Vladislav Inozemtsev, the founder and director of the Center for Post-Industrial Studies, a Moscow think tank. “Nobody believes the economic situation will be better tomorrow than it is today.” Mr. Inozemtsev calls this period the “lost decade” in Russia. Despite last year’s pledge of stimulus spending — a commitment that was reaffirmed this year when Mr. Putin outlined plans for new spending on such things as free school lunches — the government has continued socking away savings. The policy seems to reflect a deep-seated Russian belief: No matter how bad things are today, they can always get worse. Tax payments have piled up as insurance against future shocks, such as harsher sanctions or even lower oil prices. The government and state companies — the state owns a majority in six of the 10 largest companies on the Russian stock exchange — are not spending in the hopes the economy and tax base will grow on their own. Economists also point to low private-sector investment as a cause of sluggish growth, over fears the future in the domestic economy or global commodity prices might be worse than the present. China’s coronavirus outbreak also looms over Russia’s economy, even though the country is largely insulated from manufacturing supply chain problems because its manufacturing sector is minuscule. Russia has reported two cases of infection inside the country. Instead, the threat for Russia comes as oil prices slump. In recent weeks, the exchange rate for the national currency, the ruble, has dipped as China reports more viral infections. The faltering economy is out of step with Russia’s image politically at home and abroad, as a global power in good health. Geographically, the country grew with the annexation of Crimea in 2014. But even as it meddled in elections and intervened militarily in Syria and Ukraine, the Russian federal budget has remained essentially level in real, or inflation-adjusted, terms since 2014. Oil profits have instead gone into fattening the national piggy bank, a reserve called the National Welfare Fund. The giant account this winter reached its target of accumulating an amount equal to 7 percent of the gross domestic product, or about $125 billion. To bolster these reserves, the government routinely incorporated into the budget tax revenue based on artificially low assumptions of the global price of oil, with surpluses saved rather than spent. The budget now balances at oil prices below $50 per barrel, while the price of Brent crude, an international benchmark, has hovered around $60. “They were, and still are, afraid of any disturbance on the external side — be it trade wars, oil prices coming down or sanctions,” Vladimir Tikhomirov, the chief economist at BCS Global Markets, said. With this rule in place, even short periods of rising oil prices in recent years did little to jump-start growth. Every additional dollar per barrel on the oil price adds about $2 billion to Russian tax receipts — but only becomes extra padding in the Kremlin’s cushion against a possible future downturn. “Russia is moving from a dynamic, high growth, high inflation sort of place to something looking more like Eastern Europe,” said Vladimir Osakovskiy, chief economist for Russia at Bank of America. Private investors are reluctant to sink money into the Russian economy, but they are more willing to send the money elsewhere. Most years since the Soviet collapse, more money — usually tens of billions of dollars annually — has left Russia than has come in as investment. Russians, like their government, hedge against downturns by putting cash in dollar-denominated bank accounts, in foreign real estate or foreign investments. Last year, Russians moved $26 billion out of the country. “The private sector has robust demand for foreign assets,” said Sofya Donets, chief economist for Russia at Renaissance Capital, and a former central bank economist. There is a silver lining in this economy: For decades, rampant inflation was a scourge of the post-Soviet Russian economy, but low growth and declining real, or inflation-adjusted, wages have brought price rises under control. The result is Russia has moved to “modest risks, low inflation but lower growth as well,” Mr. Osakovskiy said. In the boom years of the first two terms of Mr. Putin’s long rule, from 2000 to 2008, the economy expanded at an average pace of 7 percent per year. The lack of private sector investment has a short-term benefit for investors, too. Rather than recycle profits into their businesses, Russia’s giant metals and petroleum companies have paid down debts and then, more recently, paid out large dividends, elevating stock prices. The Russian stock market became the second-best-performing market in the world last year, rising 40 percent in dollar terms. Investors were also cheered by the prospect of higher corporate profits as borrowing costs come down on the back of declining inflation; the central bank cut interest rates five times last year. The benchmark rate is now 6 percent. Officials have pointed to new rules to prevent graft in the bureaucracy as having slowed disbursements under the stimulus plan announced last year, and say the money is coming this year. January indeed brought an uptick in spending. Russia’s $1.7 trillion economy now ranks 11th in the world, between Canada and South Korea, as measured by its gross domestic product, the broadest gauge of economic activity for a country. Ms. Donets said the policy of salting away reserves amid the geopolitical tensions and sanctions had cost growth but left the government in a good position to really shift gears. “The sustainability of government finances was the focus, and will be for the foreseeable future,” she said. “For six years, the fiscal and monetary policy was very tight.” But the Kremlin has spent lavishly before, she noted. Ms. Donets pointed to public sector spending on stadiums, roads and railroads before the 2014 Winter Olympics and the 2018 World Cup soccer tournament. Since Russia embarked on a more assertive foreign policy in 2014, the economy has grown an average of about 0.7 percent a year, including two recessionary years. Given a well-educated population and abundant resources, it could grow faster, most economists say. “One thing you can say for sure,” Ms. Donets said. “This is not the potential growth of the Russian economy.” 
Passengers began disembarking on Wednesday from a cruise ship docked off Yokohama, Japan, as a two-week quarantine of the vessel was coming to an end even as a major coronavirus outbreak on board continued unabated. An initial group of about 500 people were to leave the boat on the first day of what the Japanese authorities have said will be a three-day operation to offload those who have tested negative for the virus and do not have symptoms. Passengers who shared cabins with infected patients have been ordered to remain on the ship. Several countries have arranged charter flights to take their nationals home after they leave the boat. Most if not all of these passengers face an additional two-week quarantine in their home countries. The disembarkation is taking place even as at least 542 passengers aboard the ship, the Diamond Princess, have been infected with the virus. On Tuesday, the authorities announced an additional 88 cases on the ship, which originally carried about 3,700 passengers and crew members. More than half of all the recorded cases outside China, the center of the epidemic, have been aboard the ship. Many of the infected had already been removed from the ship and taken to nearby hospitals. More than 300 Americans, at least 14 of whom were infected, had also been taken off the boat earlier this week and placed in a 14-day quarantine at military bases in the United States. But more than 100 Americans who were not evacuated on chartered flights cannot return home for at least two more weeks, the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention said Tuesday. [Update: More than 500 coronavirus cases confirmed in China’s prisons.] The agency said in a statement that virus containment measures on the ship “may not have been sufficient to prevent transmission.” “C.D.C. believes the rate of new infections on board, especially among those without symptoms, represents an ongoing risk,” it added. Passengers will not be allowed to return to the United States until they have been off the ship for 14 days, without any symptoms or a positive test for the virus, the agency said. The decision applies to those who have tested positive and are hospitalized in Japan, and to those who are still aboard the ship. On Wednesday, the number of confirmed new cases in China appeared again to be slowing, and was put at 1,749. That brought the country’s total number of reported infections to 74,185. Deaths in the previous 24 hours were put at 136, bringing the total to 2,004. Economic fallout from the epidemic continued to spread on Tuesday, with new evidence emerging in manufacturing, financial markets, commodities, banking and other sectors. HSBC, one of the most important banks in Hong Kong, said it planned to cut 35,000 jobs and $4.5 billion in costs as it faces headwinds that include the outbreak and months of political strife in Hong Kong. The bank, based in London, has come to depend increasingly on China for growth. Jaguar Land Rover warned that the coronavirus could soon begin to create production problems at its assembly plants in Britain. Like many carmakers, Jaguar Land Rover uses parts made in China, where many factories have shut down or slowed production; Fiat Chrysler, Renault and Hyundai have already reported interruptions as a result. U.S. stocks declined on Tuesday, a day after Apple warned that it would miss its sales forecasts because of the disruption in China.Stocks tied to the near-term ups and downs of the economy slumped, with financials, energy and industrial shares the leading losers. The S&P 500 index fell 0.3 percent. Bond yields declined, with the 10-year Treasury note yielding 1.56 percent, suggesting that investors are lowering their expectations for economic growth and inflation. With much of the Chinese economy stalled, demand for oil has fallen and prices were down on Tuesday, with a barrel of West Texas Intermediate selling for roughly $52. In Germany, where the economy depends heavily on global demand for machinery and automobiles, a key indicator showed economic sentiment has tumbled this month, as the economic outlook has weakened. At least 150 million people in China — over 10 percent of the country’s population — are living under government restrictions on how often they can leave their homes, The New York Times has found. More than 760 million Chinese people live in communities that have imposed strictures of some sort on residents’ comings and goings, as officials try to contain the epidemic. That larger figure represents more than half of the country’s population, and roughly one in 10 people on the planet. China’s restrictions vary widely in strictness. Some neighborhoods require residents only to show ID, sign in and have their temperature checked when they enter. Others prohibit residents from bringing guests. But in places with more stringent policies, only one person from each household is allowed to leave home at a time, and not necessarily every day. In one district in the city of Xi’an, the authorities are allowing residents to leave their homes only once every three days to shop for food and other essentials. The shopping may not take longer than two hours. Tens of millions of other people are living in places where local officials have “encouraged” neighborhoods to restrict people’s ability to leave their homes. About 500 people will be released on Wednesday from a quarantined cruise ship that has been a hot spot of the outbreak, Japan’s health ministry said, but confusion about the plan was widespread. The ministry said only those who had tested negative and were asymptomatic would be allowed to leave the Diamond Princess, which has been moored off Yokohama since Feb. 4. The authorities said 2,404 people on the ship had been tested for the virus, and earlier in the day, the ministry announced that 88 additional infections had been confirmed. That brought the total on the ship to 542. Australia plans to repatriate about 200 of its citizens who aboard the ship on Wednesday, and other countries have similar plans. Japanese officials did not say whether any of those people were among the 500 who will be allowed to disembark. The release coincides with the expiration of a two-week quarantine imposed on the ship, but it was not clear if that was the reason for letting people go. More than 300 Americans were released this week before that period was completed. Some public health experts say that the 14-day isolation period makes sense only if it begins with the most recent infection a person might have been exposed to — in other words, new cases mean a continuing risk of exposure and should restart the quarantine clock. In addition, many infected people have tested negative initially, only to test positive days later, after becoming sick. The Japanese announcement suggested that Japanese people who are released will not be isolated, a decision officials did not explain. The director of a hospital in Wuhan, the Chinese city at the center of the epidemic, died on Tuesday after contracting the new coronavirus, the latest in a series of medical professionals to be killed in the epidemic. Liu Zhiming, 51, a neurosurgeon and the director of the Wuchang Hospital in Wuhan, died shortly before 11 a.m. on Tuesday, the Wuhan health commission said. “From the start of the outbreak, Comrade Liu Zhiming, without regard to his personal safety, led the medical staff of Wuchang Hospital at the front lines of the fight against the epidemic,” the commission said.  Chinese medical workers at the forefront of the fight against the virus are often becoming its victims, partly because of government missteps and logistical hurdles. After the virus emerged in Wuhan late last year, city leaders played down its risks. Last week the Chinese government said that more than 1,700 medical workers had contracted the virus, and six had died. The death nearly two weeks ago of Li Wenliang, an ophthalmologist who was initially reprimanded for warning medical school classmates about the virus, stirred an outpouring of grief and anger. Dr. Li, 34, has emerged as a symbol of how the authorities controlled information and have moved to stifle online criticism and aggressive reporting on the outbreak. With just 42 cases of the coronavirus confirmed in Europe, the continent faces a far less serious outbreak than China. But the people and places associated with the illness have faced a stigma as a result, and fear of the virus is, itself, proving contagious. One British man who tested positive for the virus was branded a “super spreader,” and his every movement was detailed by the local media. In France, business plummeted at a ski resort identified as the scene of several transmissions of the virus. And after some employees of a German car company were found to have the virus, the children of other workers were turned away from schools, despite negative test results. Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, the director general of the World Health Organization, warned last weekend of the dangers of letting fear outpace facts. “We must be guided by solidarity, not stigma,” Dr. Tedros said in a speech at the Munich Security Conference. Fear, he said, may hamper efforts to combat the outbreak. “The greatest enemy we face is not the virus itself,” ge said. “It’s the stigma that turns us against each other.” The Philippines has lifted its travel ban on citizens employed as domestic workers in Hong Kong and Macau, officials said Tuesday. The nation had enacted the ban on Feb. 2 on travel to and from mainland China, Hong Kong and Macau, preventing workers from traveling to jobs in those places. Hong Kong alone is home to about 390,000 migrant domestic workers, many of them from the Philippines. The travel ban had left many anxious about the sudden loss of income. On Tuesday, the authorities in Hong Kong announced that a 32-year-old Filipino woman was the latest person in Hong Kong to have contracted the virus, bringing the number of confirmed cases there to 61. A spokeswoman for the Department of Health said the woman was a domestic worker. A spokesman for President Rodrigo Duterte of the Philippines said that workers returning to Hong Kong and Macau would have to “make a written declaration that they know the risk.” President Moon Jae-in of South Korea warned on Tuesday that the outbreak in China, his country’s biggest trading partner, is creating an “emergency economic situation,” and ordered his government to take actions to limit the fallout. “The current situation is much worse than we had thought,” Mr. Moon said during a Cabinet meeting on Tuesday. “If the Chinese economic situation aggravates, we will be one of the hardest-hit countries.” Mr. Moon cited difficulties for South Korean companies in getting components from China, as well as sharp drops in exports to China. He also said travel restrictions hurt the South Korean tourism industry, which relies heavily on Chinese visitors. “The government needs to take all special measures it can,” Mr. Moon said, ordering the allocation of financial aid and tax breaks to help shore up businesses hurt the most. Passengers from a cruise ship were turned away at an airport as they tried to leave Cambodia on Tuesday, amid fears that the country had been too lax in containing the coronavirus. The ship, the Westerdam, was turned away from five other ports over virus fears, but Cambodia allowed it to dock last Thursday. Prime Minister Hun Sen and other officials greeted and embraced passengers without wearing protective gear. More than 1,000 people were allowed to disembark. Other countries have been far more cautious; it is not clear how long after infection people develop symptoms, and some people at first test negative for the virus, even after becoming sick. Hundreds of passengers left Cambodia and others traveled to Phnom Penh, the capital, to wait for flights home. On Saturday, an American who left the ship tested positive on arrival in Malaysia.  On Tuesday, some passengers who went to the airport later returned to their hotel. It was not clear if any passengers had been able to fly out. 
HONG KONG — Chinese officials hailed recent figures as evidence that the spread of the coronavirus epidemic has slowed, and World Health Organization officials said on Tuesday that China’s strict limits on its people’s movements have helped. But the outbreak and its death toll continue to grow. The picture outside China has grown steadily more alarming. And experts caution against excessive optimism about the crisis peaking. “It could be unwise for anybody in China, or outside China, to be complacent that this is coming under control at this point in time,” said Prof. Malik Peiris, chief of virology at the University of Hong Kong. Since Chinese officials first acknowledged the virus in December, it has been hard to judge with precision the severity and scale of the outbreak. China has changed its criteria for diagnosis, prompting a large increase in reported infections and deaths last week. Tests for the virus have not been very accurate, and people who do not seek or receive medical care may not be counted. And people with mild or no symptoms may not realize they have the virus and may not get counted, either. Researchers in Germany presented evidence on Tuesday that people who have the new coronavirus can infect others even when they have no symptoms, as disease experts had suspected. Their findings, published in a letter in the New England Journal of Medicine, indicated that people may be spreading the disease before they know they are sick. But the Chinese government’s daily tally of new infections and deaths from the virus has declined steadily since Feb. 12, a trend that could offer a glimmer of hope if it persists. On Tuesday, the authorities reported that in the previous 24 hours, 1,886 new cases had been confirmed — the first time since Jan. 30 that the number had dropped below 2,000. On Wednesday, the number of new infections reported by authorities was again below 2,000, with China recording 1,749 confirmed new cases of coronavirus infection, bringing the country’s total number of reported infections to 74,185. With 136 deaths reported in Wednesday’s figures, the total number in China of those confirmed to have died from the virus surpassed 2,000, reaching 2,004. Government officials, as well as public health experts around the world, said the numbers suggested that China’s aggressive measures to contain the epidemic were working. China’s leader, Xi Jinping, told Prime Minister Boris Johnson of Britain in a phone call on Tuesday that China was making “visible progress” in containing the epidemic, according to Chinese state media. More than half the country’s population is under some limitations on its movements, and 150 million of its people face restrictions on leaving their homes, according to an analysis by The New York Times. “Right now, the strategic and tactical approach in China is the correct one,” Dr. Michael Ryan, the W.H.O.’s chief of emergency response, said on Tuesday. “You can argue whether these measures are excessive or restrictive on people, but there is an awful lot at stake here in terms of public health — not only the public health of China but of all people in the world.” China’s lockdown has slowed the spread of the virus from its epicenter, the city of Wuhan, to the rest of China by two to three days, and from China to the rest of the world by two to three weeks, W.H.O. officials said. The organization’s endorsement of China’s methods was an apparent reversal from less than three weeks earlier, when it had advised against restrictions on travel and trade. Some health experts have condemned the restrictions, saying that they were preventing vital resources from getting where they were needed, and could instill panic. Prof. Zhong Nanshan, a renowned respiratory disease expert in China, said on Monday that he expected the epidemic to peak in the country’s southern regions by mid- to late February, and the rest of the country to follow soon after. But Dr. Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, the W.H.O. director general, said on Monday that the apparent tapering of the spread in China “must be interpreted very cautiously.” “It’s too early to tell if this reported decline will continue,” he said during a news conference in Geneva. “Every scenario is still on the table.”   Initially, the cases reported outside mainland China were mostly among people who had recently visited there, but increasingly, they stem from contact in other countries. The number of cases in Japan has spiked in recent days, most of them tied to a quarantined cruise ship that turned into a hotbed of transmission. Other case clusters have also turned up in Japan, but so far, the ship, the Diamond Princess, accounts for most of the cases worldwide outside of China — 542 as of Tuesday, an increase of 88 in one day. On Monday, more than 300 American passengers on the ship were flown to the United States and placed in a two-week quarantine. Fourteen of them tested positive for the coronavirus shortly before leaving Japan, but were still allowed to board the flights. American officials had started the process of evacuating them home without knowing their test results. Some of those passengers said on Tuesday they had been informed that a few more of them had tested positive for the virus since they arrived in the United States. Also on Tuesday, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention told more than 100 Americans who have been on the Diamond Princess they cannot return home for at least two more weeks, after it became clear that efforts to control the virus aboard the ship had been ineffective. The passengers include some who have tested positive for the virus and are hospitalized, and others still aboard the ship who have not shown signs of illness. Japanese officials said they expected 500 people to be let off the ship on Wednesday. But they did not make it clear how they had concluded it was safe to release people, or how they had decided which passengers would leave, or who those people would be. Cambodia has allowed more than a thousand passengers from another cruise ship, the Westerdam, to disembark without testing most of them. Hundreds of them flew out of the country, before one of them took ill and tested positive for the virus, raising fears of undetected cases and a further global spread. The country’s authoritarian leader, Hun Sen, has continued to express complacency about the outbreak, even encouraging passengers from the Westerdam to go sightseeing in Cambodia. “Cruise ships are the weak link in the containment,” said Prof. Raina MacIntyre, an expert in biosecurity at the University of New South Wales in Australia. Citing the potential for future cruise ships to harbor the virus, she said, “we could lose control of the epidemic if we don’t get a tight handle on the cruise ship situation.” There are other signs the outbreak’s global toll has not crested. The first coronavirus-related death outside of Asia was announced on Saturday, when a Chinese man died in France. Taiwan announced its first virus-related death on Sunday, marking the fifth fatality outside mainland China. The economic cost of the outbreak, which has paralyzed China, the world’s second-largest economy, also continues to grow. On Tuesday, HSBC, the London-based bank with deep roots in Hong Kong, said that it would cut 35,000 jobs over the next three years, in part because of the coronavirus outbreak. President Moon Jae-in of South Korea warned on Tuesday that the outbreak in China is creating an “emergency” for the economy, saying his country could be one of the hardest hit. If the virus starts to spread rapidly around the globe, it is unclear how other countries will respond. Few other governments have the power to clamp down as thoroughly as China, or even the desire. The lockdown in the central Chinese city of Wuhan, where the outbreak started, has taken a heavy human toll, making it difficult for many to find medical care or care for sick loved ones. The countrywide restrictions create their own challenges, stranding employees away from their jobs and pummeling the economy. “This is the issue,” said Professor Peiris. “It is not clear that this is something that is replicable, even in other parts of China.” It’s a complicated calculation for China and the world. Though relaxed restrictions could revive the economy and ease fear and frustration, they could also lead to a resurgence of infections. In recent days, the Chinese authorities, hoping to nudge the economy back to life, have urged migrant laborers to return to work. Hundreds of millions had left urban centers for the Lunar New Year holiday in January. Officials in the Philippines said on Tuesday that they would allow Filipino migrant workers to return to Hong Kong and Macau, reversing an earlier ban on travel to those regions. (The bar to travel to China remains.) “The battle’s not over, because the travel restrictions can’t last forever,” Professor MacIntyre said. 
SEOUL?볾s the Covid-19 virus began to spread last month, South Koreans didn't have to wonder if they may have crossed paths with one of the country's confirmed cases. Patient No. 12 had booked seats E13 and E14 for a 5:30 p.m. showing of the South Korean film, "The Man Standing Next." Before grabbing a 12:40 p.m. train, patient No. 17 dined at a soft-tofu restaurant in Seoul. Patient No. 21 drove her car to attend a weekday evening church service. The reports, a digital diary of the individual's life a few days before contracting the coronavirus, are made public on a Ministry of Health and Welfare website. Travel details of all 29 confirmed cases are noted in bullet points. The online travel logs are made possible by one of the most ambitious tracking apparatuses in Asia. Health authorities can sift through credit-card records, CCTV footage, mobile-phone location services, public-transport cards and immigration records to pin down the travel histories of those infected or at risk. Along with other preventive measures such as entry bans and quarantines, the tracking system has been used to limit the spread of the virus from China, the source of the outbreak . As of Saturday, South Korea has 29 confirmed Covid-19 cases, a modest total compared with China's other neighbors but still the sixth-largest number after China, Singapore, Hong Kong, Thailand and Japan. While at least nine out of its cases were locally transmitted, no patients have required intensive-care treatment. Other Asian governments have deployed tracking methods and shared the whereabouts of infected individuals, though their information is often cribbed together from face-to-face interviews. China, home to the majority of the more than 66,000 Covid-19 cases, monitors individuals with data provided by telecom firms, the railway bureau and airlines. Hong Kong monitors families quarantined at home with electronic wristbands. Taiwan tracks people who are under home quarantine using their mobile-phone signals. SHARE YOUR THOUGHTS Do you think other countries should look to South Korea as a model in combating coronavirus? Why or why not? Join the conversation below. But South Korea's tactics stand out for the amount of detail authorities disclose to the public, an approach other countries have yet to adopt as they try to strike a balance between civil liberties and public-health demands. As part of the coronavirus-prevention policy, travelers arriving in South Korea from mainland China, Hong Kong and Macau must provide their mobile number if they want to enter. They must also download a government mobile application to report their health status every day. If they fail to report their status two days in a row, the government will call them and eventually try to track their whereabouts. Those who become infected aren't named on the Ministry of Health and Welfare website, and they are notified that their personal information has been collected and recent whereabouts publicized. But patients can't opt out or refuse inquiries. South Korea's methods would likely face a backlash, if not infringe on privacy laws, in many Western countries, experts say, particularly as the verdict on their usefulness isn't out yet. "We really don't know a lot yet about the level of transmissibility of Covid-19," said Linda Selvey, a public-health professor focusing on infectious diseases at the University of Queensland in Australia. "Such considerations are important when considering whether or not to release such a high level of details about a case." Use of "big data" can aid early detection and outbreak responses, said Abdi Mahamud, a senior World Health Organization official coordinating a Covid-19 response team in the western Pacific region. "However, this is an emerging field and caution needs to be taken on the interpretation of this kind of information," Mr. Mahamud said. Other health experts say digital technologies are becoming a more efficient?봞nd accurate?봶ay to monitor quarantined patients, rather than through the laborious task of home visits or telephone calls. "Using 21st century means of trying to track cases is an exciting addition to public health," said William Schaffner, an infectious-disease expert at Vanderbilt University. The reason why South Korean authorities have such latitude today?봞nd the public's support?봱esults from a national reckoning spurred by a slow-footed response five years ago to an outbreak of Middle East Respiratory Syndrome, or MERS, an illness also caused by a coronavirus. The government failed to provide transparency at the early stages of the outbreak when little was known about the virus, according to a Ministry of Health and Welfare white paper published after the crisis. The roughly two-month outbreak in 2015 left 186 people infected, 38 of whom died. It took weeks for the government to release critical information, like the names and locations of hospitals where infections had occurred. The government's indecision led to uncertainty about how, and where, MERS was spreading. The "index" case?봯atient zero?봵isited three different health facilities before being diagnosed with MERS. One of the individuals who contracted the virus from "patient zero" sickened more than 80 others. Nearly seven in 10 South Koreans distrusted the South Korean government's management of MERS, according to a 2015 poll by Realmeter, a Seoul-based research firm. The public outcry sparked legislative changes even before authorities declared the MERS outbreak was over. South Korea revised its infectious-disease control and prevention law, handing public-health officials greater authority to shut down facilities and gain access to personal information for those infected or considered to be at risk. The Latest on the Virus * Fear and Boredom Aboard the Quarantined Coronavirus Cruise Ship * What We Know About the Coronavirus * China Sees Second Straight Jump in Virus Infections * China Urged Open Borders. Even Allies Are Resisting. It also strengthened fines for those who didn't comply and established a 24-hour emergency center that monitors infectious diseases. "There are institutional mechanisms now in place to identify movements of these people and publicize them," said Jun Byung-yool, a former head of South Korea's Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, who had left before the MERS crisis. As the Covid-19 threat began to emerge in January, South Korea's new epidemiological infrastructure kicked into action. Hospitals now take individuals' temperatures at the entrance. They have set up separate screening centers for at-risk patients and have more special wards in place for treating patients with infectious diseases. Doctors now can check patient databases to see if a patient has visited another medical facility or traveled abroad recently. Health News in Your Inbox Get a curated weekly look at features, columns and headlines on personal health and the health industry. Sign up . More than 55% of South Koreans approved of the approach taken by President Moon Jae-in's administration, according to Realmeter. Mr. Moon has seen his approval ratings rise nearly 5 percentage points in recent weeks. South Korea's infectious-disease response could further tighten. Earlier this month, South Korean lawmakers proposed a revision to the infectious-disease law that would increase the penalty for those who break quarantine rules from 3 million won, or about $2,540, to 20 million won. Liza Lin contributed to this article. Write to Eun-Young Jeong at Eun-Young.Jeong@wsj.com Credit: By Eun-Young Jeong 
SEOUL?봗he challenge to contain the coronavirus looks particularly daunting in North Korea, one of the world's poorest and most isolated countries. North Korea was among the first countries last month to block the entry of foreign tourists, who come mostly from neighboring China, the source of the outbreak. It has since cut off trade with China, its main economic benefactor and ally, and limited diplomatic travel, according to North Korean state media and diplomats. The country hasn't reported any cases of the deadly coronavirus. But Pyongyang needs to wall itself off because its health-care system lacks the resources to diagnose and treat patients, experts say. The prospect of outside help is also impeded by United Nations sanctions and the question of whether the secretive Kim Jong Un regime would even accept foreign aid. North Korea's main state newspaper called thwarting the coronavirus a matter of "national survival." "This is really an existential threat for North Korea," said Rodger Baker, a senior vice president at geopolitical consulting firm Stratfor. "Their health system is not structured to be able to contain something like the coronavirus." By cutting itself off from the outside, the Kim regime also chokes off vital cross-border trade and tourism . Along the Chinese border, all train rides have been canceled and trucks have stopped crossing, said Kang Chol Hwan, a North Korean defector who regularly communicates with people in both countries. North Korea derived about 92% of its total trade from China in 2019, according to the Seoul-based Korea International Trade Association. South Korea, after sanctions were enforced , isn't a significant trade partner with its northern neighbor. But on Friday South Korea's ruling party, which advocates a pro-engagement policy, urged lawmakers to consider sending medical supplies to their northern neighbors. Related * Tracking the Coronavirus (Feb. 8) * What We Know About the Coronavirus, From Symptoms to Treatment (Feb. 5) North Korea has established "anti-epidemic posts" around the country and boosted domestic production of face masks and drugs?봧ncluding development of a new antiviral treatment?봳hat strive to "completely keep the virus from spreading," Pyongyang's state-run media said Friday. "North Korea has completely isolated itself," said Mr. Kang, who is now director at the North Korea Strategy Center, a human-rights advocacy group based in Seoul. Although the World Health Organization says Pyongyang hasn't reported any cases, the bordering Chinese provinces of Jilin and Liaoning have a combined 183 incidents, according to WHO figures as of Sunday. China, where most of the infections and deaths have occurred, reported 97 deaths in the mainland on Sunday , bringing the total number killed there to 908 people. China's cabinet-level National Health Commission on Sunday confirmed 3,062 new cases of infection , bringing the total to 40,171. The WHO is working with all its member states, including North Korea, to combat the coronavirus, Edwin Ceniza Salvador, the organization's representative to North Korea, said. The WHO is providing the North's health workers with protective equipment, such as gowns and goggles, and laboratory-testing supplies. North Korea is "taking measures to protect [the] health of its people," he said. North Korea is on near-lockdown. The country's vice foreign minister canceled a trip to Germany for a security conference, according to South Korean media. Pyongyang-based foreign diplomats have been notified they cannot leave their compounds for 14 days, say people familiar with the situation. Inside North Korea, the regime's ability to face an outbreak is limited by its outdated health-care system, already worsened by the U.N. sanctions that have impeded foreign aid and the replenishment of supplies, experts say. Treating coronavirus requires expensive supplies like ventilators, IV fluids and medication that can stabilize blood pressure, said Kee B. Park, a lecturer at Harvard Medical School, who has visited North Korea's health-care facilities. "If there is a massive outbreak overwhelming the hospitals, they will run out of supplies very quickly," Dr. Park said. A health scare would further challenge Mr. Kim, who already faces domestic pressure over his country's stagnant economy. In a Jan. 1 policy announcement, the North Korean leader urged citizens to tighten their belts and prepare for a protracted showdown with the U.S. Mr. Kim said he no longer felt bound to a moratorium on long-range weapons tests established in the months before his 2018 Singapore summit with President Trump on denuclearization. The U.S. and North Korea haven't held working-level talks since October. Mr. Trump didn't mention North Korea during his State of the Union address on Feb. 5. Mr. Kim, during his recent policy speech, threatened to unveil a new strategic weapon in the near future but provided no specifics. Pyongyang has kept a low profile in recent weeks. It hasn't conducted a weapon or rocket-engine test in nearly two months. State-media have toned down attacks on the Trump administration. Some close North Korean watchers had predicted that Pyongyang could unveil a new intercontinental ballistic missile at a military parade this month, pegged to national holidays celebrating the military's founding and the birth of Mr. Kim's father, Kim Jong Il. But the coronavirus threat may keep Pyongyang distracted for the foreseeable future, security experts said. "A campaign of provocation and antagonism requires resources, time and attention, and those things are focused on something else for now," said Gordon Flake, a Korea specialist at the Perth USAsia Centre in Australia. During the SARS crisis in 2002 and 2003, North Korea was forced to allow in outside relief agencies to help combat the deadly virus, causing deep embarrassment for then-leader Kim Jong Il, said Hoo Chiew Ping, a Korea expert at the National University of Malaysia. "Now the regime is trying to portray an image of confidence," Ms. Ping said. "This is an issue that Kim Jong Un needs to manage quite carefully." Get a curated weekly look at features, columns and headlines on personal health and the health industry. Sign up. Dasl Yoon contributed to this article. Write to Timothy W. Martin at timothy.martin@wsj.com Credit: By Timothy W. Martin 
Cambodian health officials are testing hundreds of travelers and crew who are still on a cruise ship after an American passenger, who was allowed to disembark last week, tested positive for the coronavirus . The Westerdam, operated by Seattle-based Holland America Line, docked in Cambodia's Sihanoukville port on Thursday. It sailed there after a number of other countries?봧ncluding Japan, where it was scheduled to end a 14-day voyage that began in Hong Kong on Feb. 1??declined to let the ship dock . Although the cruise's operator had said there were no known cases of the coronavirus on board, authorities in those countries were worried passengers could be carrying the virus after another cruise ship, the Diamond Princess, was quarantined in Japan . Westerdam passengers began disembarking in Sihanoukville on Friday, including an 83-year-old American woman, who then flew to Malaysia on her way home. She reported being ill at the Kuala Lumpur airport in Malaysia and was taken to the hospital, where she was diagnosed with the virus, Holland America Line said. As a result, hundreds of other passengers who had disembarked in Cambodia and those who are still on the ship were being tested. Tracking the Coronavirus * 14 Americans repatriated to the U.S. from the Diamond Princess tested positive for the virus. * An additional 99 people aboard the ship tested positive for the virus on Monday, bringing the total to 454. * Beijing is weighing plans to postpone its biggest political assembly as the government races to contain the coronavirus epidemic. The woman is in stable condition, according to Malaysia's health ministry. Her husband, who was traveling with her, tested negative for the virus. More than 400 passengers who disembarked tested negative and would be cleared to return home, Holland America Line said Monday. It could still take several days to test the 255 passengers and 747 crew members who haven't yet disembarked, the company said. Malaysia barred entry to the country to other passengers from the cruise after the woman tested positive for the virus, but more than 135 of the passengers who arrived on her flight were allowed to travel to their final destinations, including the U.S., U.K., Australia, the Netherlands and Germany, Malaysia's health authorities said. It couldn't be determined how the woman got the virus. The company said it had checked the temperatures of all 2,257 passengers and crew on Feb. 10 and found that no one had a fever. Twenty passengers who had visited the ship's medical facilities were given tests that came back negative. The woman hadn't visited the ship's medical center to report any symptoms of illness, the company said. Christina Kerby, a 41-year-old communications director for health insurer Blue Shield of California, said she and other passengers were overjoyed at the hope of finally going home after getting off the ship Saturday. She said that joy transformed quickly into anxiety when a note was slipped under the door of her hotel room in Cambodia's capital Phnom Penh telling her not to leave pending further screening. "This has been the scariest part of the whole experience," Ms. Kerby said. "We went through that jubilation of being able to leave, then getting this crushing news just hours later that someone was actually ill." Ms. Kerby was planning to stay one night in the hotel and fly to Singapore Sunday morning, then make her way to California to be reunited with her husband and two children. Health News in Your Inbox Get a curated weekly look at features, columns and headlines on personal health and the health industry. Sign up . But returns were stalled Saturday afternoon upon news of the diagnosis in Malaysia. Passengers were taken to a hotel where they are allowed to move around the premises, but have been advised not to go outside. Results are still coming in for their nasal- and throat-swab exams, administered in the hotel. "It's not the vacation we were expecting, for sure," Ms. Kerby said. More * Coronavirus Cruise Passengers Land in U.S., Including 14 With Infections * Coronavirus Outbreak Sets Back China's Biggest Political Assembly * Chinese Stocks Recover From Coronavirus-Driven Selloff * South Korea Tracks, Publishes Patients' Travels * Handshake or Elbow Bump? With Coronavirus, It's Not Business as Usual * China Defends Coronavirus Measures Chester Tay in Kuala Lumpur contributed to this article. Write to Feliz Solomon at feliz.solomon@wsj.com and Niharika Mandhana at niharika.mandhana@wsj.com Credit: By Feliz Solomon and Niharika Mandhana 
China plans to postpone an annual political conclave originally scheduled for early March, setting back a showpiece event for demonstrating Communist Party authority as officials scramble to contain a coronavirus outbreak that has shaken confidence in President Xi Jinping's rule. State media said Monday that senior officials at China's national legislature and a related government-advisory body have proposed delaying their annual meetings in Beijing, which would have drawn some 5,000 delegates from across the country for a roughly two-week gathering. Tracking the Coronavirus * 14 Americans repatriated to the U.S. from the Diamond Princess cruise ship currently docked in Japan tested positive for the virus. * In Taiwan, health authorities Sunday reported the island's first death from the coronavirus. * Officials in Shanghai began barring passengers without masks from taking the city's buses or taxis. Known locally as the "Two Sessions," the meetings are largely set pieces of political theater, where the Communist Party elite projects an air of national unity and outlines its policy priorities for the coming year. This year, uncertainty has loomed over the meetings as the outbreak of the virus , which causes a respiratory disease called Covid-19, sickened more than 70,000 people and claimed more than 1,770 lives. Mr. Xi has declared a "people's war" against the disease, calling on officials and ordinary citizens to spare no effort in containing the epidemic. Top officials at the National People's Congress, China's legislature, believe postponing their annual session is necessary for ensuring that the proper focus is kept on fighting the epidemic and safeguarding public health and safety, according to Zang Tiewei, a spokesman for the legislature's legal-affairs committee. Many congressional deputies are regional and local officials who play important front-line roles in China's efforts to contain the epidemic, Mr. Zang said in remarks carried by the official Xinhua News Agency. The delay would mark the first time China hasn't started the annual sessions of its national legislature and advisory body in the first week of March since 1997. Postponing the meetings would help Mr. Xi avoid potential criticism from attendees about the Communist Party's handling of the epidemic, according to China politics watchers. As public debate simmers over perceived government missteps during the early stages of the outbreak, "delegates may raise awkward questions about responsibility and accountability," said Zhang Lifan, an independent historian in Beijing. Delaying the meetings would buy time for Mr. Xi to unify China's political elite around a common message on the crisis and its fallout, while reducing the risk of the disease spreading among delegates and reaching the innermost circles of power, Mr. Zhang said. The two sessions have in the past allowed delegates?봠omprising officials, businesspeople and other political notables?봳o debate policy and, to some extent, vent critical views. But as Mr. Xi ramped up efforts to squelch dissent, recent editions have been reduced to little more than displays of loyalty to the Chinese leader and his agenda. For instance, two years ago, Mr. Xi used the congressional meeting to scrap term limits on his presidency , eliminating a check against lifelong rule and firmly establishing himself as China's most powerful ruler since Mao Zedong, amid virtually unanimous praise from delegates. Mr. Xi's leadership has since come under fire from some within China's political and business elite, who have accused him of concentrating too much power in his hands and mishandling a slowdown in the world's second-largest economy, a bruising trade war with the U.S. and anti-Beijing protests in the semiautonomous city of Hong Kong. The Covid-19 outbreak, which emerged in the central Chinese city of Wuhan late last year, has fueled more discontent. Many ordinary Chinese feel directly threatened by the outbreak, and some have questioned why Mr. Xi has been largely absent from the front lines of the "people's war" he says he is leading. Mr. Xi sent his titular No. 2, Premier Li Keqiang, to visit Wuhan in late January. In an apparent response to such criticism, Mr. Xi has sought to emphasize his personal role in directing the government response. Last week, Mr. Xi visited a Beijing hospital treating infected patients and a local disease-control office, after weeks of remaining largely out of public view. Over the weekend, state media took the unusual step of publishing remarks that Mr. Xi made at a Feb. 3 meeting of the Communist Party's top leadership, where he said he had issued instructions on the government's response to the epidemic in early January?봭early two weeks before he first spoke publicly about the outbreak and while local officials in Wuhan were still playing down its severity. It isn't clear when the sessions of the National People's Congress and the advisory body will be convened. The planned rescheduling comes amid widespread uncertainty around China when school classes and businesses can be expected to resume normal operations. Mr. Zang, the legislative official, said delays to the annual congressional session require approval from senior lawmakers, who state media said would convene next week to discuss the proposed postponement, as well as to review proposed legislation to tighten restrictions on the trade and consumption of wildlife ?봯ractices that scientists believe helped the new coronavirus leap from animals to humans. More * U.S. Passengers Depart Quarantined Cruise Ship * South Korea Tracks, Publishes Patients' Travels * Handshake or Elbow Bump? With Coronavirus, It's Not Business as Usual * China Defends Coronavirus Measures * Chinese Businesses Struggle to Survive * What We Know About the Coronavirus Top officials at the advisory body Monday also discussed delaying their annual meeting, state media said, without elaborating. China politics watchers say such deliberations are procedural formalities. Officials have said the Covid-19 outbreak appears to have stemmed from a Wuhan food market that offered carcasses and live specimens of dozens of wild animals?봣rom bamboo rats to ostriches, baby crocodiles and hedgehogs. Chinese authorities have continued stepping up epidemic controls. Officials in Shanghai began barring passengers without masks from taking the city's buses or taxis, in an attempt to stop the virus's spread in the country's main financial center. China's central bank on Monday cut a key interest rate in another move to support the ailing economy. In Macau, a semiautonomous Chinese city that is the world's biggest casino market, authorities said they would reopen its casinos for business on Thursday, after shutting them down earlier this month amid coronavirus concerns. The city said it is working with casino companies to prepare for reopening, according to a government statement. It said everyone will be required to take their temperature and wear a mask before entering a casino. And in Taiwan, health authorities Sunday reported the self-ruled island's first death from the coronavirus. Joyu Wang contributed to this article. Write to Chun Han Wong at chunhan.wong@wsj.com Credit: By Chun Han Wong 
Figuring out what the economic impact of the coronavirus outbreak will be is both a necessary and, at the moment, potentially futile exercise. Necessary, because policy makers, businesses, investors and people living their day-to-day lives need some baseline of what to expect. Otherwise, they risk, on the one hand, falling into a dangerous complacency or, on the other, an overreaction that causes problems of its own. Potentially futile because nobody knows what the eventual extent of the outbreak will be. Taking that uncertainty and layering on the uncertainty inherent in economic estimates yields something of a mess. Sure enough, estimates of the outbreak's economic impact vary greatly. J.P. Morgan economists initially estimated it would reduce annualized global gross domestic product growth by 0.3 percentage points in the first quarter, but now reckon the effect will be larger. UBS economists expect it will knock 2.5 percentage points off global growth. But while economists can't yet confidently estimate what the actual economic hit will be, they do know from experience how outbreaks feed into the economy and what to watch. For starters, it is important to understand that the costs of caring for the ill, while potentially substantial, will likely account for only a fraction of any economic hit. Rather, it is the behavior healthy people undertake to avoid becoming infected?봠urtailing travel, for example, or forgoing shopping?봳hat has the biggest impact, says economist Olga Jonas. A senior fellow at the Harvard Global Health Institute, she had coordinated the World Bank's program to reduce avian and pandemic influenza threats. Business and government responses matter, too. If companies close their offices, or governments quarantine a large number of people, not only is consumer demand curtailed, but production, too. As a result, infection and mortality counts can be inadequate gauges of economic impact. A 2015 outbreak of Middle East respiratory syndrome, or MERS, in South Korea infected 186 people. However, the avoidance response was so strong that the economic cost came to $8.2 billion, according to Korea Economic Research Institute estimates. Estimates of the total economic impact of the 2003 outbreak of severe acute respiratory syndrome, or SARS, in Asia are at least five times as high. On a per-case basis the cost was only a tenth as much. So watching avoidance behavior is a good check on how much economic damage an outbreak will cause. SARS, for example, had a stark effect on tourism, with international tourism arrivals in the East Asia and Pacific region falling by 10% in 2003 from 2002. With airlines suspending flight service to China, and nerves frayed among many travelers elsewhere, the coronavirus impact may be worse. Retail activity in China, where retailers such as Ralph Lauren and Adidas have temporarily closed many of their stores, will give another reading. China's greatly increased economic clout since the SARS outbreak will magnify these avoidance effects. SHARE YOUR THOUGHTS How long do you think the coronavirus' effect on the markets will reverberate? Join the conversation below. Next, watching for supply disruptions that might come about as the result of stalled production in China's Hubei province and elsewhere will be important. The good news, for now, is that Chinese factory output is always slow around the Lunar New Year, so companies with supply chains that extend into China have been relatively unaffected. The danger is that, the longer shutdowns persist, the more the supply of essential manufacturing components will become depleted, with severe spillover effects. The 2011 earthquake and tsunami in Japan provides an object lesson: It shut down a plant that made a significant portion of the world's automotive microcontrollers. Global vehicle production buckled as a result. Finally, the extent to which coronavirus and fears of contagion show up outside of China will be important to monitor. If people outside China start engaging in avoidance behavior, the economic damage will get far worse. Related * Wuhan Coronavirus Hospitals Turn Away All but Most Severe Cases * Coronavirus Threatens a Popular Crude Trade * Stocks Rally to Records as Investors' Coronavirus Concerns Ease * Oil Prices Rebound After Taking Brunt of Coronavirus Hit * China's Coronavirus Outbreak Prompts Patients to Scramble for Remedies * Coronavirus Hits Shipping as China Port Traffic Slides * U.S. Sets Second Evacuation of Americans From China Write to Justin Lahart at justin.lahart@wsj.com Credit: By Justin Lahart 
Macau planned to shut its casinos , and a technology hub near Shanghai unveiled severe restrictions on residents' movements, the latest in a series of extreme measures that governments have taken to combat the fast-spreading new virus . The number of confirmed cases of the coronavirus rose above 24,000 by the end of Tuesday, and Hong Kong reported its first death from the virus, which has killed at least 492, all but two of them in mainland China. Japan said Wednesday that 10 people on a cruise ship with about 3,700 passengers and crew aboard tested positive for the virus, and the health minister said everyone is likely to be kept on the ship for two weeks. The Diamond Princess has been quarantined since Monday night in Yokohama, a port city just south of Tokyo, after an 80-year-old man from Hong Kong who had been on the ship tested positive for the virus. The man disembarked in Hong Kong and is no longer on the ship. Belgium reported its first confirmed case, one of the nine Belgian nationals repatriated on Sunday from Wuhan, Health Minister Maggie De Block said on Tuesday at a press conference. The patient had no symptoms and was being quarantined in a hospital. Gambling center Macau, whose casinos racked up revenue roughly six times that of the Las Vegas Strip last year, is closing casinos for 15 days because of the coronavirus, Chief Executive Ho Iat-seng said Tuesday. Two local residents confirmed to have the virus Tuesday worked for casinos, health authorities said. The city had 10 cases as of Tuesday afternoon. The Latest on the Coronavirus * Confirmed cases topped 20,000. * The death toll is at least 425. * The U.S. is preparing another evacuation of Americans from central China. * Macau is closing its casinos . The Chinese special territory had previously restricted only entry to the casinos by people who had been to China's Hubei province, of which Wuhan is the capital. In China, a member of the National Health Commission's group to study the virus acknowledged in an interview with state broadcaster China Central television that resources in Wuhan weren't adequate to handle the high number of cases there. Jiang Rongmen said that was part of the reason there is a higher death rate in the city. The death rate from the virus is 4.9% in the city but 2.1% nationwide, according to the health commission. Another official with the health commission sought to offer reassurance at a press conference on Tuesday. Most infected patients have only mild symptoms, Jiao Yahui said. Still, the list of local governments restricting movement also grew. Hangzhou, home to tech giant Alibaba Group Holding Ltd. and the world's No. 1 maker of surveillance cameras, Hangzhou Hikvision Digital Technology, said it was closing all public places other than markets and pharmacies. It also joined other cities in allowing each household to send out only one person every two days for basic necessities, according to a government notice published Tuesday. Hangzhou has more than 100 confirmed cases of the virus. The city of about 10 million people is a popular tourist destination about two hours' drive from Shanghai and the capital of Zhejiang province. Wenzhou, about 200 miles south in the same province, had previously imposed similar movement restrictions. Several other cities across China?봧ncluding Harbin, more than 1,500 miles north of Wuhan, with 63 confirmed cases??introduced similar controls. Nike Inc. on Tuesday said it had closed about half of its stores in China, joining other retailers in responding to the outbreak. Hong Kong, a special territory that neighbors Macau, recorded its first death from the coronavirus, a 39-year-old man who had been to the central city of Wuhan in January. It was the second coronavirus death outside mainland China, following the death in the Philippines of a 44-year-old man from Wuhan on Saturday. Hong Kong Chief Executive Carrie Lam has faced calls from some politicians and medical professionals in the city to fully close the border with the mainland. The city, which has 18 confirmed cases of the coronavirus, is set to shut some of its busiest checkpoints with mainland China late Tuesday night, tightening the border for the second time since the outbreak began. Singapore's Ministry of Health reported six new cases, four of them resulting from local human-to-human transmission, but said there was no evidence of sustained community transmission. The city state, among the first countries to impose travel restrictions on people from mainland China, has more than 20 confirmed cases. Meanwhile, the U.K. upgraded its travel warning, telling citizens who were in China to leave if they were able. Previously, the advisory had applied only to Hubei. New Zealand issued a similar advisory. India said it had banned all Chinese citizens and others who had recently been in the virus-stricken country, from entering the country, and Taiwan said on Tuesday that it would refuse entry starting Friday to foreigners who had been to mainland China in the past two weeks. Chinese nationals largely aren't permitted by their own government to travel to the self-ruling island as tourists. Related * The Middle Seat: How to Handle Air Travel During Outbreak * Outbreak a Major Test of China's System, Says Xi Jinping * Officials Err on Side of Caution * Tracking the Coronavirus * The Economic Impact of Coronavirus, by the Numbers * Coronavirus Closes China to the World, Straining Global Economy Taiwan also imposed limits on purchasing face masks, which are in short supply in the region as people try to protect themselves against infection. South Korea was set to implement a law on Wednesday that would punish hoarding protective masks with up to two years in prison and a fine of more than $40,000. The Macau government's website had a page that updated every 15 minutes to track which stores had face masks in stock and how many. In South Korea, Hyundai Motor Co. said it would suspend production at all of its plants in Korea as its supply chain had been crippled by the outbreak in China. Suspension schedules would vary by line, as it sought suppliers outside China. Hyundai had to shut down one of its major assembly lines in the southern city of Ulsan on Tuesday amid a lack of auto components after its China-based parts suppliers suspended work. The car maker has seven major factories in South Korea, including five in Ulsan, and 10 plants overseas. SHARE YOUR THOUGHTS How do you think China has been handling the coronavirus outbreak? Is there something you would change or replicate in other countries? Join the conversation below. The United Arab Emirates followed several other Middle Eastern countries, including Qatar and Iran, in restricting travel to China. Flights, except those going to Beijing, will be suspended indefinitely starting Wednesday, the aviation authority there said on Monday. Chinese stock markets steadied Tuesday, after plunging on the first day of trading after the Lunar New Year holiday, despite liquidity injections from the central bank and vows to support financial institutions. The People's Bank of China injected a further $71.2 billion of liquidity through reverse repurchase agreements into the financial system Tuesday, adding to the $171 billion injected Monday. The benchmark Shanghai Composite Index closed up 1.3% Tuesday, one day after falling 7.7% and notching its steepest one-day decline since August 2015. According to the state-run People's Daily newspaper, China has spent roughly $6.7 billion on epidemic prevention, with the majority going to patient treatment and subsidies for medical workers. Health News in Your Inbox Get a curated weekly look at features, columns and headlines on personal health and the health industry. Sign up. Following the opening of a newly built hospital in Wuhan on Monday, several other cities have begun construction of hospitals designated for coronavirus patients. They include Guangzhou and Shenzhen in the southern province of Guangdong, which has the second-highest number of confirmed cases in China, with 725. State media reported that Wuhan is setting up field hospitals inside a sports stadium and two exhibition halls. The transformation is expected to be finished as early as Tuesday night. The three hospitals will have a total of 3,400 beds for patients with mild symptoms, according to Xinhua News Agency. Joyu Wang, Grace Zhu, Yin Yijun, Jing Yang, Liyan Qi, Wenxin Fan, Miho Inada and Valentina Pop contributed to this article. Write to Stephanie Yang at stephanie.yang@wsj.com Credit: By Stephanie Yang 
The U.S. expanded screenings of passengers to 20 airports and other governments took steps to reduce exposure to travelers from China, as the head of the World Health Organization praised Beijing's handling of the outbreak of a new and dangerous coronavirus . The words of encouragement from WHO Director-General Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus in Beijing on Tuesday offered a public boost to a government response that has come under fire for a lack of transparency, but other developments illustrated continuing fears around the globe that Chinese authorities might not be doing enough to contain the fast-spreading virus. The number of confirmed cases and fatalities continued to rise, with China's National Health Commission announcing 26 more deaths, bringing the total count to 132. Confirmed infections leapt to around 6,000. Share Your Thoughts How would you evaluate Beijing's response to the coronavirus outbreak? Join the conversation below. Tibet reported its first suspected infection. The remote mountainous region was previously the only area of mainland China that hadn't reported evidence of the virus. The Chinese territory of Hong Kong said it would reduce travel links to the mainland, while Singapore said it would ban travelers from China's Hubei province from entering or transiting through the Southeast Asian city-state. The Philippines Bureau of Immigration suspended issuing visas upon arrival for Chinese nationals to discourage tour groups. The U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention has advised travelers to avoid all nonessential trips to China and issued a Level 3 warning for the country, citing the virus's rapid spread and the lockdown of cities including Wuhan. For Wuhan's home province of Hubei, the U.S. State Department issued its highest Level 4 alert?봳he same used for North Korea, Iran and Venezuela. The department evacuated staff from its consulate in Wuhan, as well as a limited number of U.S. citizens, via a charter flight bound for Ontario, Calif., on Tuesday. The U.K. and New Zealand followed the U.S. in advising their citizens against nonessential travel. France recommend a suspension of all travel to Hubei and announced plans to evacuate its citizens from Wuhan. Some global companies are adjusting operations in China. Starbucks Corp. said it had temporarily closed more than half its stores in the country due to the outbreak. Apple Inc. has limited business travel to the country, closed a China retail store and limited store operating hours there. Other chains including McDonald's Corp. and Yum China Holdings Inc. have closed stores. Facebook Inc. restricted all nonessential employee travel to China and is asking those who have recently been there to work from home for a period, according to a person familiar with the situation. Office-space startup We Co.'s WeWork shut down 52 locations in eastern China until Feb. 9, in accordance with government demands. United Airlines Holdings Inc. on Tuesday became the first U.S. carrier to cancel flights due to the coronavirus?봲uspending 24 round trip-flights between the U.S. and China starting Feb. 1. Air France-KLM said it canceled flights to the city of Wuhan, the center of the outbreak. The airline also is offering rebooking and cancellation at no extra charge to and from China. British Airways and Deutsche Lufthansa AG are offering similar rebooking policies. Meanwhile, health authorities in Germany and in Sri Lanka announced their first confirmed coronavirus cases, and Japan's health minister confirmed two more cases Tuesday, including what was likely the country's first human-to-human transmission. That case involved a tour-bus driver who fell sick after chauffeuring two groups from Wuhan, the center of the outbreak, this month. Taiwan's Health Ministry reported its eighth case, a man who was infected by a family member who worked in mainland China. In Russia, tour operators suspended group tours from China and three eastern provinces that border with China halted road traffic from China into the country, although they continue to admit Chinese visitors arriving by plane and train, according to local authorities. All Chinese arrivals at the border points in these provinces are being checked for fever. Russia's eastern border is one of the main entry points for Chinese traders while some areas are also a popular destination for Chinese tourists. In Beijing, Dr. Tedros, as he is known, expressed confidence in China's approach to controlling the epidemic at a meeting with Chinese Foreign Minister Wang Yi and called for people to remain calm, according to a readout by China's Ministry of Foreign Affairs. Dr. Tedros offered similar praise in a meeting later in the day with Chinese President Xi Jinping, state media reported. The WHO said in a statement Tuesday that it had identified three new infection cases outside China without the onset of any symptoms. Another 14 had developed symptoms after leaving China. One involved a human-to-human transmission among family members in Vietnam. The WHO has so far declined to declare the outbreak a global public-health emergency, citing a limited number of cases abroad and efforts under way to bring it under control. South Korea's Foreign Ministry also issued an alert urging "restraint"?봳he country's second-highest level of caution?봣or travel to China and recommended that citizens leave Hubei. The European Union is sending two planes to repatriate EU citizens from the Wuhan area to Europe, EU Commissioner for Crisis Management Janez Lenar훾i훾 said Tuesday. The first plane is scheduled to leave France for China on Wednesday morning and the second later in the week. The EU said roughly 250 French citizens would take the first plane and more than 100 EU citizens from other countries would take the second. Additional assistance may follow, the EU said. Hong Kong Chief Executive Carrie Lam said the specially-governed Chinese territory would close some border-crossing points and reduce travel links to mainland China, including shutting two railways, and suspending cross-border ferries and tour buses in an attempt to prevent more infections. Flights from the mainland to the Chinese territory would be reduced by half, she said, and inspections at border checkpoints to detect symptoms of the virus would increase. Chinese immigration authorities said they would temporarily stop issuing permits for mainland residents to travel to Hong Kong. Mrs. Lam urged Hong Kong residents on the mainland to return to the city immediately and stay home for 14 days to prevent spreading the virus. Around China, governments and private companies continued to tighten restrictions on travelers who could be at risk of infection. On Monday, a China Southern Airlines Co. flight from Nagoya, Japan, to Shanghai was delayed for more than five hours after a group of passengers refused to board with tourists who had come from Wuhan. When the plane finally departed, it carried 19 passengers who had recently been to Hubei, the province home to Wuhan, Shanghai's top health official said Tuesday. All 19 were seated separately and placed in quarantine for observation upon arrival, and none showed signs of fever, the official said. Nearly 60 high-speed trains connecting Beijing with the port city of Tianjin will be suspended through Feb. 26, the Beijing Railway Bureau said on its official social-media account. Trains from the capital to several other cities, including Shanghai and the southwestern city of Kunming, will also be suspended. The city of Zhengzhou, in central China's Henan province, started construction on a 300-bed hospital for coronavirus patients that was scheduled to be completed by Feb. 5. Two similar hospitals are already under construction in Wuhan. Local governments intensified efforts to enlist the public's help in spotting potential carriers of the virus. In a post on an official social-media account, Zhending county in northern China's Hebei province offered a reward of 1000 yuan ($144) to anyone who reported someone who had returned home from Wuhan without notifying authorities. In the latest edition of its coronavirus disease treatment manual, China's cabinet-level National Health Commission said it believes the main transmission channel for the virus is by droplets in the respiratory system, adding that the coronavirus can also be transmitted by contact. People of all ages are susceptible, including children, it added. Wenxin Fan, Liza Lin, Kersten Zhang, Yin Yijun, Raffaele Huang, Megumi Fujikawa and Ruth Bender contributed to this article. Related * U.S. Expands Airport Screening for Coronavirus * Virus Tests Market's Faith in Global Economy * Stocks Rise Amid Efforts to Contain Virus * Companies Try to Assess Financial Impact * Lunar New Year Visitors to Gambling Hub Macau Screened for Coronavirus * China Strains to Stamp Out Coronavirus Criticisms at Home * What to Know About the Coronavirus Write to Stephanie Yang at stephanie.yang@wsj.com Credit: By Stephanie Yang 
The head of the World Health Organization praised China's handling of the outbreak of a new and dangerous coronavirus during a visit to Beijing, as the U.S. expanded screenings of passengers to 20 airports and other governments took steps to reduce exposure to travelers from China. The words of encouragement from WHO Director-General Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus offered a public boost to a government response that has come under fire for a lack of transparency, but other developments illustrated continuing fears around the globe that Chinese authorities may not be doing enough to contain the fast-spreading virus. China reported its biggest one-day jump in confirmed cases and fatalities, with China's National Health Commission announcing 26 more deaths, bringing the count to 106, and a near-doubling in confirmed infections to 4,515 cases. Share Your Thoughts How would you evaluate Beijing's response to the coronavirus outbreak? Join the conversation below. The Chinese territory of Hong Kong said it would reduce travel links to the mainland, while Singapore said it would ban travelers from China's Hubei province from entering or transiting through the Southeast Asian city-state. The Philippines Bureau of Immigration suspended issuing visas upon arrival for Chinese nationals to discourage tour groups. The U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention has advised travelers to avoid all nonessential trips to China after issuing a Level 3 warning for the country, citing the virus's rapid spread and the lockdown of cities including Wuhan. For Wuhan's home province of Hubei, the U.S. State Department issued its highest Level 4 alert?봳he same used for North Korea, Iran and Venezuela. The department evacuated staff from its consulate in Wuhan, as well as a limited number of U.S. citizens, via a charter flight bound for Ontario, Calif. on Tuesday. Meanwhile, health authorities in Germany and in Sri Lanka announced their first confirmed coronavirus cases, and Japan's health minister confirmed two more cases Tuesday, including what was likely the country's first human-to-human transmission. That case involved a tour-bus driver who fell sick after chauffeuring two groups from Wuhan, the epicenter of the outbreak, earlier this month. Taiwan's Health Ministry reported its eighth case, a man who was infected by a family member who worked in mainland China. In Russia, tour operators suspended group tours from China and three eastern provinces that border with China halted road traffic from China into the country, although they continue to admit Chinese visitors arriving by plane and train, according to local authorities. All Chinese arrivals at the border points in these provinces are being checked for fever. Russia's eastern border is one of the main entry points for Chinese traders while some areas are also a popular destination for Chinese tourists. In Beijing, Dr. Tedros, as he is known, expressed confidence in China's approach to controlling the epidemic at a meeting with Chinese Foreign Minister Wang Yi and called for people to remain calm, according to a readout by China's Ministry of Foreign Affairs. Dr. Tedros offered similar praise in a meeting later in the day with Chinese President Xi Jinping, state media reported. The WHO said in a statement Tuesday that it had identified three new infection cases outside China without the onset of any symptoms. Another 14 had developed symptoms after leaving China. One involved a human-to-human transmission among family members in Vietnam. The WHO has so far declined to declare the outbreak a global public health emergency, citing a limited number of cases abroad and efforts under way to bring it under control. South Korea's Foreign Ministry also issued an alert urging "restraint"?봳he country's second-highest level of caution?봣or travel to China and recommended that citizens leave Hubei. The European Union is sending two planes to repatriate EU citizens from the Wuhan area to Europe, EU Commissioner for Crisis Management Janez Lenar훾i훾 said Tuesday. The first plane is scheduled to leave France for China on Wednesday morning and the second later in the week. The EU said roughly 250 French citizens would take the first plane and more than 100 EU citizens from other countries would take the second. Additional assistance may follow, the EU said. Hong Kong Chief Executive Carrie Lam said the specially-governed Chinese territory would close some border-crossing points and reduce travel links to mainland China, including shutting two railways, and suspending cross-border ferries and tour buses in an attempt to prevent more infections. Flights from the mainland to the Chinese territory would be reduced by half, she said, and inspections at border checkpoints to detect symptoms of the virus would increase. Chinese immigration authorities said they would temporarily stop issuing permits for mainland residents to travel to Hong Kong. Mrs. Lam urged Hong Kong residents on the mainland to return to the city immediately and stay home for 14 days to prevent spreading the virus. Around China, governments and private companies continued to tighten restrictions on travelers who could be at risk of infection. On Monday, a China Southern Airlines Co. flight from Nagoya, Japan, to Shanghai was delayed for more than five hours after a group of passengers refused to board with tourists who had come from Wuhan. When the plane finally departed, it carried 19 passengers who had recently been to Hubei, the province home to Wuhan, Shanghai's top health official said Tuesday. All 19 were seated separately and placed in quarantine for observation upon arrival, and none showed signs of fever, the official said. U.S. tech companies also moved to limit their exposure to the virus. Facebook Inc. restricted all nonessential employee travel to China and is asking those who have recently been there to work from home for a period, according to a person familiar with the situation. Office-space startup We Co.'s WeWork shut down 52 locations in eastern China until Feb. 9, in accordance with government demands. Nearly 60 high-speed trains connecting Beijing with the port city of Tianjin will be suspended through Feb. 26, the Beijing Railway Bureau said on its official social-media account. Trains from the capital to several other cities, including Shanghai and the southwestern city of Kunming, will also be suspended. The city of Zhengzhou, in central China's Henan province, started construction on a 300-bed hospital for coronavirus patients that was scheduled to be completed by Feb. 5. Two similar hospitals are already under construction in Wuhan. Local governments intensified efforts to enlist the public's help in spotting potential carriers of the virus. In a post on an official social-media account, Zhending county in northern China's Hebei province offered a reward of 1000 yuan ($144) to anyone who reported someone who had returned home from Wuhan without notifying authorities. In the latest edition of its coronavirus disease treatment manual, China's cabinet-level National Health Commission said it believes the main transmission channel for the virus is by droplets in the respiratory system, adding that the coronavirus can also be transmitted by contact. People of all ages are susceptible, including children, it added. Wenxin Fan, Liza Lin, Kersten Zhang, Yin Yijun, Raffaele Huang, Megumi Fujikawa and Ruth Bender contributed to this article. Related * U.S. Expands Airport Screening for Coronavirus * Virus Tests Market's Faith in Global Economy * Stocks Rise Amid Efforts to Contain Virus * Companies Try to Assess Financial Impact * Lunar New Year Visitors to Gambling Hub Macau Screened for Coronavirus * China Strains to Stamp Out Coronavirus Criticisms at Home * What to Know About the Coronavirus Write to Stephanie Yang at stephanie.yang@wsj.com Credit: By Stephanie Yang 
BEIJING??Two more Chinese cities were put on lockdown by the government on Thursday, as authorities in the Chinese gambling center of Macau said they were weighing closures of its casinos, expanding an unprecedented experiment to try to contain a fast-spreading virus that has killed 18 people and infected more than 600. The World Health Organization on Thursday declined to declare the outbreak a global public health emergency, citing a limited number of cases abroad and efforts under way to bring it under control. On Thursday, authorities in Huanggang?봞 Chinese city of 7.5 million people?봲aid they wouldn't let long-distance trains and buses run from the urban center and would shut its public transportation system in the lockdown zone, effective midnight Friday local time. Ezhou, another neighboring city with just over a million residents, said it would enact similar restrictions, bringing the total number of cities with travel restrictions to three. Huanggang is about 35 miles east of Wuhan, a city of 11 million and a major hub for travel, where the new pneumonia-causing coronavirus originated. Wuhan just hours earlier halted outbound trains and flights and shut down its public-transportation system. The Huanggang local government also said movie theaters, internet cafes and other entertainment and cultural facilities in the city center would temporarily halt operations and a central market would be shut down for an indefinite period. Starting Thursday, the local government said it would inspect every person and car entering and exiting the urban center. SHARE YOUR THOUGHTS How do you think Chinese cities are handling the spread of the coronavirus? Do you agree with the lockdown measures? Join the conversation below. Besides Wuhan, Huangguang and Ezhou, which collectively hold more than 20 million people, five other cities in the province of Hubei, of which Wuhan is the capital, enacted travel restrictions late Thursday. Separately, the chief executive of Macau, the Chinese special administrative region that is the world's biggest gambling market, said Thursday he was considering closing all of the territory's 40-some casinos, following the confirmation of a second coronavirus infection case there, government-run broadcaster Radio Television Hong Kong reported. The Hong Kong government confirmed its first two cases of the new coronavirus Thursday evening and said some people who had been in close contact with them were quarantined at one of the centers the government has set up at campsites. One close contact was suspected of being infected, the government said. Singapore's Ministry of Health also confirmed its first case of the coronavirus Thursday evening. A 66-year-old Chinese tourist from Wuhan became the city-state's first case of the virus. the tourist developed a sore throat on the flight to Singapore, then a fever and cough, the ministry said in a statement. One of his travel companions, a 37-year-old male, is suspected to carry the virus, the ministry added. The WHO, in explaining its decision not to declare a global public health emergency, said it was still too early for such a move, although the emergency committee that studied the outbreak was divided on the matter, according to the committee chairman, Didier Houssin. WHO Director-General Tedros Adhamom Ghebreyesus said he would reconvene the committee if the situation changes?봢ven if that happens in the next couple of days. "This is an emergency in China, but it has not yet become a global health emergency," he said. "It may yet become one." By imposing blanket restrictions on people's movement, Chinese authorities are doubling down on a high-stakes strategy that experts say is an untested approach to dealing with infectious diseases. "To my knowledge, trying to contain a city of 11 million people is new to science. It has not been tried before as a public-health measure, so we cannot at this stage say it will or will not work," Gauden Galea, the WHO's country representative for China, said in an interview Thursday with the Associated Press, referring to the Wuhan lockdown. Mr. Galea added that while such a radical measure "obviously has social and economic impacts that are considerable," it also "demonstrates a very strong public health commitment and a willingness to take dramatic action." Related Stories * Relief and Panic in the Rush to Catch Last Trains From Wuhan * China Locks Down City at Center of Outbreak * Heard on the Street: Wuhan Coronavirus Could Hit China's Economy Harder Than SARS * What We Know About the Coronavirus Tom Inglesby, an expert on epidemics who is director of the Center for Health Security at the Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health, said "large-scale quarantine efforts in the past have not been successful in changing the outcome of disease outbreaks." Chinese authorities have suggested the coronavirus is spreading between people primarily through coughing, kissing or contact with saliva. It emerged from a seafood and livestock market in Wuhan and has spread across China and into the U.S ., Japan, South Korea and Thailand. On Thursday, Chinese health authorities said the coronavirus had reached the northeastern and northwestern corners of China, including the provinces of Heilongjiang, which borders Russia, and Xinjiang, the majority Muslim region that borders Kazakhstan. Jilin province, in the country's northeast, and Jiangsu province, just north of Shanghai, also reported their first cases. The total confirmed cases in China rose to more than 600, according to state media. The decision to ban people from leaving or entering Wuhan rippled across China and beyond its borders, sparking confusion and elevating fears about a growing contagion ahead of the Lunar New Year, the busiest travel period of the year in China and many other parts of Asia. In Tokyo and Seoul, face masks and hand sanitizer disappeared from some store shelves, while across China, seven movie openings were scrapped as film studios and theaters worried about moviegoers fearful of setting foot outside. In Wuhan, a boxing qualifier for this year's Olympic Games in Tokyo slated to take place starting Feb. 3 was canceled by the local organizing committee. Primary and secondary schools in Hubei have postponed reopening after Lunar New Year to an undetermined date, according to the Communist Party newspaper People's Daily. In Beijing, major events over the holiday were canceled. Japan and the U.S. each raised their alert levels for travel to Wuhan. Tokyo advised its citizens not to travel to the city unless necessary, while Washington recommended exercising caution but stopped short of advising travelers to avoid the city. In Wuhan, local authorities urged calm, calling on citizens not to panic or hoard supplies. "With the close care of General Secretary Xi Jinping," a government notice read, "Wuhan has sufficient reserves and smooth supplies of commodities, food and medical protection products." Operators from the transportation-service hotline in Wuhan said more than 8,000 buses in the city and all nine subway lines had stopped running as of 10 a.m. Thursday. Many entrances to the highway from the Wuhan area were closed, while vehicles could still get off the highway and enter the city, according to the local highway information service early Thursday. Meanwhile, a few flights continued to depart Wuhan's Tianhe International Airport even after the 10 a.m. lockdown began, according to the flight-tracking site FlightAware. Most of the flights were transiting through Wuhan from other cities, though some direct flights?봧ncluding to Beijing and Paris?봶ere among those allowed to take off after the lockdown deadline. Within Wuhan's city limits, people expressed frustrations online over a lack of transportation services and dwindling resources at hospitals. The Wuhan Health Commission acknowledged long lines outside fever clinics and a shortage of hospital beds. It said the city was designating more hospitals as centers for fever patients. The central government is shipping 10,000 sets of protective clothing and 50,000 sets of gloves to Wuhan from its reserve medical supplies, according to the Ministry of Industry and Information, which posted the information through its account on the Twitter-like Weibo service. The Finance Ministry said late Thursday that it is giving out 1 billion yuan ($144 million) in emergency subsidies to Hubei province to fight the coronavirus. Lekai Liu, Yin Yijun, Bingyan Wang, Betsy McKay and Liza Lin contributed to this article. Write to Stephanie Yang at stephanie.yang@wsj.com and Yoko Kubota at yoko.kubota@wsj.com The What's News Briefing In Your Inbox Get What's News, a daily digest of the day's most important news to watch, delivered to your inbox. Sign up. Credit: By Stephanie Yang and Yoko Kubota 
A man in Washington state has been diagnosed with a deadly strain of coronavirus, the first case to be confirmed in the U.S. in an outbreak that has sickened hundreds of people in Asia, federal and state health officials said Tuesday. The man, who is in his 30s and is a U.S. resident, recently traveled to Wuhan, China, the city where the outbreak is believed to have started last month, according to the federal Centers for Disease Control and Prevention as well as Washington state and local health authorities. The man arrived back in the U.S. on Jan. 15. He is the first patient to be diagnosed with the new coronavirus outside of Asia, where more than 300 people have been sickened and at least six have died. While most of the confirmed illnesses occurred in people in Wuhan, cases have been reported in other cities in China, as well as Thailand, Japan, South Korea and Taiwan. The CDC said last week that it was expecting cases in the U.S., and now says it expects more. "We do expect additional cases in the United States and globally," said Nancy Messonnier, director of the CDC's National Center for Immunization and Respiratory Diseases. An emergency committee for the World Health Organization is scheduled to meet Wednesday to determine whether to declare the outbreak a public-health emergency of international concern, a designation that would help mobilize resources to prevent the virus's spread around the globe. Aware of the outbreak in Wuhan, the Washington man sought medical care when he developed symptoms a day after arriving home to Snohomish County, north of Seattle, the health officials said. He is in good condition and has been hospitalized at the Providence Regional Medical Center Everett out of an abundance of caution, the officials said. A hospital spokesman said that the patient is being monitored in a special isolation unit "for at least the next 48 hours." The hospital is contacting health workers and other patients who may have had contact with him, so they can be monitored for symptoms, the spokesman said. "The man who tested positive acted quickly to seek treatment," said John Wiesman, Washington State Secretary of Health. "We believe the risk to the public is low." The fact that local health officials and a regional hospital in the Pacific Northwest have suddenly been confronted with a virus that scientists discovered just a few weeks ago thousands of miles away in central China shows how rapidly diseases can spread around the world. The risk is even greater when a new virus emerges in a busy transport hub like Wuhan, which is connected through direct and connecting flights to many other major cities around the globe. Share Your Thoughts How concerned are you about the Wuhan coronavirus? Join the conversation below. The CDC said Tuesday that it will expand screening of airline passengers for symptoms of the new virus to two more airports: Chicago O'Hare International Airport and Hartsfield-Jackson Atlanta International Airport. All passengers from Wuhan will now be funneled through five airports where screening is taking place, said Martin Cetron, director of the Division of Global Migration and Quarantine at the CDC. The CDC began screening at the end of last week at three airports that receive the majority of travelers from Wuhan: San Francisco International Airport, Los Angeles International Airport and New York's John F. Kennedy International Airport. More than 1,200 passengers have been screened, but none have been referred to a hospital, said Dr. Messonnier. The Washington state man returned to the U.S. before screening began. It isn't clear how he was infected, deepening a mystery as to how the virus is transmitted and how easily it spreads from one person to another. He didn't visit any animal or seafood markets in Wuhan, which were suspected sites for transmission, said Chris Spitters, health officer for the Snohomish Health District. Nor did the man know anyone who was ill. It is also unclear how easily the virus is spreading from one human to another, the CDC said Tuesday. Coronaviruses circulate primarily in animals such as bats and pigs, and Chinese authorities initially believed that patients had been infected during contact with animals at a market. But as more cases emerged in people who said they hadn't visited the market, they revised their stance. Chinese authorities acknowledged on Monday that the virus is spreading among humans. The CDC is working with authorities in China and other experts globally to learn more about the virus, and scientists are working on the development of treatments, Dr. Messonnier said. "There is new information hour by hour, day by day that we are tracking and following closely," she said. Experts believe the current coronavirus to be much less deadly than severe acute respiratory syndrome, or SARS, a different coronavirus strain that killed hundreds of people around the world in late 2002 and early 2003 after it first appeared in southern China. Even so, China's cabinet-level National Health Commission said Monday it would treat the new coronavirus as a Class A infectious disease, meaning it would be handled similarly to cholera, the plague and to how it handled the SARS outbreak Wuhan will take more stringent measures to prevent transmission of the disease, including canceling what it considers unnecessary large gatherings, setting up a prevention and control center, and strengthening protection of medical staff, China's state-run Xinhua News Agency said Tuesday. "We recommend outsiders not come to Wuhan and also that Wuhan residents not leave Wuhan without a special reason," Zhou Xianwang, the city's mayor, told CCTV on Tuesday. North Korea, which borders northeastern China, has stopped allowing entry for tourists as a preventive measure, according to two China-based travel agencies that arrange tours to the country. In Australia, the country's chief medical officer, Brendan Murphy, told reporters that three direct flights each week between Wuhan and Sydney would be met by officials who would inquire about sick passengers. Philippine health authorities, meanwhile, said they are testing which type of coronavirus a 5-year-old who traveled from Wuhan this month had contracted. Write to Betsy McKay at betsy.mckay@wsj.com and Chao Deng at Chao.Deng@wsj.com Credit: By Betsy McKay and Chao Deng 
BEIJING -- A leading Chinese health official said that a newly identified virus originating in central China has spread between humans, heightening health officials' concerns that it could be transmitted even more quickly as the number of confirmed cases tripled on Monday. The prospect of human-to-human transmission of the coronavirus, which causes a potentially deadly pneumonia that already has claimed four lives, comes as tens of millions of Chinese citizens crisscross the country this week for the annual Lunar New Year holiday. The virus has already spread outside China, and appeared in South Korea for the first time, officials said Monday. The World Health Organization said that Director General Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus plans to convene an emergency committee Wednesday to determine whether to declare the outbreak a public-health emergency of international concern. The designation helps the WHO mobilize resources to prevent and combat the spread to other countries. The WHO said Monday the spread of the disease was likely the product of "some limited human-to-human transmission occurring between close contacts." The outbreak is believed to have started in the central Chinese city of Wuhan, where a number of infected patients were exposed to a large seafood and livestock wholesale market. Coronaviruses most commonly infect mammals, including pigs and cats, but can jump from animals to humans. They can also then jump from one human to another. Some patients have said they didn't visit the market and only came into contact with people in Wuhan. The Wuhan market is close to the city's main railway station, an important travel hub in the center of the country. Zhong Nanshan, one of China's most highly regarded epidemiology experts who is leading an expert committee on the outbreak for China's cabinet-level National Health Commission, urged heightened vigilance in a live interview on state broadcaster China Central Television Monday, citing the risk of human-to-human transmission. "Right now is the time when we should increase alert," said Dr. Zhong, who rose to national prominence nearly two decades ago as an authoritative voice during China's fight against severe acute respiratory syndrome, or SARS. In that outbreak, a similar coronavirus killed 774 people after its emergence in southern China beginning in late 2002. The new warnings came as the number of confirmed cases of the new coronavirus more than tripled to 218, according to Chinese state media and health authorities, including in Beijing, Shanghai and the southern metropolis of Shenzhen. Fifteen medical staff involved in treating the new coronavirus have themselves been infected with the disease, authorities in Wuhan said. It is unclear whether these medical staff members were included in the reported patient figures. One reason for the rapid increase in reported cases is that a diagnostic test for the virus is now available. That means infections that would otherwise have gone unnoticed are being identified. U.S. health officials said last week that they expect more cases to be diagnosed in China and other countries as testing for the virus expands. Yang Gonghuan, the former deputy head of the Chinese Center for Disease Control and Prevention, said in a separate interview with the China Business Journal newspaper Monday that human-to-human transmission of the disease had occurred. The sudden increase in cases is likely to spark questions over the transparency of disclosures by Chinese health authorities. President Xi Jinping urged authorities earlier Monday to make efforts to prevent and control the spreading infection, according to the state-run Xinhua News Agency. Officials should "release outbreak information in a timely manner and deepen international cooperation," he said. China is working with other countries to prevent and control the outbreak, Chinese Foreign Ministry spokesman Geng Shuang said at a regular media briefing in Beijing on Monday. "We've formulated prevention and control plans, treated patients, monitored their close contacts, conducted epidemiological research and released information in a timely manner," he said. South Korean authorities said Monday that a 35-year-old Chinese woman who had flown into the country from Wuhan had contracted the coronavirus. The previous three patients who have been identified outside China -- two Chinese tourists in Thailand and a man from Japan -- had all traveled from the Wuhan area. In the U.S., where no cases have so far been detected, the federal Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and the Department of Homeland Security's Customs and Border Protection have begun screening people traveling from Wuhan for fevers, coughs or difficulty breathing. Health authorities in Wuhan, a densely populated city of 19 million people, said Monday that the number of patients infected with the new coronavirus jumped to 198, from 62 on Sunday. The statement said 35 of those cases were severe, while nine were critical. The fourth infected person to die was an 89-year-old man who suffered high blood pressure and diabetes, Wuhan authorities said. A third infected patient died over the weekend, authorities said without offering details. In the case of the two earlier fatalities, authorities previously said the men suffered from existing illnesses. On top of confirmed cases, suspected cases have sprung up in a number of Chinese provinces, including Shandong on the east coast, Sichuan in the interior and Yunnan and Guangxi on the southwestern border with Vietnam, according to CCTV Monday. Separately, five suspected cases were reported by health authorities in coastal Zhejiang province, just south of Shanghai on the country's east coast. Shanghai health authorities on Tuesday reported four suspected cases. The newly discovered coronavirus so far is significantly less deadly than SARS. However, it is in the same class of pathogens, and this outbreak is clearly larger than scientists and officials initially believed. Dr. Zhong, the Chinese epidemiologist, told CCTV on Monday that transmission from wild animals to humans was a "big possibility." His acknowledgment of human-to-human transmission was a break from earlier statements by Chinese authorities who rated the risk of human-to-human transmission as relatively low. Chinese health authorities are urging people to wear masks and to report quickly to a hospital if they have a fever. Dr. Zhong cited two cases in Guangdong where patients hadn't traveled to Wuhan but were in contact with family members returning from there. In many cases, patients did travel to Wuhan and showed symptoms of fever and fatigue. The Chinese patient in South Korea had flown from Wuhan and was quarantined by authorities before being transferred to a medical center, according to South Korea's Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. In Shanghai, two confirmed cases were patients who traveled from Wuhan, according to the city's health authorities. Beijing has five confirmed cases, according to state media; a district authority said that two patients returned from Wuhan. One of the confirmed cases in southern Guangdong province is 10 years old, according to local authorities. Most of the other infected patients identified by authorities were elderly. --- Betsy McKay, Xiao Xiao, Natasha Khan, Wenxin Fan and Eun-Young Jeong contributed to this article.  Credit: By Chao Deng and Jonathan Cheng 
BEIJING?봎ore people in China are staying closer to home during this week's Lunar New Year holiday as a newly identified virus and financial pressures push more to dial back travel plans. The movement of hundreds of millions of people across China and outside the country each year during the Spring Festival?봢ither to visit family or, increasingly, to take a vacation?봧s commonly described as the world's largest annual human migration. But some say they are reconsidering their plans amid growing concerns and broad domestic media coverage of the outbreak of the coronavirus, part of a class of pathogens that cause a range of respiratory illness. As the virus spreads nationwide, travelers worry about unwanted exposure as they crisscross the country in packed trains and planes. There has been human-to-human transmission of the virus, one of China's best-known epidemiology experts told a state broadcaster Monday. Before the outbreak, China's largest travel platform, Ctrip.com, a unit of Trip.com Group Ltd., estimated that Chinese would take roughly 450 million trips within China for the Lunar New Year between Jan. 24 and Jan. 30, an 8.4% increase from last year. But as economic growth slows in China, travel out of the country decelerated last year and will continue to slow, a UBS Securities survey of Chinese travelers in October found. While Chinese authorities aren't urging travelers to stay home because of the virus, the Shanghai Municipal Center for Disease Control and Prevention issued a statement Monday warning potentially vulnerable people to avoid crowded public places and wear a face mask to reduce their risk of exposure. The virus originated in Wuhan, a large city in central China, but authorities reported on Monday new confirmed and suspected cases in Beijing in the north, Shanghai in the east and in the southern province of Guangdong, which borders Hong Kong. As of Monday, 218 cases had been confirmed and three people had been killed by the virus, according to Chinese state media and health authorities. Lynn Lin, a 34-year-old health-care worker based in southern China, said she had planned to spend the long holiday in Beijing with her husband and 5-year-old son. But she canceled the trip at the last minute after learning that cases of the virus had reached the capital. "I cannot risk the safety of my whole family, especially the kid," Ms. Lin said. Ms. Lin said she and her husband had booked their tickets almost two months ago at a cost of 10,000 yuan ($1,456) and can't get a refund. They also had to forfeit another 1,200 yuan in hotel deposits. She recalled her experience when the deadly severe acute respiratory syndrome, or SARS, swept across China in late 2002 and early 2003. That viral respiratory illness, which was caused by another strain of coronavirus, spread world-wide within a few months and overlapped with the Spring Festival travel season, ultimately killing around 800 people, mostly in mainland China and Hong Kong. "I am afraid it could turn out to be another SARS, even though it is not as severe and fatal as SARS so far," Ms. Lin said. Beyond China's borders, the coronavirus has infected travelers in Japan, South Korea and Thailand?봳hree of the most popular destinations for Lunar New Year travelers. All of them had recently traveled through Wuhan. Airports in neighboring countries were expanding the body-temperature monitoring of arrivals. Travel destinations around the world rely increasingly on Chinese tourism dollars, particularly during the Lunar New Year. China's domestic economy, too, counts on the millions of Chinese who return to their hometowns or spend the annual holiday traveling to domestic tourist sites. China's economy grew 6.1% last year, the lowest level in nearly three decades , official data showed last week?봶eighing on consumer spending. UBS expects the year-over-year increase in Chinese outbound travel to have slowed to 12% in 2019 from 15% a year earlier, and then to decelerate to an average of 8% over this year and 2021. "It is very difficult for the Chinese tourism sector because of the Chinese economy," said Chen Xin, China tourism analyst at UBS Securities. "Most of the Chinese outbound travelers are preferring to stay in Asia." SHARE YOUR THOUGHTS How do you foster safe travel when facing a public health concern? Join the conversation below. Zhou Yongxiang, a 29-year-old manager at a Guangdong-based toy company, said he had planned to spend 10-12 days with his wife in Italy, France and Germany during the Lunar New Year holiday, but canceled this month. His factory has been feeling more economic pressure over the past year, he said, and the yuan has weakened against the euro, making his trip to Europe more costly. "We don't want to spend some 40,000 to 50,000 yuan just to throw ourselves into a crowd of tourists, five or six meters away from the tiny Mona Lisa and seeing nothing. It's just a waste of money," he said. Raffaele Huang contributed to this article. Write to Julie Wernau at Julie.Wernau@wsj.com Credit: By Julie Wernau 
SINGAPORE?봃or three days in January, 109 people from different countries gathered for a business meeting organized by a U.K.-based company at the Grand Hyatt Singapore, a luxury hotel in the heart of the city's main shopping area. They shook hands and ate meals together. Then they went home. Not long after, a Malaysian participant developed a cough and fever. Two men from South Korea fell sick. A 27-year-old Singaporean?봮ne of only 15 attendees who hadn't come from abroad?봱eported symptoms. All four tested positive for the new coronavirus this week, raising concerns about the spread of the illness from countries other than China. Singapore on Friday also confirmed three new cases of infected citizens who have no known links to previous cases and haven't recently traveled to China. Two of them visited Malaysia last month, though authorities said it isn't yet known where and how they caught the illness. These developments prompted the country to raise its alert level from yellow to orange Friday, which indicates the disease is severe and transmits easily but hasn't yet spread widely in Singapore. The wealthy city-state has reported 33 confirmed cases, one of the highest outside mainland China, where more than 30,000 people have been sickened . While many of the patients in Singapore are visitors from China, several cases confirmed this week were transmitted locally or from sources that haven't been identified, signaling a greater risk of the infection spreading. Many countries have banned travel to and from China in an effort to contain the virus, but worries are also growing of transmissions from other places. South Korea's Centers for Disease Control and Prevention on Thursday advised travelers to Southeast Asia to avoid crowded areas and monitor themselves for respiratory symptoms after their return. A Korean woman who visited Thailand in mid-January tested positive this week; authorities haven't said where she contracted the virus. Her 21-year-old daughter and one other relative were later confirmed to have been sickened as well. Authorities in at least four countries, including South Korea and Malaysia, are monitoring hundreds of people who either attended the business meeting at the Singapore hotel or came into close contact with those who attended. The event was organized by a company called Servomex, which supplies products and technology that analyzes gas to various industries and has operations around the world. A spokesman for the company said a "limited number" of its employees in different countries have been diagnosed with the coronavirus and are being treated. The company is working closely with all the relevant public health authorities, the spokesman said. A Singapore government official said Friday that U.K. authorities were in touch about another case linked to the meeting. The official didn't say if that person had traveled to Singapore or caught the infection from someone else who was present at the meeting. Some participants were from China's Hubei province, the epicenter of the outbreak , but Singapore authorities haven't said if they were sick, nor have they identified the source of the infection. The Malaysian participant's sister tested positive this week. Three other Singaporeans who were at the meeting and reported symptoms are being monitored. One of the South Korean men who later tested positive for the virus visited health facilities and restaurants after he showed symptoms and came into contact with 188 people, who are being closely monitored, authorities said. More cases could emerge. Out of 109 participants, 94 have left Singapore. The country's health ministry said it has alerted countries whose residents attended the meeting, though it hasn't disclosed the full list. Authorities first contacted the hotel's management this week, a spokesman for the hotel said. No employees have shown symptoms of the virus, and staff were following the government's directive only to wear face masks when sick, the spokesman said. Housekeeping staff undertook deep-cleaning measures in all 677 rooms and every shared space on the premises, the spokesman said. A hand-sanitizer dispenser is positioned on the welcome desk and bottles of the liquid are available throughout the building. Staff check the temperature of everyone arriving for an event, tagging them with an orange sticker to show they passed the test. Singaporean authorities haven't shared details with hotel management of how, where or when people were infected, according to the hotel's general manager, Willi Martin. One hotel employee said management was "keeping the whole thing very confidential." At a bistro next door, a bartender said the event has caused worry. "A lot of the hotel guests come here for our happy hour," he said, declining to be named. "We're very worried, of course, but we just do what we can to keep everything clean." Eun-Young Jeong in Seoul contributed to this article. Write to Niharika Mandhana at niharika.mandhana@wsj.com and Feliz Solomon at feliz.solomon@wsj.com Credit: By Niharika Mandhana and Feliz Solomon 
Airbus SE shut down a factory in China that accounts for almost 10% of the production of its most popular jet, as precautions taken to contain the coronavirus outbreak ricochet across global industries. Hyundai Motor Co. said this week it was idling all seven of its plants in South Korea because of a lack of parts from suppliers in China. It was the first big auto maker to shut down production outside of China because of supply-line bottlenecks resulting from widespread factory outages and strict limits on worker movements in the country. Tesla Inc., meanwhile, warned of delivery delays in China. Tao Lin, a vice president for the electric-car maker, posted on chat service Weibo on Tuesday that deliveries set for early February would be affected. Tesla's new factory in Shanghai has been closed due to the outbreak. Many multinational companies have suspended production , closed offices and shut retail outlets in China. In many cases, they have extended shutdowns scheduled for the Lunar New Year. To slow the spread of the deadly coronavirus, the Chinese government has ordered most big plants to stay closed until Feb. 10. Airbus, which had closed its factory for the holiday, said Wednesday it would extend the suspension indefinitely, pending further guidance from Beijing. The list of companies suffering from stoppages in China includes major foreign auto makers as well as technology giants such as Apple Inc. and the biggest assembler of its devices, Foxconn Technologies Co. For the current quarter, analysts expect Apple to ship between 5% and 10% fewer iPhones than was projected prior to the outbreak. The Latest on the Coronavirus * American Airlines and United suspended flights to Hong Kong * 10 people on a quarantined cruise ship in Japan tested positive * The death toll neared 500, with more than 24,000 confirmed cases Other companies are bracing for supply-line shocks. Industrial giant Siemens AG set up a crisis team to help navigate obstacles resulting from the epidemic. Chief Executive Joe Kaeser told reporters Wednesday that the team was monitoring potential bottlenecks in the German company's supply chain. So far, Siemens hasn't encountered problems purchasing components, and Mr. Kaeser said the crisis team was to "make sure it stayed that way." China is also one of Siemens's largest markets, accounting for roughly 10% of the group's total sales. Almost all of its products sold in China?봣rom medical equipment to factory automation?봞re at least partially produced there, a Siemens spokesman said. Hiroki Totoki, Sony Corp.'s chief financial officer, said the disruptions in China could impact the supply chain for the Japanese company's image-sensor business, its most-profitable segment this fiscal year. "We are going to move forward with business while carefully monitoring the condition of the virus," he told reporters earlier this week. Airbus, the world's largest jet maker by deliveries, said that domestic and international travel restrictions were hampering operations at its factory in Tianjin, China. The plant manufactures Airbus's bestselling A320neo narrow body, the rival to Boeing Co.'s 737 MAX. The factory currently produces about six jets a month; Airbus makes just over 60 of the aircraft a month globally. The plant's closure is likely to cause some delivery delays for Asian carriers. If extended, it could affect cash flow at the plane maker, since customers typically pay for planes on delivery. "Airbus is constantly evaluating the situation and monitoring any potential knock-on effects to production and deliveries and will try to mitigate via alternative plans where necessary," the company said. Airbus also has a smaller facility in China that applies finishing touches on A330 wide-body jetliners for local customers. It said last year it was expanding that facility to accommodate A350 jets and the handful of those bigger jets that it delivers each year. Telecom-equipment maker Ericsson AB said it has suspended production in China. A spokesman said the Swedish company has 11,000 employees in China and 450 in Wuhan, the epicenter of the coronavirus outbreak. Ericsson has 99,000 employees globally. "We have a global supply chain, and [while] China is a big market, we have manufacturing in other countries as well," the spokesman said. The company had a flexible supply chain and its level of manufacturing in China varies year over year, he said. Ruth Bender and Parmy Olson contributed to this article. Write to Benjamin Katz at ben.katz@wsj.com and Kwanwoo Jun at kwanwoo.jun@wsj.com Credit: By Benjamin Katz and Kwanwoo Jun 
Investors around the globe stepped up their retreat from stocks and many commodities, reflecting intensifying fears that a viral outbreak in China will deliver a setback to the outlook for world economic growth. The Dow Jones Industrial Average posted its fifth consecutive daily decline, dropping 453.93 points, or 1.6%. The S&P 500 also declined 1.6%, its first drop of more than 1% since October. Meanwhile, the yield on the benchmark 10-year Treasury note fell to 1.605%, its lowest level since October, a signal investors are eschewing risk as they reconsider an outlook that just recently had been brightening. The Cboe Volatility Index, which measures expected moves in the S&P 500 index, also climbed to its highest level since October. "It's probably too early to determine the impact to global growth from the outbreak of this virus," said Allen Bond, portfolio manager at Jensen Investment Management. "The impact on global growth is probably the key uncertainty." Concern about the coronavirus intensified as the tally of infections jumped over the weekend. The virus has infected more than 4,500 people and killed at least 106, mostly in China's Hubei province. It has spread to other countries including the U.S., Japan and South Korea, and public-health officials have warned that it is growing more contagious. Shares of tourism-related companies and those with ties to China were among the hardest hit, after the country imposed travel restrictions in response to the outbreak. Wynn Resorts, which has a large presence in gambling hot spot Macau, declined 8.1%. American Airlines Group, one of the world's largest carriers, dropped 5.5%, and Apple, which counts China among its biggest markets, fell 2.9%. "It reminds investors that this market can turn on a dime, should it start to question what was causing it to go higher," said Sam Stovall, chief investment strategist at CFRA, of the volatility. The selloff jolted an equity market that had been unusually calm: The S&P 500 hadn't logged a daily rise or fall of more than 1% since October. It also hadn't suffered two consecutive daily declines since Dec. 10. The broad stock-market index fell 51.84 points to 3243.63, weighed down by losses in all 11 sectors. The energy, technology and materials sectors, all of which are sensitive to China and any growth-related fears, dropped more than 2%. The 30-stock Dow Jones Industrial Average, meanwhile, gave up its gains for the year, falling to 28535.80, less than 0.1% below the level at which it ended 2019. And the technology-heavy Nasdaq Composite dropped 175.60 points, or 1.9%?봧ts largest one-day decline since August?봳o 9139.31. "Clearly, the news today is just hit the sell button first and worry about the details later," said Jack Ablin, chief investment officer at Cresset Capital. U.S. stocks have steadily risen since mid-October when the Trump administration indicated it was nearing a phase-one trade deal with Beijing. Meanwhile, improving economic data?봞nd three interest-rate cuts by the Federal Reserve?봢ased fears about a manufacturing slowdown bleeding into the broader economy. More * Commodity Prices Slump * Heard on the Street: Virus Is No Small Threat to Travel Stocks Shares have been trading at relatively high multiples of earnings, which has made them more vulnerable to pullbacks in response to negative headlines, said Yousef Abbasi, global market strategist at INTL FCStone. "Investors were considering and really looking forward to improved global growth," he said. "Uncertainty like this causes people to step back and reassess the amount of risk they're taking." Several investment advisers said it is too soon to make portfolio changes based upon the outbreak. Kristina Hooper, chief global market strategist at Invesco, cautioned against panicking. "Investors would be well-served to stay the course and remain well-diversified," she said. As investors fled stocks, they sought safety in gold, which rose 0.4%, settling at the highest value since April 2013. Making the matter more difficult to assess for investors is the fluid nature of the outbreak and the impenetrability of Chinese politics. The mayor of Wuhan said rules imposed by Beijing limit what he could disclose about the threat posed by the pathogen, suggesting the government was partially responsible for a lack of transparency about the outbreak. In addition to developments around the virus, investors are looking ahead to a big week of corporate earnings reports. Among the companies on tap for Tuesday are Apple, Pfizer and Lockheed Martin. With about 17% of S&P 500 companies having reported for the fourth quarter, 70% have topped analysts' earnings expectations, according to FactSet. Still, analysts anticipate earnings for the S&P 500 as a whole to register a drop of 1.9% from a year earlier, before climbing again in the first quarter of 2020. Investors also will be keeping an eye on the Federal Reserve's meeting Wednesday, though the central bank is expected to hold its benchmark rate steady. Share Your Thoughts Are you concerned about the economic impact of the coronavirus? Why or why not? Join the conversation below. Overseas, Stoxx Europe 600 retreated 2.3%. Markets in China, Hong Kong and South Korea were closed Monday for a public holiday. Japan's Nikkei 225 index closed down 2%. In the U.S., hotel, cruise and airline stocks were among the biggest decliners on the day. The U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention issued a warning to avoid nonessential travel to the Hubei province of China. Las Vegas Sands dropped $4.58, or 6.8%, to $63.27 and MGM Resorts International lost $1.22, or 3.9%, to $30.35. United Airlines Holdings shares fell $4.27, or 5.2%, to $77.63 and Delta Air Lines shares declined $1.98, or 3.4%, to $56.83. With renewed questions about growth in China, the world's largest consumer of industrial commodities, shares of mining company Freeport-McMoRan fell 94 cents, or 7.9%, to $10.90. Oil prices slumped, extending their losing streak to five sessions, as the virus outbreak threatens to damp economic growth in China, the world's biggest energy consumer. Brent crude, the global benchmark, declined 2.3% to settle at $59.32 a barrel, the lowest mark since Oct. 21. Write to Karen Langley at karen.langley@wsj.com Credit: By Karen Langley 
Investors around the globe stepped up their retreat from stocks and many commodities, reflecting intensifying fears that a viral outbreak in China will deliver a fresh setback to the outlook for world economic growth. The Dow Jones Industrial Average posted its fifth consecutive daily decline, dropping 453.93 points, or 1.6%. The S&P 500 also declined 1.6%, its first drop of more than 1% since October. Meanwhile, the yield on the benchmark 10-year Treasury note fell to 1.605%, its lowest level since October, a signal investors are eschewing risk as they reconsider an outlook that just recently had been brightening. The Cboe Volatility Index, which measures expected moves in the S&P 500 index, also climbed to its highest level since October. "It's probably too early to determine the impact to global growth from the outbreak of this virus," said Allen Bond, portfolio manager at Jensen Investment Management. "The impact on global growth is probably the key uncertainty." Concern about the coronavirus intensified as the tally of infections jumped over the weekend. The virus has infected more than 2,700 people and killed at least 82, mostly in China's Hubei province. It has spread to other countries including the U.S., Japan and South Korea, and public-health officials have warned that it is growing more contagious. Shares of tourism-related companies and those with ties to China were among the hardest hit, after the country imposed travel restrictions in response to the outbreak. Wynn Resorts, which has a large presence in gambling hot spot Macau, declined 8.1%. American Airlines Group, one of the world's largest carriers, dropped 5.5%, and Apple, which counts China among its biggest markets, fell 2.9%. "It reminds investors that this market can turn on a dime, should it start to question what was causing it to go higher," said Sam Stovall, chief investment strategist at CFRA, of the volatility. The sharp selloff jolted an equity market that had been unusually calm: The S&P 500 hadn't logged a daily rise or fall of more than 1% since October. It also hadn't suffered two consecutive daily declines since Dec. 10. The broad stock-market index fell 51.84 points to 3243.63, weighed down by losses in all 11 sectors. The energy, technology and materials sectors, all of which are sensitive to China and any growth-related fears, dropped more than 2%. The 30-stock Dow Jones Industrial Average, meanwhile, gave up its gains for the year, falling to 28535.80, less than 0.1% below the level at which it ended 2019. And the technology-heavy Nasdaq Composite dropped 175.60 points, or 1.9%?봧ts largest one-day decline since August?봳o 9139.31. "Clearly, the news today is just hit the sell button first and worry about the details later," said Jack Ablin, chief investment officer at Cresset Capital. U.S. stocks have steadily risen since mid-October when the Trump administration indicated it was nearing a phase-one trade deal with Beijing. Meanwhile, improving economic data?봞nd three interest-rate cuts by the Federal Reserve?봢ased fears about a manufacturing slowdown bleeding into the broader economy. More * Commodity Prices Slump * Heard on the Street: Virus Is No Small Threat to Travel Stocks Shares have been trading at relatively high multiples of earnings, which has made them more vulnerable to pullbacks in response to negative headlines, said Yousef Abbasi, global market strategist at INTL FCStone. "Investors were considering and really looking forward to improved global growth," he said. "Uncertainty like this causes people to step back and reassess the amount of risk they're taking." Several investment advisers said it is too soon to make portfolio changes based upon the outbreak. Kristina Hooper, chief global market strategist at Invesco, cautioned against panicking. "Investors would be well-served to stay the course and remain well-diversified," she said. As investors fled stocks, they sought safety in gold, which rose 0.4%, settling at the highest value since April 2013. Making the matter more difficult to assess for investors is the fluid nature of the outbreak and the impenetrability of Chinese politics. The mayor of Wuhan said rules imposed by Beijing limit what he could disclose about the threat posed by the pathogen, suggesting the government was partially responsible for a lack of transparency about the outbreak. In addition to developments around the virus, investors are looking ahead to a big week of corporate earnings reports. Among the companies on tap for Tuesday are Apple, Pfizer and Lockheed Martin. With about 17% of S&P 500 companies having reported for the fourth quarter, 70% have topped analysts' earnings expectations, according to FactSet. Still, analysts anticipate earnings for the S&P 500 as a whole to register a drop of 1.9% from a year earlier, before climbing again in the first quarter of 2020. Investors also will be keeping an eye on the Federal Reserve's meeting Wednesday, though the central bank is expected to hold its benchmark rate steady. Share Your Thoughts Are you concerned about the economic impact of the coronavirus? Why or why not? Join the conversation below. Overseas, Stoxx Europe 600 retreated 2.3%. Markets in China, Hong Kong and South Korea were closed Monday for a public holiday. Japan's Nikkei 225 index closed down 2%. In the U.S., hotel, cruise and airline stocks were among the biggest decliners on the day. The U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention issued a warning to avoid nonessential travel to the Hubei province of China. Las Vegas Sands dropped $4.58, or 6.8%, to $63.27 and MGM Resorts International lost $1.22, or 3.9%, to $30.35. United Airlines Holdings shares fell $4.27, or 5.2%, to $77.63 and Delta Air Lines shares declined $1.98, or 3.4%, to $56.83. With renewed questions about growth in China, the world's largest consumer of industrial commodities, shares of mining company Freeport-McMoRan fell 94 cents, or 7.9%, to $10.90. Oil prices slumped, extending their losing streak to five sessions, as the virus outbreak threatens to damp economic growth in China, the world's biggest energy consumer. Brent crude, the global benchmark, declined 2.3% to settle at $59.32 a barrel, the lowest mark since Oct. 21. Write to Karen Langley at karen.langley@wsj.com Credit: By Karen Langley 
The tally of deaths and infections from the spread of the new coronavirus in China jumped again on Friday -- with authorities canceling large public gatherings and locking down more cities -- as the U.S. confirmed its second infection and the disease spread into Europe and Australia for the first time. The number of infections had risen to at least 1,287 confirmed cases as of the end of Friday, China's National Health Commission reported Saturday morning local time, more than doubling the total number from just a day earlier. Chinese state media separately reported the death on Saturday morning of a doctor at one of the main hospitals treating coronavirus patients in Wuhan, the central Chinese city where the outbreak began. The 62-year-old ear, nose and throat doctor is believed to be the first doctor to have died from the disease, and would bring the total count up to 42. The new U.S. case involves a woman in her 60s from Chicago who had traveled to Wuhan in late December and returned to the U.S. on Jan. 13, Chicago's health commissioner said, adding that the woman has been isolated in a hospital and is doing well. A man in his 30s in Washington state who had traveled to Wuhan had been diagnosed with the virus earlier this week. Officials at the federal Centers for Disease Control and Prevention said they expected the virus would spread to more people in the U.S. and elsewhere around the world. The French health ministry said on Friday that one patient had been hospitalized in Bordeaux, in the south of France, while two other patients were hospitalized in Paris. In Australia, health officials Saturday confirmed the country's first case of coronavirus, a Chinese man in his 50s who had flown into Melbourne last week after having spent time in Wuhan. Singapore said it had two new confirmed coronavirus cases, bringing the total number there to three. All are residents of Wuhan, visiting Singapore over the weeklong Lunar New Year holiday. Taiwan's health ministry confirmed two more cases on Friday, bringing the separately governed island's tally to three. Confirmed cases have also appeared in Thailand, Vietnam, South Korea, Japan, Nepal and the Chinese territories of Hong Kong and Macau. The Wuhan virus belongs to a family of respiratory viruses that can be spread by coughing, kissing or making contact with saliva. Often, these coronaviruses simply cause common colds. But others have been more serious, even deadly. Health officials believe that the incubation period for the virus is around 14 days, meaning it could take roughly two weeks for someone infected with the virus to develop symptoms. People are most likely not contagious before symptoms develop, health officials said. U.S. authorities have been screening international travelers arriving at five major airports for fevers and other symptoms of an infection. The CDC said that it is currently re-evaluating the screening process. So far, over 2,000 people coming into the U.S. have been screened from roughly 200 flights. The Chicago woman who was infected didn't show symptoms until a few days after returning to the U.S., health authorities said. After learning about the woman's trip, her doctor took steps to prevent further spread, including sending the woman to a hospital with infection control. Authorities in Chicago expressed doubt that the woman who became the U.S. second confirmed case had transmitted the virus since she didn't have symptoms while flying -- and after returning to the U.S., didn't take public transportation or attend any large gatherings. In addition, she didn't have long, close contact with anyone outside her home, they added. President Trump said in a tweet Friday that the U.S. "greatly appreciates" China's efforts to control the coronavirus, and its transparency. He singled out Chinese President Xi Jinping for praise. In China, officials have shut down parts of the Great Wall and canceled Lunar New Year events as part of efforts to stop the spread of the respiratory virus. They have also halted public transportation out of several cities in Hubei province, of which Wuhan is the capital and largest city. On Thursday morning, local officials locked down Wuhan, a major transportation hub that is home to 11 million people. Outbound flights and trains were canceled and roads leading out of the city were blocked. --- Jon Emont in Singapore and James Glynn in Sydney contributed to this article.  Credit: By Stephanie Yang and Brianna Abbott 
BEIJING??Two more Chinese cities were put on lockdown by the government on Thursday, as authorities in the Chinese gambling center of Macau said they were weighing closures of its casinos, expanding an unprecedented experiment to try to contain a fast-spreading virus that has killed 25 people and infected more than 800. The World Health Organization on Thursday declined to declare the outbreak a global public health emergency, citing a limited number of cases abroad and efforts under way to bring it under control. On Thursday, authorities in Huanggang?봞 Chinese city of 7.5 million people?봲aid they wouldn't let long-distance trains and buses run from the urban center and would shut its public transportation system in the lockdown zone, effective midnight Friday local time. Ezhou, another neighboring city with just over a million residents, said it would enact similar restrictions, bringing the total number of cities with travel restrictions to three. Huanggang is about 35 miles east of Wuhan, a city of 11 million and a major hub for travel, where the new pneumonia-causing coronavirus originated. Wuhan just hours earlier halted outbound trains and flights and shut down its public-transportation system. The Huanggang local government also said movie theaters, internet cafes and other entertainment and cultural facilities in the city center would temporarily halt operations and a central market would be shut down for an indefinite period. Starting Thursday, the local government said it would inspect every person and car entering and exiting the urban center. SHARE YOUR THOUGHTS How do you think Chinese cities are handling the spread of the coronavirus? Do you agree with the lockdown measures? Join the conversation below. Besides Wuhan, Huanggang and Ezhou, which collectively hold more than 20 million people, five other cities in the province of Hubei, of which Wuhan is the capital, enacted travel restrictions late Thursday. Separately, the chief executive of Macau, the Chinese special administrative region that is the world's biggest gambling market, said Thursday he was considering closing all of the territory's 40-some casinos, following the confirmation of a second coronavirus infection case there, government-run broadcaster Radio Television Hong Kong reported. The Hong Kong government confirmed its first two cases of the new coronavirus Thursday evening and said some people who had been in close contact with them were quarantined at one of the centers the government has set up at campsites. One close contact was suspected of being infected, the government said. Singapore's Ministry of Health also confirmed its first case of the coronavirus Thursday evening. A 66-year-old Chinese tourist from Wuhan became the city-state's first case of the virus. the tourist developed a sore throat on the flight to Singapore, then a fever and cough, the ministry said in a statement. One of his travel companions, a 37-year-old male, is suspected to carry the virus, the ministry added. Early Friday, Japan's health authorities confirmed its second case of the virus, found in a Chinese tourist from Wuhan in his 40s visiting Japan. The WHO, in explaining its decision not to declare a global public health emergency, said it was still too early for such a move, although the emergency committee that studied the outbreak was divided on the matter, according to the committee chairman, Didier Houssin. WHO Director-General Tedros Adhamom Ghebreyesus said he would reconvene the committee if the situation changes?봢ven if that happens in the next couple of days. "This is an emergency in China, but it has not yet become a global health emergency," he said. "It may yet become one." By imposing blanket restrictions on people's movement, Chinese authorities are doubling down on a high-stakes strategy that experts say is an untested approach to dealing with infectious diseases. "To my knowledge, trying to contain a city of 11 million people is new to science. It has not been tried before as a public-health measure, so we cannot at this stage say it will or will not work," Gauden Galea, the WHO's country representative for China, said in an interview Thursday with the Associated Press, referring to the Wuhan lockdown. Mr. Galea added that while such a radical measure "obviously has social and economic impacts that are considerable," it also "demonstrates a very strong public health commitment and a willingness to take dramatic action." Tom Inglesby, an expert on epidemics who is director of the Center for Health Security at the Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health, said "large-scale quarantine efforts in the past have not been successful in changing the outcome of disease outbreaks." Chinese authorities have suggested the coronavirus is spreading between people primarily through coughing, kissing or contact with saliva. It emerged from a seafood and livestock market in Wuhan and has spread across China and into the U.S ., Japan, South Korea and Thailand. On Thursday, Chinese health authorities said the coronavirus had reached the northeastern and northwestern corners of China, including the provinces of Heilongjiang, which borders Russia, and Xinjiang, the majority Muslim region that borders Kazakhstan. Jilin province, in the country's northeast, and Jiangsu province, just north of Shanghai, also reported their first cases. The total number of confirmed cases in mainland China rose to 830, according to data released by the National Health Commission early Friday, an increase of several hundred from the previous day. The decision to ban people from leaving or entering Wuhan rippled across China and beyond its borders, sparking confusion and elevating fears about a growing contagion ahead of the Lunar New Year, the busiest travel period of the year in China and many other parts of Asia. In Tokyo and Seoul, face masks and hand sanitizer disappeared from some store shelves, while across China, seven movie openings were scrapped as film studios and theaters worried about moviegoers fearful of setting foot outside. In Wuhan, a boxing qualifier for this year's Olympic Games in Tokyo slated to take place starting Feb. 3 was canceled by the local organizing committee. Primary and secondary schools in Hubei have postponed reopening after Lunar New Year to an undetermined date, according to the Communist Party newspaper People's Daily. In Beijing, major events over the holiday were canceled. Japan and the U.S. each raised their alert levels for travel to Wuhan. Tokyo advised its citizens not to travel to the city unless necessary, while Washington recommended exercising caution but stopped short of advising travelers to avoid the city. In Wuhan, local authorities urged calm, calling on citizens not to panic or hoard supplies. "With the close care of General Secretary Xi Jinping," a government notice read, "Wuhan has sufficient reserves and smooth supplies of commodities, food and medical protection products." Operators from the transportation-service hotline in Wuhan said more than 8,000 buses in the city and all nine subway lines had stopped running as of 10 a.m. Thursday. Many entrances to the highway from the Wuhan area were closed, while vehicles could still get off the highway and enter the city, according to the local highway information service early Thursday. Meanwhile, a few flights continued to depart Wuhan's Tianhe International Airport even after the 10 a.m. lockdown began, according to the flight-tracking site FlightAware. Most of the flights were transiting through Wuhan from other cities, though some direct flights?봧ncluding to Beijing and Paris?봶ere among those allowed to take off after the lockdown deadline. Within Wuhan's city limits, people expressed frustrations online over a lack of transportation services and dwindling resources at hospitals. The Wuhan Health Commission acknowledged long lines outside fever clinics and a shortage of hospital beds. It said the city was designating more hospitals as centers for fever patients. The central government is shipping 10,000 sets of protective clothing and 50,000 sets of gloves to Wuhan from its reserve medical supplies, according to the Ministry of Industry and Information, which posted the information through its account on the Twitter-like Weibo service. The Finance Ministry said late Thursday that it is giving out 1 billion yuan ($144 million) in emergency subsidies to Hubei province to fight the coronavirus. Lekai Liu, Yin Yijun, Bingyan Wang, Betsy McKay and Liza Lin contributed to this article. The What's News Briefing In Your Inbox Get What's News, a daily digest of the day's most important news to watch, delivered to your inbox. Sign up. Write to Stephanie Yang at stephanie.yang@wsj.com and Yoko Kubota at yoko.kubota@wsj.com Related Stories * Relief and Panic in the Rush to Catch Last Trains From Wuhan * China Locks Down City at Center of Outbreak * Heard on the Street: Wuhan Coronavirus Could Hit China's Economy Harder Than SARS * What We Know About the Coronavirus Credit: By Stephanie Yang and Yoko Kubota 
WUHAN, China?봗he city in central China where a new coronavirus originated will halt outbound flights and trains and shut its public-transportation system, the Chinese government said, a dramatic escalation in the battle to contain a pneumonia outbreak that has killed at least 17 people. The decision to lock down Wuhan, a major travel hub and a city of 11 million, comes as the country is entering one of its busiest travel periods, its Lunar New Year holiday. Hundreds of millions will travel across China and outside the country, increasing the risk of transmission for the virus. After days in which authorities appeared reluctant to impose sweeping bans on the movement of the general public in Wuhan, the mood began to shift on Monday, when the number of confirmed cases jumped and health authorities confirmed the virus could be transmitted between humans. That day, President Xi Jinping gave his first public direction to officials to work with international authorities and share information more openly. Since then, as the number of deaths and confirmed cases has risen, authorities in Wuhan have stepped up their own countermeasures. The lockdown will begin at 10 a.m. local time on Thursday and continue for an indefinite period, Wuhan health authorities said. Service on subways, city buses, long-distance coaches and ferries will also be suspended. The announcement, released first on state media early Thursday, comes as China gears up to formally start its Lunar New Year holiday formally on Friday. It is likely to force many Chinese to change their travel plans. The country is entering one of its busiest travel periods of the year, where hundreds of millions will move people across China and outside, increasing the risk of transmission for the virus. Many of the top comments on Weibo, China's Twitter-like microblogging service, have been supportive of the city at the epicenter of the outbreak and the government's efforts to contain the virus. "Wuhan, we are in this together. You are one city but part of the country. Please don't lose hope. The dark days will pass," read a post that got more than 15,000 likes. Chinese authorities have suggested that the newly identified coronavirus is spreading between people primarily through coughing, kissing or contact with saliva. The number of infections from the new pneumonia-causing coronavirus has multiplied in recent days, with 547 confirmed cases in mainland China as of Thursday, according to state broadcaster China Central Television and local Chinese authorities, up from more than 300 announced on Tuesday. SHARE YOUR THOUGHTS What else should nations be doing to stem the spread of this new coronavirus? Join the conversation below. Public anxiety, the holiday and cold, wet weather had cleared many from Wuhan's streets, restaurants, subway and airport by Wednesday, but the entrances to front-line hospitals were busy, with patients' relatives dropping off food and other daily supplies. "My dad is 65, and he's right in that vulnerable age of danger," said a woman waiting inside the Wuhan Medical Treatment Center, also known as Jinyintan Hospital, in a newish northern section of the city. She said her father had suffered a high fever for several days and been transferred to the center?봶here staffers donned blue surgical-type gowns, as did some police officers who fit them over their uniforms and wore plastic shields over their faces?봣rom a different city hospital the day before for additional testing. She said doctors didn't know whether he had the virus. "I'm very afraid for his health," she said. From its initial emergence in a seafood and livestock market in Wuhan, the virus has spread across China and into the U.S., Japan, South Korea and Thailand. In Hong Kong, health authorities on Thursday said they were investigating two patients who are suspected of having been infected with the new coronavirus, in what would be the Chinese territory's first confirmed cases. One of the patients, a 39-year-old man from Wuhan, had arrived in Hong Kong on Tuesday, Hong Kong Food and Health Secretary Sophia Chan said at a press conference. Preliminary examinations had shown the man testing positive for the virus, Ms. Chan said. The other is a 56-year-old Hong Kong resident who traveled to Wuhan this month to visit relatives, authorities said. Additionally, across the Pearl River, the Chinese territory of Macau confirmed its first case on Wednesday: a 52-year-old woman who had taken a high-speed train from Wuhan, Chinese state media reported. Several other provinces and territories in China, including Fujian, Anhui, Liaoning and Guizhou, announced their first confirmed infection cases on Wednesday, according to CCTV and local Chinese authorities. The province of Hubei, of which Wuhan is the capital and largest city, late Wednesday reported a total 444 confirmed cases, up from 270 announced the previous day. It has been the only region to report deaths from the virus so far?봱ising to 17 from six a day earlier. Outside mainland China, health authorities have tallied at least three infected patients in Thailand, and one each in Japan, South Korea and Taiwan. On Tuesday, health officials confirmed that a man who had recently arrived in Washington state after a visit to Wuhan had become the U.S.'s first confirmed case. The World Health Organization on Wednesday postponed for a day a decision on whether to declare that the outbreak constitutes a public-health emergency of international concern. That designation would help mobilize resources to prevent the virus's spread. After debating the matter for hours, the emergency committee was split on the decision, said Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, the WHO's director-general. "It was clear that to proceed, we need more information," Dr. Tedros said. The agency has a team in China trying to answer important questions such as how transmissible the virus is and what is being done to contain it, he said. "The situation is evolving very rapidly," said Didier Houssin, chairman of the WHO's emergency committee, who is an adviser to the French Agency for Food, Environment and Occupational Health and Safety. The start of the Lunar New Year this week has prompted fears of a repeat of the crisis involving severe acute respiratory syndrome, or SARS, which spread through China in late 2002 and early 2003, also overlapping with the holiday. SARS, caused by a different strain of coronavirus, spread globally and killed 774 people after its emergence in southern China. Public-health officials are particularly concerned about the new virus because there are many unknowns. It is unclear, for example, how many people have actually been infected, and how transmissible it is from one person to another. The more it spreads, the greater the chance of a mutation that could make the virus even deadlier, scientists say. Some experts have questioned whether China has been too slow in providing updates to the international health community. "It is still not transparent enough," said Harry Yi-Jui Wu, director of medical ethics and humanities at the University of Hong Kong, while calling on the Chinese government to provide better updates on cases outside of Wuhan. "It should communicate more effectively with citizens, instead of reiterating a wishful phrase saying, 'Disease is in general controllable.' " In Beijing, Chinese health officials said at a briefing on Wednesday that they are still working to understand more about the virus, while pledging to release timely information. This week, Zhong Nanshan, one of the country's best-known epidemiologists, confirmed suspicions that the novel coronavirus was spreading between humans , which would allow the disease to be transmitted among people who don't interact with any animals. The virus is believed to have spread to humans from animals at the Wuhan market. Chinese hospitals are stepping up preventive measures, health officials said. Hubei province plans to ask the national government for emergency aid, the official Communist Party mouthpiece People's Daily reported on Wednesday. Hubei is short of face masks , the report said. Chinese authorities have yet to determine which animal originally harbored the virus and passed it on to humans, although they have said it was likely a wild animal. They also have yet to announce what they believe is the incubation period for the disease, or the time it takes for infected patients to start showing symptoms. "If you knew the incubation period, you could do quarantining of people who are in close contact with infected patients," said Melissa Nolan, an assistant professor at the University of South Carolina's Arnold School of Public Health. "You would monitor those people for the incubation period." Related * What We Know About the Virus * First U.S. Case Reported of Deadly Wuhan Virus * Virus in China Is Part of a Growing Threat * Virus Sparks Chinese Panic Buying, Travel Cancellations * Investors Look to Past Epidemics for Clues As China's government races to find out more about how the disease is spreading, it is paying attention to the possibility of superspreaders?봧nfected patients who have been able to pass on the virus to several people?봆ao Fu, a director at China's Center for Disease Control and Prevention, said at the government's press briefing. On Tuesday, the epidemiologist Dr. Zhong, who leads an expert committee organized by the Beijing government, said one patient in Wuhan had infected more than a dozen medical staff. But Mr. Gao said there was no evidence yet of superspreaders. One reason SARS spread so quickly nearly two decades ago was because some individuals were able to transmit the disease to dozens of others. At Wuhan Lung Hospital, another facility designated to treat virus patients, people huddled outside a quarantine ward that serves as a preliminary location for testing. One man said his 39-year-old wife had been admitted on Monday after developing a high fever and troubled breathing. Doctors said tests would confirm within a day whether she had the new virus, but 48 hours later, he said, there had been no update. "Specialists from Beijing have come, but there are so many people sick that they're overwhelmed," he said. "I hope it's normal pneumonia and she can leave soon, but when you hear nothing you get worried." Yijun Yin, Lucy Craymer, Liyan Qi, Betsy McKay and Yoko Kubota contributed to this article. Write to Shan Li at shan.li@wsj.com , James T. Areddy at james.areddy@wsj.com and Chao Deng at Chao.Deng@wsj.com Credit: By Shan Li, James T. Areddy and Chao Deng 
A man in Washington state has been diagnosed with a deadly strain of coronavirus, the first case to be confirmed in the U.S. in an outbreak that has sickened hundreds of people in Asia, federal and state health officials said Tuesday. The man, who is in his 30s and is a U.S. resident, recently traveled to Wuhan, China, the city where the outbreak is believed to have started last month, according to the federal Centers for Disease Control and Prevention as well as Washington state and local health authorities. The man arrived back in the U.S. on Jan. 15. He is the first patient to be diagnosed with the new coronavirus outside of Asia, where more than 300 people have been sickened and at least six have died. While most of the confirmed illnesses occurred in people in Wuhan, cases have been reported in other cities in China, as well as Thailand, Japan, South Korea and Taiwan. The CDC said last week that it was expecting cases in the U.S., and now says it expects more. "We do expect additional cases in the United States and globally," said Nancy Messonnier, director of the CDC's National Center for Immunization and Respiratory Diseases. An emergency committee for the World Health Organization is scheduled to meet Wednesday to determine whether to declare the outbreak a public-health emergency of international concern, a designation that would help mobilize resources to prevent the virus's spread around the globe. Aware of the outbreak in Wuhan, the Washington man sought medical care when he developed symptoms a day after arriving home to Snohomish County, north of Seattle, the health officials said. He is in good condition and has been hospitalized at the Providence Regional Medical Center Everett out of an abundance of caution, the officials said. A hospital spokesman said that the patient is being monitored in a special isolation unit "for at least the next 48 hours." The hospital is contacting health workers and other patients who may have had contact with him, so they can be monitored for symptoms, the spokesman said. "The man who tested positive acted quickly to seek treatment," said John Wiesman, Washington State Secretary of Health. "We believe the risk to the public is low." Share Your Thoughts How concerned are you about the Wuhan coronavirus? Join the conversation below. The fact that local health officials and a regional hospital in the Pacific Northwest have suddenly been confronted with a virus that scientists discovered just a few weeks ago thousands of miles away in central China shows how rapidly diseases can spread around the world. The risk is even greater when a new virus emerges in a busy transport hub like Wuhan, which is connected through direct and connecting flights to many other major cities around the globe. The CDC said Tuesday that it will expand screening of airline passengers for symptoms of the new virus to two more airports: Chicago O'Hare International Airport and Hartsfield-Jackson Atlanta International Airport. All passengers from Wuhan will now be funneled through five airports where screening is taking place, said Martin Cetron, director of the Division of Global Migration and Quarantine at the CDC. The CDC began screening at the end of last week at three airports that receive the majority of travelers from Wuhan: San Francisco International Airport, Los Angeles International Airport and New York's John F. Kennedy International Airport. More than 1,200 passengers have been screened, but none have been referred to a hospital, said Dr. Messonnier. The Washington state man returned to the U.S. before screening began. It isn't clear how he was infected, deepening a mystery as to how the virus is transmitted and how easily it spreads from one person to another. He didn't visit any animal or seafood markets in Wuhan, which were suspected sites for transmission, said Chris Spitters, health officer for the Snohomish Health District. Nor did the man know anyone who was ill. It is also unclear how easily the virus is spreading from one human to another, the CDC said Tuesday. Coronaviruses circulate primarily in animals such as bats and pigs, and Chinese authorities initially believed that patients had been infected during contact with animals at a market. But as more cases emerged in people who said they hadn't visited the market, they revised their stance. Chinese authorities acknowledged on Monday that the virus is spreading among humans. The CDC is working with authorities in China and other experts globally to learn more about the virus, and scientists are working on the development of treatments, Dr. Messonnier said. "There is new information hour by hour, day by day that we are tracking and following closely," she said. Experts believe the current coronavirus to be much less deadly than severe acute respiratory syndrome, or SARS, a different coronavirus strain that killed hundreds of people around the world in late 2002 and early 2003 after it first appeared in southern China. Even so, China's cabinet-level National Health Commission said Monday it would treat the new coronavirus as a Class A infectious disease, meaning it would be handled similarly to cholera, the plague and to how it handled the SARS outbreak Wuhan will take more stringent measures to prevent transmission of the disease, including canceling what it considers unnecessary large gatherings, setting up a prevention and control center, and strengthening protection of medical staff, China's state-run Xinhua News Agency said Tuesday. "We recommend outsiders not come to Wuhan and also that Wuhan residents not leave Wuhan without a special reason," Zhou Xianwang, the city's mayor, told CCTV on Tuesday. North Korea, which borders northeastern China, has stopped allowing entry for tourists as a preventive measure, according to two China-based travel agencies that arrange tours to the country. In Australia, the country's chief medical officer, Brendan Murphy, told reporters that three direct flights each week between Wuhan and Sydney would be met by officials who would inquire about sick passengers. Philippine health authorities, meanwhile, said they are testing which type of coronavirus a 5-year-old who traveled from Wuhan this month had contracted. Write to Betsy McKay at betsy.mckay@wsj.com and Chao Deng at Chao.Deng@wsj.com Credit: By Betsy McKay and Chao Deng 
BEIJING?볾 leading Chinese health official said that a newly identified virus originating in central China has spread between humans, heightening health officials' concerns that it could be transmitted even more quickly as the number of confirmed cases tripled on Monday. The prospect of human-to-human transmission of the coronavirus, which causes a potentially deadly pneumonia that already has claimed four lives, comes as tens of millions of Chinese citizens crisscross the country this week for the annual Lunar New Year holiday. The virus has already spread outside China, and appeared in South Korea for the first time, officials said Monday. Related * Virus in China Is Part of a Growing Threat * Coronavirus Prompts Change of Plan for Chinese Holiday: Stay Home * Chinese Drugmakers' Shares Surge, Travel Stocks Fall The World Health Organization said that Director General Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus plans to convene an emergency committee Wednesday to determine whether to declare the outbreak a public-health emergency of international concern. The designation helps the WHO mobilize resources to prevent and combat the spread to other countries. The WHO said Monday the spread of the disease was likely the product of "some limited human-to-human transmission occurring between close contacts." The outbreak is believed to have started in the central Chinese city of Wuhan, where a number of infected patients were exposed to a large seafood and livestock wholesale market. Coronaviruses most commonly infect mammals, including pigs and cats, but can jump from animals to humans. They can also then jump from one human to another. Some patients have said they didn't visit the market and only came into contact with people in Wuhan. The Wuhan market is close to the city's main railway station, an important travel hub in the center of the country. Zhong Nanshan, one of China's most highly regarded epidemiology experts who is leading an expert committee on the outbreak for China's cabinet-level National Health Commission, urged heightened vigilance in a live interview on state broadcaster China Central Television Monday, citing the risk of human-to-human transmission. "Right now is the time when we should increase alert," said Dr. Zhong, who rose to national prominence nearly two decades ago as an authoritative voice during China's fight against severe acute respiratory syndrome, or SARS. In that outbreak, a similar coronavirus killed 774 people after its emergence in southern China beginning in late 2002. Share Your Thoughts How worried are you about the new virus spreading from central China? Join the conversation below. The new warnings came on a day when the number of confirmed cases of the new coronavirus more than tripled to 218, according to Chinese state media and health authorities, including in Beijing, Shanghai and the southern metropolis of Shenzhen?봳hree of the country's biggest and most affluent cities. Fifteen medical staff involved in treating the new coronavirus have themselves been infected with the disease, authorities in Wuhan said. It is unclear whether these medical staff members were included in the reported patient figures. One reason for the rapid increase in reported cases is that a diagnostic test for the virus is now available. That means infections that would otherwise have gone unnoticed are being identified. U.S. health officials said last week that they expect more cases to be diagnosed in China and other countries as testing for the virus expands. Yang Gonghuan, the former deputy head of the Chinese Center for Disease Control and Prevention, said in a separate interview with the China Business Journal newspaper Monday that human-to-human transmission of the disease had occurred. The sudden increase in cases is likely to spark questions over the transparency of disclosures by Chinese health authorities. President Xi Jinping earlier Monday urged authorities to make efforts to prevent and control the spreading infection , according to the state-run Xinhua News Agency. Officials should "release outbreak information in a timely manner and deepen international cooperation," he said. China is working with other countries to prevent and control the outbreak, Chinese Foreign Ministry spokesman Geng Shuang said at a regular media briefing in Beijing on Monday. "We've formulated prevention and control plans, treated patients, monitored their close contacts, conducted epidemiological research and released information in a timely manner," he said. South Korean authorities said Monday that a 35-year-old Chinese woman who had flown into the country from Wuhan had contracted the coronavirus. The previous three patients who have been identified outside China?봳wo Chinese tourists in Thailand and a man from Japan ?봦ad all traveled from the Wuhan area. In the U.S., where no cases have so far been detected, the federal Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and the Department of Homeland Security's Customs and Border Protection have begun screening people traveling from Wuhan for fevers, coughs or difficulty breathing. Health authorities in Wuhan, a densely populated city of 19 million people, said Monday that the number of patients infected with the new coronavirus jumped to 198, from 62 on Sunday. The statement said 35 of those cases were severe, while nine were critical. The fourth infected person to die was an 89-year-old man who suffered high blood pressure and diabetes, Wuhan authorities said. A third infected patient died over the weekend, authorities said without offering details. In the case of the two earlier fatalities, authorities previously said the men suffered from existing illnesses . On top of confirmed cases, suspected cases have sprung up in a number of Chinese provinces, including Shandong on the east coast, Sichuan in the interior and Yunnan and Guangxi on the southwestern border with Vietnam, according to CCTV's report Monday. Separately, five suspected cases were reported by health authorities in coastal Zhejiang province, just south of Shanghai on the country's east coast. Shanghai health authorities on Tuesday reported four suspected cases. The newly discovered coronavirus so far is significantly less deadly than SARS. However, it is in the same class of pathogens, and this outbreak is clearly larger than scientists and officials initially believed. The availability of detection kits at more Chinese hospitals will likely lead to more confirmed cases, said David Hui, an infectious disease specialist at the Chinese University of Hong Kong. Dr. Zhong, the Chinese epidemiologist, told CCTV on Monday that transmission from wild animals to humans was a "big possibility." His frank acknowledgment of human-to-human transmission was a notable break from earlier statements by Chinese authorities who rated the risk of human-to-human transmission as being relatively low. Chinese health authorities are urging people to wear face masks and to report quickly to a hospital if they have a fever. In an exchange with state media, Dr. Zhong cited two cases in Guangdong where the patients hadn't traveled to Wuhan but were in contact with family members returning from there. In many cases, patients did travel to Wuhan and showed symptoms of fever and fatigue. The Chinese patient in South Korea had flown into Incheon International Airport from Wuhan and was quarantined by airport authorities before being transferred to a medical center for treatment, according to South Korea's Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. In Shanghai, two confirmed cases were patients who traveled from Wuhan, according to the city's health authorities. Beijing has five confirmed cases, according to state media; a district authority has said that two patients had returned from Wuhan. One of the confirmed cases in southern Guangdong province is 10 years old, according to local authorities. Most of the other infected patients who have been identified by authorities were elderly. Betsy McKay, Xiao Xiao, Natasha Khan, Wenxin Fan and Eun-Young Jeong contributed to this article. Write to Chao Deng at Chao.Deng@wsj.com and Jonathan Cheng at jonathan.cheng@wsj.com Credit: By Chao Deng and Jonathan Cheng 
Fears over the fast-spreading coronavirus are prompting global companies to cancel plans for major industry gatherings, as executives weigh the risks and rewards of sending employees to conferences that draw attendees from around the world. A growing roster of telecommunications and technology companies have decided not to attend the MWC Barcelona conference slated for later this month. AT&T Inc., Amazon.com Inc., Cisco Systems Inc., Intel Corp. and Sony Corp. are among the latest that have said they won't send company delegates to the annual gathering, which draws more than 100,000 people. The Singapore Airshow, a biennial aerospace gathering that typically hosts top executives from major plane makers and suppliers, opened this week with muted attendance because of virus concerns. Boeing Co. scaled back its presence and defense contractors Lockheed Martin Corp. and Raytheon Co. skipped the gathering. And watchmaker Swatch Group AG has canceled plans for an annual trade event in Zurich in early March, which it uses to present new luxury-watch models. It will host regional events instead. Related Coverage * Wuhan Residents Question Accuracy of Virus Test * American Evacuee Tests Positive for Coronavirus * China Fires Highest-Level Officials Yet Over Outbreak * Delivery Drivers Offer a Lifeline as They Brave Coronavirus Risk Scientists and public-health officials globally are racing to learn more about the virus , which has become an epidemic in China that has infected more than 42,000 people, killed more than 1,000 and overwhelmed hospitals in the country . The Barcelona trade show, previously known as Mobile World Congress, is typically an opportunity for carriers, equipment makers and government officials globally to meet their foreign counterparts and showcase their latest devices and technology. This year's event, which is scheduled to begin Feb. 24, comes as carriers around the world race to roll out faster 5G networks. Ericsson AB of Sweden said Friday it was withdrawing from the event and LG Electronics of South Korea last week was among the first to say it wouldn't send representatives, to prevent "needlessly exposing hundreds of LG employees to international travel." Show attendees typically pack a sprawling Barcelona convention center speckled with booths bearing the logos of telecommunications and equipment giants. Last year's conference was dominated by China's Huawei Technologies Co., with a sizable booth on the exhibition floor. Huawei's lotus logo also has adorned attendee name-tag lanyards in recent years. The event's organizer, mobile-carrier trade group GSMA, said Sunday that visitors from China would have to prove via passport stamp or a health certificate that they have been outside of the country for 14 days. GSMA also said last week that it was important to convene industry members and global policy makers "at this critical time where connectivity is on the cusp of a new industrial revolution." The industry group said it will provide temperature screening and disinfectant stations. Some attendees plan to arrive early in Spain to allow time to self-quarantine and replace staff from high-risk locations with employees from Europe, it added. Qualcomm Inc., Nokia Corp. and Samsung Electronics Co. said they are still considering whether to attend. Samsung, which launched the next models of its flagship Galaxy devices in San Francisco on Tuesday, had already intended to limit its presence at the Barcelona event. At its own event, Samsung had signs urging attendees to reduce their risk of coronavirus infection and cautioning that medical screenings would be conducted. Several people at the event accepted masks that were provided near the entrance. A spokesman for Samsung said the company is continuing to monitor the situation to determine the extent of its participation in Barcelona and likely to reach a final verdict around the end of the week. It hasn't implemented companywide operating changes, but some individual facilities are limiting visitors' access and taking other precautions. InterDigital Inc, a mobile and video technology research-and-development company, and Amdocs Ltd., a provider of software and services to communications and media companies, said earlier this week that their employees wouldn't attend MWC. Cristina Roca and Robert Wall contributed to this article. Write to Sarah Krouse at sarah.krouse@wsj.com Credit: By Sarah Krouse and Elizabeth Koh 
U.S. government-bond yields rose Tuesday as concerns around the coronavirus abated, stocks edged higher and Federal Reserve Chairman Jerome Powell said the central bank is monitoring the potential global economic disruptions from the epidemic. The yield on the benchmark 10-year U.S. Treasury note rose to 1.589%, according to Tradeweb, compared with 1.547% Monday. Bond yields fall as prices rise. Investors often buy Treasurys when they are seeking safety during market turbulence or economic uncertainty. When concerns subside, they usually allocate capital back into higher-yielding assets such as stocks or junk bonds. Tuesday's move in the 10-year yield snapped a three-day slide. Some traders said it indicates the worst of the coronavirus may be priced into government-bond markets. On Tuesday, the Chinese government encouraged people to resume work after an extended Lunar New Year holiday and some plants resumed manufacturing operations. Mr. Powell, who testified Tuesday before the House Financial Services Committee, said the U.S. economy was in a "very good place." He also said the central bank is "closely monitoring" the potential impact of the epidemic on the global economy. Mr. Powell is set to testify again Wednesday in front of the Senate Banking Committee. Analysts and traders expect Treasury yields will trade within a limited range in 2020 as the Fed remains on hold for an extended period and provides liquidity to financial markets . They also expect inflation to hover below the central bank's target of 2%, limiting the risk the central bank tightens monetary policy. While the Fed is considering changes to the inflation-targeting framework it formally adopted eight years ago, it isn't considering a different target. Officials are looking at whether they could update the framework to address growing risks that low inflation and low interest rates could leave them unprepared in the case of a downturn. Rick Rieder, chief investment officer of global fixed-income at BlackRock Inc., anticipates the yield on the 10-year Treasury will stay between 1.50% and 2.25% over the course of the year, but that coronavirus and the corresponding growth risk could keep the range lower for a period. "That range should hold, barring either greater fears over the spread of coronavirus and its economic impact on the downside, or temporary spikes if the perfect storm of higher equity markets, weaker U.S. dollar and higher commodity prices spark inflation fears among one-word headline watchers," he said. Some analysts warn that investors shouldn't underestimate the virus's aftermath. Steve Englander, head of currency strategy and North America macro strategy at Standard Chartered, said lockdown measures in China are starting to disrupt global supply chains and could further pressure currencies in certain countries and boost the U.S. dollar. "Automobile makers in South Korea and Japan have had to shut down production due to lack of intermediate goods sourced from China," he said. "Economies with strong goods trade linkages with China are likely to be most affected by these disruptions, leading to underperformance for the Taiwan dollar, South Korea won, Singapore dollar, Malaysia ringgit and Thai baht." The WSJ Dollar Index, which measures the U.S. currency against a basket of 16 others, fell about 0.15% to 91.49. Write to Julia-Ambra Verlaine at Julia.Verlaine@wsj.com Credit: By Julia-Ambra Verlaine 
[Financial Analysis and Commentary] Figuring out what the economic impact of the coronavirus outbreak will be is both necessary and, at the moment, potentially futile. Necessary, because policy makers, businesses, investors and people living their day-to-day lives need some baseline of what to expect. Otherwise, they risk, on the one hand, falling into a dangerous complacency or, on the other, an overreaction that causes problems of its own. Potentially futile because nobody knows what the eventual extent of the outbreak will be. Taking that uncertainty and layering on the uncertainty inherent in economic estimates yields something of a mess. Surely enough, estimates of the outbreak's economic impact vary greatly. JPMorgan economists initially estimated it would reduce annualized global gross domestic product growth by 0.3 percentage point in the first quarter but now reckon the effect will be larger. UBS economists expect it will knock 2.5 percentage points off global growth. But economists know from experience how outbreaks feed into the economy and what to watch. For starters, it is important to understand that the costs of caring for the ill, while potentially substantial, will likely account for only a fraction of any economic hit. Rather, it is the behavior healthy people undertake to avoid becoming infected -- curtailing travel, for example, or forgoing shopping -- that has the biggest impact, said economist Olga Jonas. A senior fellow at the Harvard Global Health Institute, she had coordinated the World Bank's program to reduce avian and pandemic influenza threats. Business and government responses matter, too. If companies close their offices or governments quarantine a large number of people, not only is consumer demand curtailed, but production is, too. As a result, infection and mortality counts can be inadequate gauges of economic impact. A 2015 outbreak of Middle East respiratory syndrome, or MERS, in South Korea infected 186 people. However, the avoidance response was so strong that the economic cost came to $8.2 billion, according to Korea Economic Research Institute estimates. Estimates of the total economic impact of the 2003 outbreak of severe acute respiratory syndrome, or SARS, in Asia are at least five times as high. On a per-case basis the cost was only one-tenth as much. So watching avoidance behavior is a good check on how much economic damage an outbreak will cause. SARS, for example, had a stark effect on tourism, with international tourism arrivals in the East Asia and Pacific region falling 10% in 2003 from 2002. With airlines suspending flight service to China and nerves frayed among travelers elsewhere, the coronavirus impact may be worse. Retail activity in China will give another reading. China's increased economic clout since SARS will magnify avoidance effects. Next, watching for supply disruptions that might come about as the result of stalled production in China's Hubei province and elsewhere will be important. The good news, for now, is that Chinese factory output is always slow around the Lunar New Year, so companies with supply chains that extend into China have been relatively unaffected. The danger is that the longer shutdowns persist, the more the supply of essential manufacturing components will become depleted, with severe spillover effects. The 2011 earthquake and tsunami in Japan provide an object lesson: It shut down a plant that made a significant portion of the world's automotive microcontrollers. Global vehicle production buckled as a result. Finally, the extent to which coronavirus and fears of contagion show up outside of China will be important to monitor. If people outside China start engaging in avoidance behavior, the economic damage will get far worse.  Credit: By Justin Lahart 
The newly identified coronavirus claimed its first life outside China, as the number of U.S. cases ticked up to eight and the Pentagon said it was setting up quarantine centers for travelers who screened positive for the illness. A 44-year-old man in the Philippines from the Chinese city of Wuhan, where the outbreak began in December, died on Saturday, the Philippine Department of Health said on Sunday. The man was one of two confirmed cases in the Philippines, the other being his 38-year-old female companion. The number of cases has expanded dramatically around the world to more than 20 countries. There are now nearly 15,000 cases of the virus in China, resulting in more than 300 deaths overall. Some 150 people outside China have been sickened . SHARE YOUR THOUGHTS How do you protect yourself from contracting infectious diseases? Join the conversation below. Heath officials said a University of Massachusetts Boston student in his 20s who had recently visited Wuhan had been infected, raising the number of cases in the U.S. to eight. The man, who went to doctors soon after returning from China, is in isolation and his close contacts are being monitored, they said. Countries and airlines around the world have limited their contact with China after the World Health Organization designated the coronavirus outbreak a public health emergency of international concern. The U.S., Australia and New Zealand have raised their travel alerts for all of China to their highest levels , "Do Not Travel," and Indonesia, South Korea and the Philippines imposed new restrictions over the weekend. The U.S. has set entry restrictions on foreign nationals and quarantines on Americans returning from Hubei, the province at the outbreak's center. The Pentagon announced it was preparing four military bases, in California, Colorado and Texas, as centers for overseas travelers who are screened and identified as needing to be quarantined. It said it acted at the request of the Department of Health and Human Services, and was prepared to provide quarters for up to 1,000 people through the end of February. No one had yet been received at any of the four installations, Defense Department officials said Sunday. Military officials would only provide housing support for people potentially infected by the virus to have individual rooms, and wouldn't be responsible for caring for the patients, the statement said. People found by Health and Human Services personnel to be ill with the virus would be transferred to local civilian hospitals, the Pentagon said. The Department of Homeland Security also announced new precautions, saying that U.S. citizens who have traveled in China within the last 14 days will be rerouted to one of seven designated airports for screening. Foreign nationals who have traveled to China within 14 days will typically be denied entry to the U.S., with exceptions made for immediate family and other cases, the department said. The seven airports for screening Americans coming from China are New York's John F. Kennedy International Airport, Chicago's O'Hare International Airport and the international airports in San Francisco, Los Angeles, Seattle-Tacoma, Honolulu and Atlanta. The U.S. Coast Guard also said it would bar ships from entering U.S. ports if they had been to China within the previous 14 days or taken on board passengers that had been to China within 14 days. The order said the "temporary measures are in place to safeguard the American public." Under the order, passenger ships arriving that had stopped in China will be allowed to enter the U.S. if it has been more than 14 days since any passengers have been in China and if all passengers are symptom free. The Coast Guard said cargo ships will be allowed into U.S. ports even if they have been to China within the previous 14 days as long as they have no sick crew members. But crew members would have to remain on their vessel "except to conduct specific activities directly related to vessel cargo or provisioning operations." The order doesn't include ships that have been to Hong Kong or Macau. In Hong Kong, thousands of hospital workers voted to press ahead with a five-day strike starting Monday, in a bid to force the government to fully shut its borders to mainland China as coronavirus cases climb there. Chinese authorities have been pushing to learn more about the new virus, but they have made little progress in stopping it from spreading. Restrictions on citizens' movements expanded to the coastal city of Wenzhou where the government closed 46 high-speed toll stations and prohibited households from allowing more than one person out every two days, marking the first city outside of Hubei province to impose such drastic measures. U.S. national security adviser Robert O'Brien said the U.S. was prepared to send a team of American health professionals from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention to help Beijing but that Chinese officials hadn't responded to the offer. "I think we can be helpful if we're on the ground right now," Mr. O'Brien said Sunday on CBS. "We've made the offer, and we'll see if they accept the offer." Mr. O'Brien spoke as reports indicated Chinese officials may have contributed to the spread of the virus by purposely hiding initial indications of the disease. Mr. O'Brien said Beijing had begun to be more forthcoming. "We've asked them for transparency," he said. In an attempt to support Chinese financial markets, which are scheduled to reopen on Monday after an extended Lunar New Year holiday, China's central bank said it would inject 1.2 trillion yuan ($173 billion) of liquidity into the market. Related * Tracking the Coronavirus * The Economic Impact of Coronavirus, by the Numbers * New York City Investigating Possible First Case of Coronavirus * In Virus-Hit China, Markets Brace for a Fall as Authorities Urge Calm * Avian Influenza in China Adds to Economic Concerns Amid Coronavirus Spread * Coronavirus Is Declared a Global Health Emergency as Threat Rises Outside China The People's Bank of China, which has vowed to provide more aid for financial institutions during the deadly outbreak, said there will be 900 billion yuan more liquidity in the system compared with the same period a year earlier. Chinese health officials said in a trial guideline that the remains of deceased coronavirus patients should be disinfected and placed in sealed bags, cremated in designated facilities and not transferred between provinces, China's official Xinhua News Agency reported Sunday. The guideline included a ban on certain funeral traditions for coronavirus victims. Both patients in the Philippines were being treated in isolation at a hospital in Manila, health authorities said. The man developed severe pneumonia due to viral and bacterial infection, the statement added, and while he had shown signs of improvement, his condition deteriorated rapidly in his final 24 hours. Philippine health authorities urged calm. "I would like to emphasize that this is an imported case with no evidence of local transmission," said Health Secretary Francisco T. Duque III. Raffaele Huang, Grace Zhu, Rachel Pannett, Jon Emont, Chuin-Wei Yap, Paul Page and Cameron McWhirter contributed to this article. Write to Stephanie Yang at stephanie.yang@wsj.com , Feliz Solomon at feliz.solomon@wsj.com and Gordon Lubold at Gordon.Lubold@wsj.com Credit: By Stephanie Yang, Feliz Solomon and Gordon Lubold 
It took investors a few days, but they think they have the effect of the new coronavirus from China worked out. The broad thrust: Suppliers to China, and travel and holiday stocks, will suffer, but nasty effects for the market as a whole will be offset by central banks. The virus will be controlled enough that it won't cause a recession in the West. Leaving aside the heartbreak experienced by relatives and friends of those with the illness, as well as the many deaths , this coldblooded analysis rests on several assumptions that may turn out to be unsound?봭otably, the big risk that this virus could follow a different pattern than the 2003 outbreak of severe acute respiratory syndrome, or SARS, the financial effects of which are being widely used as a model. The new coronavirus has spread rapidly in China since emerging in Wuhan in December. So far its spread outside China has been limited, with around 100 cases and, so far, not much human-to-human infection?봞lthough the U.S. State Department is concerned enough to warn against all travel to China . Investors have reacted in what looks like a rational way: Since human-to-human infection was confirmed on Jan. 20, the biggest China exchange-traded fund, iShares MSCI China ETF, is down 11%; the U.S. airline sector is off 7%; and Brent crude oil, the global benchmark for the main transport fuel, is down 13%. Stocks in China-dependent Taiwan and South Korea have lost 6% and 9%, respectively, in dollar terms, while the U.S. benchmark S&P 500 is down only 3%. Bond yields are significantly lower, and investors are pricing in a 60% chance of a Federal Reserve rate cut by June?봠ompared with just 15% before human-transmission confirmation. Those lower yields are once again cushioning the impact on U.S. stocks, following the lesson of the past decade that equities thrive when money is cheap. SHARE YOUR THOUGHTS Have you altered your investments because of the coronavirus? Why or why not? Join the conversation below. The trouble is the assumptions underlying the market reaction. The first is that the effects of the virus will be short-lived, and so can be (mostly) ignored. Investors care much more about the long-term prospects for earnings than a short-term hit to sales; there are going to be lots of profit warnings blaming the infection. But, investors assume, things will rapidly return to normal. Unfortunately, we have little idea whether this is true. If people can pass on the virus before they show symptoms, or if it turns out to be easier to catch than first thought, it may spread rapidly outside China. Second, investors are assuming that the wider population outside China remains calm and that preventive action by governments and companies isn't terribly disruptive. If people aren't willing or able to go about their ordinary lives, the economy will be hit hard and so will stocks. Confidence is a fragile thing and hard to predict. If confidence crumbles, it will be doubly bad. The S&P 500 was the most highly valued since 2002 just before the outbreak, with investors verging on exuberant, so any loss of faith could hit prices hard. Worse, the U.S. economy has been reliant on confident consumers for the past year as manufacturers and exporters struggled. If consumers close their wallets, there is no backup source of demand. Third, investors assume there are no cliff-edge effects, such as highly indebted companies just clinging to life that could be tipped over. "For a few weeks, it's not a big deal, but if it lasts a few months, then sustainability of debt becomes an issue," says Vincent Mortier, deputy chief investment officer at Paris-based fund manager Amundi. A series of vulnerable companies collapsing would probably push up corporate bond yields and make it more difficult for junk-rated companies to borrow, in turn hurting the economy. Analysis is difficult partly because of the shortage of precedent. SARS in 2003 was mainly a China threat, reflected in a big hit to Hong Kong stocks but not much impact on assets in the rest of the world. Hong Kong stocks bottomed out when new SARS cases started to fall, anticipating the end of the problem, which makes sense. But it is a poor example for the rest of the world, where the picture was clouded by the U.S. invasion of Iraq just as the virus began to spread globally. The effects of previous pandemics?봞nd note that so far this is very far from a pandemic?봮n stock prices are similarly obscured by other events. In 1918, for example, the Dow Jones Industrial Average rose as the Spanish flu intensified, just as World War I was nearing its end. When the index finally fell, losing 11% during the winter, it only took the Dow back to where it stood in June, three months after the infection was first identified. Trying to separate how prices were affected by the flu from how they were affected by the end of the first world war is a matter of guesswork. Two other flu pandemics, in 1957-58 and 1968-70, killed 1 million or more people world-wide and coincided with U.S. recessions, but didn't obviously cause them. The Congressional Budget Office attempted to model the economic effects of a flu pandemic in 2009. It estimated that additional U.S. deaths of around 100,000, comparable to the 1957 and 1968 outbreaks, would knock about 1% off the U.S. economy?봟ut probably wouldn't cause a recession. A 1918-style pandemic could create a full-blown recession on its own, but as the researchers said, there are huge uncertainties both about patterns of infection and about the economic effects. Medicine is far better today, but the world is better connected, speeding contagion. We should hope that markets are right and that this infection can be contained to China. My concern is that investors are overly confident in their assumption that easy money will keep the U.S. economy and stocks up. Write to James Mackintosh at James.Mackintosh@wsj.com Credit: By James Mackintosh 
The number of people in China infected by a fast-spreading new coronavirus surpassed that of severe acute respiratory syndrome, or SARS, nearly two decades ago, as airlines halted flights to the country and governments around the world worked to repatriate their citizens from the city at the center of the outbreak. British Airways and Indonesia's Lion Air said on Wednesday they would halt all flights to mainland China, and American Airlines said it would suspend flights to Shanghai and Beijing from Los Angeles, citing a significant decline in demand for travel. Taken together, the airlines' moves serve as a harbinger of more cutbacks to services to the Chinese mainland, as safety concerns rise and demand drops sharply ?봳riggered by the virus's rapid spread around the globe. In a matter of weeks, the pathogen has killed at least 170 people and infected more than 7,700 people in China, according to China's National Health Commission. That latter number topped SARS, which also originated in China, killing 349 people and infecting 5,327 on the Chinese mainland during its nine-month outbreak in 2002 and 2003. The number of SARS infections world-wide??,098?봧s still higher than the total for the new coronavirus??,065, according to the WHO. The WHO said it would decide on Thursday whether to declare the outbreak an international public-health emergency, based on an increasing number of cases and evidence of human-to-human transmission outside China. Michael Ryan, executive director of the WHO's health-emergencies program, praised China's response to the outbreak on Wednesday. "Myself and the director-general have never seen the scale, commitment of an epidemic response at this level," Dr. Ryan said. Meanwhile, governments globally were evacuating their citizens from Wuhan, the city in central China where the virus emerged late last year. A plane carrying more than 200 Americans arrived on Wednesday morning at March Air Reserve Base in Riverside County, Calif. The passengers were screened multiple times?봳wice in China before being allowed to board the flight and again after the plane stopped in Anchorage, Alaska, to refuel. They will be screened again in California and temporarily housed there for a period of time, according to Alaska's Department of Health and Social Services. Matt Hancock, secretary of state for health and social care in the U.K., tweeted on Wednesday that the government is working on evacuating its citizens from Wuhan and that all passengers would be isolated for 14 days upon arrival. Australia, which has roughly 600 citizens in Hubei province, of which Wuhan is the capital, said it would also evacuate its citizens and quarantine them in a detention center on remote Christmas Island, an Australian territory typically used to house asylum seekers. Jin Geun Lim of Connecticut was among the Americans who couldn't get a seat on the U.S. flight, leaving him stranded in Wuhan rather than starting his final semester of college at the University of Bridgeport. The 23-year-old Mr. Lim, who traveled to the city to meet his in-laws for the first time, on Wednesday said his mother-in-law has been going to the market two hours before opening time to ensure she can get meat and vegetables, the items that sell out fastest. She cleans everything she touches with rubbing alcohol, he added. Mr. Lim said he hadn't been out of the house in nine days. The family has passed the time by playing cards and watching movies. He said he had gone on social media to connect with the outside world?봞 pastime made aggravating by his 2G data roaming, which means loading a single Instagram photo takes 10 seconds or more. After posting an article that attracted thousands of "upvotes" of approval, he spent all day answering questions from curious readers. "That's the most fun I've had so far," he said, though he added that he missed the food back home. The U.S. Embassy in Beijing said it would work with Chinese authorities to find other options for U.S. citizens remaining in Wuhan to leave the Chinese city of 11 million, which has been on lockdown since last week to curb further spread of the virus. Several other countries, including Japan and South Korea, are also planning evacuations of their citizens. The Chinese government is requiring airlines to offer passengers free cancellations on prebooked flights. New cases continued to emerge around the world. The United Arab Emirates's Health Ministry said Wednesday that a family of four visiting from Wuhan had contracted the new coronavirus, the Middle Eastern nation's first confirmed cases. Kazakhstan, which shares a border with China, said Wednesday that it would suspend all transport links to the country in addition to stopping the issuance of entry visas to Chinese citizens over the coronavirus. Georgia was suspending all direct air traffic with China as a preventive measure, the former Soviet republic's air traffic authority said. In Russia, all tour operators have stopped selling tours to China, including charter flights, according to Russia's national tourism agency, Rostourism. New Zealand followed the U.S. in advising against nonessential travel to China, and Australia urged its citizens to reconsider travel to the country. The U.S. expanded screenings for the coronavirus to 20 airports this week, though Health and Human Services Secretary Alex Azar said Americans didn't need to worry about their health and safety, noting that the U.S. had recorded only five confirmed cases so far. Much remains unknown about the new coronavirus, including the specific source and the period before an infection begins to show symptoms. The 10-Point In Your Inbox Get a daily, guided tour of the best scoops and stories in The Wall Street Journal. Sign up for The 10-Point newsletter . Hong Kong leader Carrie Lam on Tuesday urged residents to return home from the mainland immediately and to quarantine themselves at home for 14 days after. The Communist Party-run People's Daily, via an official social-media account, asked that passengers who had made any of 116 domestic journeys by public transport?봳he post listed specific train, plane and bus numbers?봰uarantine themselves at home and report to authorities in their communities. Passengers from just two of those trips, taken Jan. 6 to Jan. 23, had been found, according to the posting. Denise Roland, Anthony O. Goriainoff, Benjamin Katz, Fanfan Wang and Ben Otto contributed to this article. Related * Businesses Suspend Chinese Operations Amid Coronavirus Fears * An American Mother's Desperate Attempt to Get Out of Wuhan With Her Daughter * Americans Evacuated From Wuhan Pass Initial Health Screens for Coronavirus * What to Know About the New Chinese Coronavirus * Airlines Brace for Coronavirus to Cut Into Revenue * Australia's Coronavirus Evacuation Plan: A Tiny Island 1,000 Miles Away * As China Locks Down Cities, Residents Battle Virus Fears?봞nd Boredom Write to Stephanie Yang at stephanie.yang@wsj.com and Julie Wernau at Julie.Wernau@wsj.com Credit: By Stephanie Yang and Julie Wernau 
Hong Kong-listed stocks dropped sharply on their first trading day after the Lunar New Year break, as investors assessed the spreading Wuhan coronavirus and its impact on global growth. The benchmark Hang Seng Index dropped 2.8% on Wednesday, catching up with a slide in global markets that took place earlier in the week. Markets in mainland China remain closed for the Lunar New Year holiday; they are scheduled to reopen next week. The market closures didn't stop investors from placing bets against Chinese companies. The Hang Seng China Enterprises Index, which tracks large Chinese companies listed in Hong Kong, fell 3.3%. Exchange-traded funds comprised of A-shares listed on the mainland fell even more. The ChinaAMC CSI 300 Index ETF, which is designed to mimic the performance of the biggest stocks in Shanghai and Shenzhen, dropped 5%. The declines come as the number of confirmed cases and fatalities from the pneumonia-causing coronavirus continue to rise, with the death total climbing to at least 132 and confirmed infections rising to around 6,000. "Financial markets are reacting nervously to the spread of the coronavirus, and more and more questions are being asked about the economic consequences," said Charlie Lay, a foreign-exchange strategist at Commerzbank in Singapore. The Hong Kong government unveiled measures on Tuesday to limit travel to and from mainland China to try to contain the outbreak, though it stopped short of completely shutting the border. So far, there have been eight confirmed cases of the coronavirus in Hong Kong. The main concern among global investors is that the virus could turn into a pandemic that cripples transportation, shopping, business meetings and weighs on economic growth. Luxury retailers, travel companies and casino stocks have been among the hardest hit shares in recent weeks. On Wednesday, shares of Macau resort and casino operator Sands China Ltd. dropped more than 5.6% while Galaxy Entertainment Group fell 5.2%. Chinese property developers China Evergrande Group and Sunac China Holdings Ltd. declined 4.2% and 5.2%, respectively. Meanwhile, stock indexes in South Korea, Australia and Japan rose Wednesday. The gains came after U.S. stocks rebounded on Tuesday, with the S&P 500 rising 1% after suffering its steepest loss since October on Monday. The yuan strengthened slightly in offshore trading on Wednesday morning, then fell back to 6.9659 per U.S. dollar. Seema Shah, chief strategist at Principal Global Investors, said part of the concern weighing on markets is the speed at which information travels today. The global spread of severe acute respiratory syndrome, or SARS, in 2003, by comparison, took place before the dawn of modern-day social media. "The echo chamber to amplify market anxiety has never been more powerful," she said. Write to Steven Russolillo at steven.russolillo@wsj.com Credit: By Steven Russolillo 
Investors who began the year feeling largely sanguine about the stock market are struggling to make sense of whether a growing coronavirus outbreak could upend their bets on a global economic recovery . Just days ago, global stocks looked poised to close out January on a strong note. Benchmark indexes from the S&P 500 to the Stoxx Europe 600 to India's S&P BSE Sensex climbed to records. Investors projected that with issues including the U.S. and China's trade war and central-bank rate increases in the rearview mirror, the global economy would likely be able to stage a modest rebound in 2020. Now that view is being tested. The viral outbreak that originated in Wuhan, China, has infected thousands and spread to the U.S., Japan, South Korea and other countries. The disease threatens to hamper an already-slowing Chinese economy , in turn potentially jeopardizing the global recovery that many investors had counted on to materialize this year. Markets bounced higher Tuesday, paring losses after anxiety over the outbreak sent stocks from Japan to Germany to the U.S. to their biggest one-day declines in months Monday. "I don't think markets anticipated how contagious this disease has proven to be and how quickly it's spreading," said Michael Farr, president and chief executive of investment-management firm Farr, Miller & Washington. Over the past several months, Mr. Farr said his firm has been gradually selling some of its riskier investments, reasoning that the stock market had already managed to run up well past what most had expected in 2019. "It really has yet to be seen whether this [downturn] will gain traction or not," Mr. Farr said. "But it certainly seems like the ingredients for a further decline are coming together." Experts caution that it is still too early to understand how big an economic impact the virus will have. So far, health officials say the Wuhan virus appears to be less severe than prior strains, such as the SARS coronavirus. During prior outbreaks, markets proved resilient. Charles Schwab analysts found the MSCI World Index declined 5.5% in the month after January 2016, when the Zika virus spread to several countries, but returned 2.9% over the course of six months. In their analysis of 13 outbreaks since 1981, analysts at the firm found the index returned an average of 0.8% over a one-month period following an outbreak and 7.1% over a six-month period. Morningstar analysts came to a similar conclusion, finding that, among the companies they covered, none suffered a long-term effect from the 2003 SARS outbreak. In other words, even when stocks have taken a short-term hit from disease-related worries, they have tended to bounce back in the following months. That is because in recent decades it has been rare, if not unheard of, for a contagious disease to bring consumer spending to a halt around the world. Nevertheless, the timing of this year's outbreak is in some ways more worrisome than in prior cases. Data earlier in the month showed China's economy grew 6.1% in 2019 . While that increase was within the government's target, it marked the slowest pace of expansion for the world's second-largest economy in nearly three decades. Should the coronavirus outbreak fail to stabilize by March, first-quarter growth in China could slow to below 6%, Soci챕t챕 G챕n챕rale economists said in a report. Making matters worse, the latest outbreak is spreading in the midst of the Lunar New Year holiday, when millions of Chinese citizens typically travel to visit their families. And China's economy is more interconnected to the global economy than it was when the SARS outbreak occurred in 2003, meaning a slowdown there could have widespread ramifications. Even just days into the deepening crisis, markets outside China have been hit by volatility. Share Your Thoughts How do you expect the coronavirus outbreak to affect global stocks throughout the year? Join the conversation below. Copper has fallen for nine straight days in their longest losing streak since October 2016. Prices for the industrial metal tend to pick up when investors are more optimistic about the prospects for economic growth. Shares of airlines and casino operators such as Wynn Resorts Ltd., Las Vegas Sands Corp. and American Airlines Group Inc. have dropped, reflecting investors' anxieties about a potential pullback in travel spending . In the U.S., the S&P 500 ended Monday down 1.6%, marking its worst session since October . The broad index rose 1% on Tuesday. Some analysts believe markets may still have further to fall before they bottom out. Morgan Stanley analysts predicted the S&P 500 could drop as much as 5% before the current stretch of declines is over. That assessment was based on the view that stocks had already run up past what economic data justified, making them appear vulnerable to a drawdown even before the coronavirus outbreak began. Ultimately, though, money managers have more questions than answers. During the SARS outbreak in 2003, "the hit to economic growth was measurable, albeit short-lived," said Katie Nixon, chief investment officer at Northern Trust Wealth Management, in emailed comments. The extent to which the markets slide this time around will depend on "the length, depth and breadth of the economic impact" of the outbreak, Ms. Nixon said, adding that she would be carefully monitoring news reports in the coming days. Markets in Your Inbox Get our Markets newsletter, a pre-markets primer packed with news, trends and ideas. Plus, up-to-the-minute market data. Sign up. Related * WHO Chief Praises Beijing's Coronavirus Response as Travel Barriers Rise * U.S. Expands Airport Screening for Coronavirus * Stocks Rise Amid Efforts to Contain Virus * Companies Try to Assess Financial Impact * Lunar New Year Visitors to Gambling Hub Macau Screened for Coronavirus * China Strains to Stamp Out Coronavirus Criticisms at Home * What to Know About the Coronavirus Write to Akane Otani at akane.otani@wsj.com Credit: By Akane Otani 
The tally of deaths and infections from the spread of the new coronavirus in China jumped again on Friday?봶ith authorities canceling large public gatherings and locking down more cities ?봞s the U.S. confirmed its second infection and the disease spread into Europe and Australia for the first time. The number of infections had risen to at least 1,287 confirmed cases as of the end of Friday, China's National Health Commission reported Saturday morning local time, more than doubling the total number from just a day earlier. The official death count rose to at least 41, all of them within China. Confirmed cases were reported for the first time in France, where authorities counted three coronavirus infections. Chinese state media separately reported the death on Saturday morning of a doctor at one of the main hospitals treating coronavirus patients in Wuhan, the central Chinese city where the outbreak began. The 62-year-old ear, nose and throat doctor is believed to be the first doctor to have died from the disease, and would bring the total count up to 42. Health officials in the southwestern province of Guangxi also reported Saturday morning the infection of a 2-year-old girl. The new U.S. case involves a woman in her 60s from Chicago who had traveled to Wuhan in late December and returned to the U.S. on Jan. 13, Chicago's health commissioner said, adding that the woman has been isolated in a hospital and is doing well. A man in his 30s in Washington state who had traveled to Wuhan had been diagnosed with the virus earlier this week. Officials at the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention said they expected the virus would spread to more people in the U.S. and elsewhere around the world. The French health ministry said on Friday that one patient had been hospitalized in Bordeaux, in the south of France, while two other patients were hospitalized in Paris. In Australia, health officials Saturday confirmed the country's first case of coronavirus, a Chinese man in his 50s who had flown into Melbourne last week after having spent time in Wuhan. Singapore said it had two new confirmed coronavirus cases, bringing the total number there to three. All are residents of Wuhan, visiting Singapore over the weeklong Lunar New Year holiday. Separately, Taiwan's health ministry, which confirmed its first case earlier this week, added two more on Friday, bringing the separately governed island's tally to three. Confirmed cases have also appeared in Thailand, Vietnam, South Korea, Japan, Nepal and the Chinese territories of Hong Kong and Macau. The Wuhan virus belongs to a family of respiratory viruses that can be spread by coughing, kissing or making contact with saliva . Often, these coronaviruses simply cause common colds. But others have been more serious, even deadly. Health officials believe that the incubation period for the virus is around 14 days, meaning it could take roughly two weeks for someone infected with the virus to develop symptoms. People are most likely not contagious before symptoms develop, health officials said. U.S. authorities have been screening international travelers arriving at five major airports for fevers and other symptoms of an infection, while alerting hospitals to take measures to screen people who have traveled to Wuhan. The CDC said that it is currently re-evaluating the screening process. So far, over 2,000 people coming into the U.S. have been screened from roughly 200 flights. The Chicago woman who was infected didn't show symptoms until a few days after returning to the U.S., health authorities said. After learning about the woman's trip, her doctor took steps to prevent further spread, including sending the woman to a hospital with infection control. Authorities in Chicago expressed doubt that the woman who became the U.S. second confirmed case had transmitted the virus, because she didn't have symptoms while flying?봞nd after returning to the U.S., didn't take public transportation or attend any large gatherings. In addition, she didn't have long, close contact with anyone outside her home, they added. President Trump said in a tweet Friday that the U.S. "greatly appreciates" China's efforts to control the coronavirus, and its transparency. He singled out Chinese President Xi Jinping for praise. In China, officials have shut down parts of the Great Wall and canceled Lunar New Year events as part of efforts to stop the spread of the respiratory virus. They have also halted public transportation out of several cities in Hubei province, of which Wuhan is the capital and largest city, and where the vast majority of the cases have been identified. On Thursday morning, local officials locked down Wuhan , a major transportation hub that is home to 11 million people. Outbound flights and trains were canceled and roads leading out of the city were blocked. Within a day, at least a dozen other cities in Hubei had said they would also suspend public transportation, according to the Communist Party's flagship newspaper, People's Daily. Several more cities imposed restrictions Friday on human movement, including Jingzhou, a city of 6.6 million people?봶hich banned buses, cars and ferries from leaving. It set up body temperature checkpoints at stations and highways around the city. Related Coverage * Virus Overwhelms Wuhan's Health System * Stocks Close Lower on Outbreak Worries * China's Coronavirus Response Is Questioned: 'Everyone Was Blindly Optimistic' * Racing for the Last Train Out of Wuhan: 'If I Don't Leave Now, I Won't Be Able To' * Coronavirus Forces China to Close Some Famous Landmarks * Spreading Coronavirus Prompts Lockdown of More Chinese Cities * What We Know About the Wuhan Coronavirus In neighboring Henan province, Guangshan county, with a population of 860,000, set up its own restrictions on travel, a sign that the lockdowns are spreading beyond Hubei province. In Beijing, the Forbidden City and sections of the Great Wall were closed until further notice, while Shanghai closed many major venues including museums, movie theaters and Shanghai Disneyland Park. The U.S. and Japan, meantime, warned travelers not to visit Hubei province. The State Department has ordered the departure of all nonemergency personnel and family members, warning that the American government is limited in its ability to provide emergency services to citizens still in the province. Japan said its citizens should avoid Hubei province entirely. The World Health Organization decided not to declare a global public health emergency on Thursday, saying it was still too early for such a move. WHO Director-General Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus added the situation may change in the coming days. Jon Emont in Singapore and James Glynn in Sydney contributed to this article. Write to Stephanie Yang at stephanie.yang@wsj.com and Brianna Abbott at brianna.abbott@wsj.com Credit: By Stephanie Yang and Brianna Abbott 
WUHAN, China?봗he city in central China where a new coronavirus originated will halt outbound flights and trains and shut its public-transportation system, the Chinese government said, a dramatic escalation in the battle to contain a pneumonia outbreak that has killed at least 17 people. The decision to lock down Wuhan, a major travel hub and a city of 11 million, comes as the country is entering one of its busiest travel periods, its Lunar New Year holiday. Hundreds of millions will travel across China and outside the country, increasing the risk of transmission for the virus. After days in which authorities appeared reluctant to impose sweeping bans on the movement of the general public in Wuhan, the mood began to shift on Monday, when the number of confirmed cases jumped and health authorities confirmed the virus could be transmitted between humans. That day, President Xi Jinping gave his first public direction to officials to work with international authorities and share information more openly. Since then, as the number of deaths and confirmed cases has risen, authorities in Wuhan have stepped up their own countermeasures. The lockdown will begin at 10 a.m. local time on Thursday and continue for an indefinite period, Wuhan health authorities said. Service on subways, city buses, long-distance coaches and ferries will also be suspended. At Wuhan's Hankou rail station, thousands of travelers hustled to catch trains, many booked or changed at the last minute, to get out of the city before the lockdown on public transportation. Inside the station, people wearing face masks and dragging luggage jogged to catch departing trains. Almost every seat on the trains was occupied. Lai Xuan, a 25-year-old accountant, was awakened by her husband, Tang Hao, at 2 a.m. after he read about the pending transportation closure. "I wanted to flee immediately," said Ms. Lai, who has been avoiding restaurants, movie theaters and other public spaces to avoid infection. Mr. Tang, who works in advertising at a tech firm, said he believes the government is doing only what is necessary to ensure public health. "It's normal to try to control the population flow when people are sick," he said. But they hurried over to the train station at 5 a.m. to exchange their noon tickets to Shiyan in the Hubei province for an 8:30 a.m. train. His employer told employees to try to stay away from Wuhan. Many of the top comments on Weibo, China's Twitter-like microblogging service, have been supportive of the city at the epicenter of the outbreak and the government's efforts to contain the virus. "Wuhan, we are in this together. You are one city but part of the country. Please don't lose hope. The dark days will pass," read a post that got more than 15,000 likes. Chinese authorities have suggested that the newly identified coronavirus is spreading between people primarily through coughing, kissing or contact with saliva. The number of infections from the new pneumonia-causing coronavirus has multiplied in recent days, with 568 confirmed cases in mainland China as of the end of Wednesday, according to the Communist Party mouthpiece People's Daily, up from more than 300 announced on Tuesday. Public anxiety, the holiday and cold, wet weather had cleared many from Wuhan's streets, restaurants, subway and airport by Wednesday, but the entrances to front-line hospitals were busy, with patients' relatives dropping off food and other daily supplies. "My dad is 65, and he's right in that vulnerable age of danger," said a woman waiting inside the Wuhan Medical Treatment Center, also known as Jinyintan Hospital, in a newish northern section of the city. SHARE YOUR THOUGHTS What else should nations be doing to stem the spread of this new coronavirus? Join the conversation below. She said her father had suffered a high fever for several days and been transferred to the center?봶here staffers donned blue surgical-type gowns, as did some police officers, who fit them over their uniforms and wore plastic shields over their faces?봣rom a different city hospital the day before for additional testing. She said doctors didn't know whether he had the virus. "I'm very afraid for his health," she said. From its initial emergence in a seafood and livestock market in Wuhan, the virus has spread across China and into the U.S., Japan, South Korea and Thailand. In Hong Kong, health authorities on Thursday said they were investigating two patients who are suspected of having been infected with the new coronavirus, in what would be the Chinese territory's first confirmed cases. One of the patients, a 39-year-old man from Wuhan, had arrived in Hong Kong on Tuesday, Hong Kong Food and Health Secretary Sophia Chan said at a press conference. Preliminary examinations had shown the man testing positive for the virus, Ms. Chan said. The other is a 56-year-old Hong Kong resident who traveled to Wuhan this month to visit relatives, authorities said. Additionally, across the Pearl River, the Chinese territory of Macau confirmed its first case on Wednesday: a 52-year-old woman who had taken a high-speed train from Wuhan, Chinese state media reported. Several other provinces and territories in China, including Fujian, Anhui, Liaoning and Guizhou, announced their first confirmed infection cases on Wednesday, according to CCTV and local Chinese authorities. The province of Hubei, of which Wuhan is the capital and largest city, late Wednesday reported a total 444 confirmed cases, up from 270 announced the previous day. It has been the only region to report deaths from the virus so far?봱ising to 17 from six a day earlier. Outside mainland China, health authorities have tallied at least three infected patients in Thailand, and one each in Japan, South Korea and Taiwan. On Tuesday, health officials confirmed that a man who had recently arrived in Washington state after a visit to Wuhan had become the U.S.'s first confirmed case. The World Health Organization on Wednesday postponed for a day a decision on whether to declare that the outbreak constitutes a public-health emergency of international concern. That designation would help mobilize resources to prevent the virus's spread. After debating the matter for hours, the emergency committee was split on the decision, said Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, the WHO's director-general. "It was clear that to proceed, we need more information," Dr. Tedros said. The agency has a team in China trying to answer important questions such as how transmissible the virus is and what is being done to contain it, he said. "The situation is evolving very rapidly," said Didier Houssin, chairman of the WHO's emergency committee, who is an adviser to the French Agency for Food, Environment and Occupational Health and Safety. The start of the Lunar New Year this week has prompted fears of a repeat of the crisis involving severe acute respiratory syndrome, or SARS, which spread through China in late 2002 and early 2003, also overlapping with the holiday. SARS, caused by a different strain of coronavirus, spread globally and killed 774 people after its emergence in southern China. Public-health officials are particularly concerned about the new virus because there are many unknowns. It is unclear, for example, how many people have actually been infected, and how transmissible it is from one person to another. The more it spreads, the greater the chance of a mutation that could make the virus even deadlier, scientists say. Some experts have questioned whether China has been too slow in providing updates to the international health community. "It is still not transparent enough," said Harry Yi-Jui Wu, director of medical ethics and humanities at the University of Hong Kong, while calling on the Chinese government to provide better updates on cases outside of Wuhan. "It should communicate more effectively with citizens, instead of reiterating a wishful phrase saying, 'Disease is in general controllable.' " In Beijing, Chinese health officials said at a briefing on Wednesday that they are still working to understand more about the virus, while pledging to release timely information. This week, Zhong Nanshan, one of the country's best-known epidemiologists, confirmed suspicions that the novel coronavirus was spreading between humans , which would allow the disease to be transmitted among people who don't interact with any animals. The virus is believed to have spread to humans from animals at the Wuhan market. Chinese hospitals are stepping up preventive measures, health officials said. Hubei province plans to ask the national government for emergency aid, the official Communist Party mouthpiece People's Daily reported on Wednesday. Hubei is short of face masks , the report said. Chinese authorities have yet to determine which animal originally harbored the virus and passed it on to humans, although they have said it was likely a wild animal. They also have yet to announce what they believe is the incubation period for the disease, or the time it takes for infected patients to start showing symptoms. "If you knew the incubation period, you could do quarantining of people who are in close contact with infected patients," said Melissa Nolan, an assistant professor at the University of South Carolina's Arnold School of Public Health. "You would monitor those people for the incubation period." Related * What We Know About the Virus * First U.S. Case Reported of Deadly Wuhan Virus * Virus in China Is Part of a Growing Threat * Virus Sparks Chinese Panic Buying, Travel Cancellations * Investors Look to Past Epidemics for Clues As China's government races to find out more about how the disease is spreading, it is paying attention to the possibility of superspreaders?봧nfected patients who have been able to pass the virus to several people?봆ao Fu, a director at China's Center for Disease Control and Prevention, said at the government's press briefing. On Tuesday, the epidemiologist Dr. Zhong, who leads an expert committee organized by the Beijing government, said one patient in Wuhan had infected more than a dozen medical staff. But Mr. Gao said there was no evidence yet of superspreaders. One reason SARS spread so quickly nearly two decades ago was that some individuals were able to transmit the disease to dozens of others. At Wuhan Lung Hospital, another facility designated to treat virus patients, people huddled outside a quarantine ward that serves as a preliminary location for testing. One man said his 39-year-old wife had been admitted on Monday after developing a high fever and troubled breathing. Doctors said tests would confirm within a day whether she had the new virus, but 48 hours later, he said, there had been no update. "Specialists from Beijing have come, but there are so many people sick that they're overwhelmed," he said. "I hope it's normal pneumonia and she can leave soon, but when you hear nothing you get worried." Yijun Yin, Lucy Craymer, Liyan Qi, Betsy McKay and Yoko Kubota contributed to this article. Write to Shan Li at shan.li@wsj.com , James T. Areddy at james.areddy@wsj.com and Chao Deng at Chao.Deng@wsj.com Credit: By Shan Li, James T. Areddy and Chao Deng 
A man in Washington state has been diagnosed with a deadly strain of coronavirus, the first case to be confirmed in the U.S. in an outbreak that has sickened hundreds of people in Asia, federal and state health officials said Tuesday. The man, who is in his 30s and is a U.S. resident, recently traveled to Wuhan, China, the city where the outbreak is believed to have started last month, according to the federal Centers for Disease Control and Prevention as well as Washington state and local health authorities. The man arrived back in the U.S. Jan. 15. He is the first patient to be diagnosed with the new coronavirus outside Asia. Authorities in China early Wednesday said the death toll from the outbreak in that nation had risen to nine from six, and there are 440 confirmed cases. The government said it would step up preventive measures at hospitals and recommended that people not go into or out of Wuhan. While most of the confirmed illnesses occurred in people in Wuhan, cases have been reported in other cities in China, as well as Thailand, Japan, South Korea and Taiwan. The CDC said last week that it was expecting cases in the U.S., and now says it anticipates more. "We do expect additional cases in the United States and globally," said Nancy Messonnier, director of the CDC's National Center for Immunization and Respiratory Diseases. An emergency committee for the World Health Organization is scheduled to meet Wednesday to determine whether to declare the outbreak a public-health emergency of international concern, a designation that would help mobilize resources to prevent the virus's spread around the globe. Aware of the outbreak in Wuhan, the Washington man sought medical care when he developed symptoms a day after arriving home to Snohomish County, north of Seattle, health officials said. He is in good condition and has been hospitalized at the Providence Regional Medical Center Everett out of an abundance of caution, the officials said. A hospital spokesman said that the patient is being monitored in a special isolation unit "for at least the next 48 hours." The hospital is contacting health workers and other patients who might have had contact with him, so they can be monitored for symptoms, the spokesman said. "The man who tested positive acted quickly to seek treatment," said John Wiesman, Washington state secretary of health. "We believe the risk to the public is low." The fact that local health officials and a regional hospital in the Pacific Northwest have suddenly been confronted with a virus that scientists discovered just a few weeks ago thousands of miles away in central China shows how rapidly diseases can spread around the world. The risk is even greater when a new virus emerges in a busy transportation hub like Wuhan, which is connected through direct and connecting flights to many other major cities around the globe. The CDC said Tuesday that it would expand screening of airline passengers for symptoms of the new virus to two more airports: Chicago O'Hare International Airport and Hartsfield-Jackson Atlanta International Airport. The CDC began screening at the end of last week at three airports that receive the majority of travelers from Wuhan: San Francisco International Airport, Los Angeles International Airport and New York's John F. Kennedy International Airport. More than 1,200 passengers have been screened, but none have been referred to a hospital, said Dr. Messonnier. The Washington state man returned to the U.S. before screening began. It isn't clear how he was infected, deepening a mystery as to how the virus is transmitted and how easily it spreads from one person to another. He didn't visit any animal or seafood markets in Wuhan, which were suspected sites for transmission, said Chris Spitters, health officer for the Snohomish Health District. Nor did the man know anyone who was ill. Coronaviruses circulate primarily in animals such as bats and pigs, and Chinese authorities initially believed that patients had been infected at a market. But as more cases emerged in people who said they hadn't visited the market, they revised their stance. Chinese authorities acknowledged on Monday that the virus is spreading among humans.  Credit: By Betsy McKay 
Disruptions caused by the coronavirus outbreak have forced auto makers and their suppliers to idle plants across China, rattling the industry's global supply chain and posing another challenge for companies already facing slowing sales and declining profitability. Chinese factories building both finished vehicles and car parts have been on an extended temporary shutdown following the Lunar New Year holiday, as part of a larger effort by the country's government to suspend business and travel as it tries to contain the spread of the deadly flulike virus. While many factories were expected to reopen next week, some auto makers and suppliers say they'll keep their plants idled for longer or are waiting until this weekend to make a final determination. The expected disruptions threaten the ability of auto makers to get key parts and maintain production levels well into 2020. Honda Motor Co., which has three assembly plants in the city of Wuhan where the outbreak is believed to have begun, said Friday that production at those plants was likely to resume in the week of Feb. 17. The company earlier targeted Feb. 14 for the restart. Executive Vice President Seiji Kuraishi said the company had planned repairs to its production lines during the holiday but had to stop because of restrictions set by local authorities. Toyota Motor Corp. said Friday that its joint-venture factories in China wouldn't restart regular production until Feb. 17 at the earliest, with further delays possible. The company is concerned some employees visiting families during the holiday might not be able to immediately return to work, said public-relations head Masayoshi Shirayanagi. "Some provinces are ordering people to stay at home for 14 days after they come back from other provinces," Mr. Shirayanagi said. "We'll have to take that kind of thing into account." The outbreak is yet another challenge for the global car business, already facing slowing sales, falling profit margins and new auto-emissions regulations requiring manufacturers to spend billions on electric cars. Car-industry sales in China have slumped over the past two years, ending a 30-year boom that resulted in auto makers rushing to build more plants in the country. Car company executives say they are still trying to get a handle on how deeply this could cut into sales results and whether it will affect earnings. Many say it is too early to tell. The suspended production is already having an impact outside of China. Many Chinese auto-parts suppliers haven't been able to build and export parts, creating a ripple effect for the foreign car factories that depend on them for critical components. The intricacy of supply chains in the auto industry?봶here a typical finished vehicle is assembled from roughly 30,000 individual parts manufactured by hundreds of different companies?봫akes it difficult for car companies to quickly shift work outside of China or to another supplier, analysts and car executives say. Fiat Chrysler Automobiles NV chief executive Mike Manley said it might have to halt production at one of its European plants in as little as two weeks because four Chinese suppliers are unable to provide parts. Hyundai Motor Co. has already suspended production lines at its South Korean plants due to shortages of parts supplied by Chinese factories, a company spokesperson said Tuesday. More Automotive News on China * China Auto Sales Slid 8.2% Last Year * Ford Signals More China Trouble on the Road Ahead * Tesla Set to Expand China Assembly With Compact SUV * GM Posts Its Biggest China Sales Decline France's Renault SA is also closing a factory in South Korea because of supply shortages from its Chinese suppliers. The shutdown will start on Feb. 11 and last for at least four days, a spokeswoman said. Even if plants in China are able to reopen next week, there is no guarantee that they'll have the workforce or parts to restart assembly lines, analysts and car executives say. Auto forecasting company LMC Automotive expects the outbreak to have a lingering effect on car manufacturing well into the spring before coming under control in June. That scenario could reduce Chinese car production by over 900,000 vehicles this year, shaving around 4% from what had been expected before the shutdowns, the company said in a published note. In addition to disrupting assembly of finished vehicles, China has thousands of auto parts suppliers, some of whom are already telling clients they won't be able to fulfill orders, say industry lawyers. Guenter Butschek, chief executive officer of India's Tata Motors Ltd., said the situation in China could be unclear for months. "We can expect the rebalancing of the entire supply chain is effectively going to take more than just a week, because there is a huge backlog in demand domestically and for export," Mr. Butschek said. The chief executives for General Motors Co. and Ford Motor Co. said this week that they are still trying to assess the situation. Both car companies have large vehicle-assembly operations in China, all of which have been idled due to the outbreak. Some of GM's plants are expected to reopen next week, but it does have one factory in Wuhan that likely will be idled longer, according to a company spokesman. "Our supply chain and engineering teams are working around the clock to develop and execute contingency plans," GM Chief Executive Mary Barra told investors during a presentation Wednesday in New York. It could take some time before China-side work stoppages affect U.S. assembly plants because shipping parts across the Pacific takes weeks and deliveries are still expected to come in, analysts say. But the longer businesses are closed in China, the more complicated it can get for foreign factories reliant on Chinese-built parts. Hyundai was among the first auto makers impacted outside of China as its South Korean factories are close to nearby China and they can keep leaner inventories on hand. The disruption highlights both the complexity and fragility of the auto industry's global supply chains, said Sheldon Klein, a Detroit-based attorney whose practice works with automotive suppliers. "If anything goes wrong, the whole thing comes crashing down," he said. Megumi Fujikawa, Eric Bellman and Nick Kostov contributed to this article. Write to Ben Foldy at Ben.Foldy@wsj.com Credit: By Ben Foldy 
Ship calls at or through major Chinese ports have fallen 20% since Jan. 20, maritime data provider Alphaliner said, as measures to control the coronavirus outbreak cut into international supply chains. The research firm said in a report that it projects the impact of factory shutdowns and other restrictions hitting China's economic output will reduce global ocean container volumes, a major piece of global trade, by about 0.7% over the full year, or about 6 million containers. China, acting to halt the spread of the disease, has extended until Feb. 9 the Lunar New Year holiday that traditionally curtails factory production. Travel restrictions remain in place, however, which may leave many factories short of workers to resume production if they try to reopen next week. "The full impact of the Chinese coronavirus outbreak on container volumes will not be fully measurable until ports announce their throughput numbers for the first quarter, but data collected on weekly container vessel calls at key Chinese ports already shows a reduction of over 20% since 20 January," Paris-based Alphaliner said in the report, released late Tuesday. Brokers in China said bookings for container ships, tankers and dry bulk vessels are falling rapidly and that the slowdown could extend until March. The reduction in shipping volumes is expected to ripple across supply chains in the U.S. and Europe, with rail and truck volumes likely sliding in the coming weeks on the reduced flow of international goods. "As far as box volumes in China, we see a fall of around 23% over the past three weeks as the country is gradually shutting down," said Wang Lei, a broker in Shanghai, the main gateway for Chinese exports and the world's busiest seaport with some 42 million containers a year. "Workers from crane operators to customs officials and truck drivers are staying home," Mr. Lei said. "It's always slower during the Lunar New Year holidays, but this is something else. People are afraid to interact and it's killing business." China is the world's biggest exporter, and container ships move everything from clothes and furniture to electronics, cars and industrial equipment from seven sprawling ports on its Pacific coast to the U.S., Europe and the rest of Asia. Big container lines continue to operate at China's main coastal seaports, but the world's top 10 operators have canceled at least two dozen sailings to China in recent weeks, many more than they typically drop during the traditionally slow first quarter. Danish maritime giant A.P. Moller-Maersk A/S said it will cut two sailings in the key Asia-Europe trade loop over the next two weeks. A number of other carriers have canceled sailings, too, including France's CMA CGM SA and Taiwan's Evergreen Marine Corp. Other global carriers are set to announce more voided sailings in coming days that could extend to mid-March, shipping executives said. Supply chains have begun feeling the heat. Hyundai Motor Co. said Tuesday it will begin suspending production at all seven of its plants in South Korea because of a lack of parts made by suppliers in China. Tesla Inc. warned of delivery delays in China with its factory in Shanghai closed due to the outbreak, while Kia Motors Corp. cut car production in three South Korean plants due to parts shortages from Chinese suppliers. "Ironically, the only port which is busy is Wuhan because it has become the city's lifeline," said a Singapore broker. "Everything from food and medicine to petrol and other supplies comes through there." The Yangtze River port at Wuhan, the main city in China's Hubei province at the center of the outbreak, has remained open even as travel in the region has been locked down. The virus is also stopping work at China's shipyards, where dozens of ocean-going vessels are undergoing repairs or are scheduled to be retrofitted with sulfur-trapping exhausts in line with a mandatory global maritime directive to drastically cut ship sulfur emissions. "We are trapped on board waiting for some service work to be done," said Nikos Papatheodorou, the chief mechanic of a Greek-operated dry bulk vessel at China's private Changhong shipyard. "There are about two dozen ships berthed at the yard and we were told that we could be facing delays of up to three weeks." The Baltic Capesize Index, which measures the cost of moving commodities on the world's largest bulk ships, has been in negative territory since last Friday. Demand for raw materials in China "has fallen off a cliff," said the Singapore broker. The tanker market is also reeling as the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries and its allies look for an agreement to slash daily production because of deeply reduced demand from China. "All crude sectors are already recalibrating sharply lower and there are some very dark clouds on the horizon for the tanker market," said London-based ship brokerage E.A. Gibson Shipbrokers Ltd. in a report on Monday, adding that daily freight rates for large crude carriers fell around 40% last week. Write to Costas Paris at costas.paris@wsj.com Credit: By Costas Paris 
SHANGHAI -- The U.S. government was preparing to evacuate by air hundreds of Americans from central China on Wednesday in response to the deadly coronavirus outbreak, as Beijing criticized Washington's overall response as unhelpful. In the second such operation in a week following the December outbreak, two jetliners landed Tuesday in Wuhan to fly roughly 530 people to the U.S. in the evacuation, a person familiar with the planning said. On the way into China, the two jetliners carried shipments of private aid -- moves that followed several days of criticism from Beijing about U.S. policy following the outbreak of the coronavirus, which has killed hundreds of people and infected more than 20,000, the most in and around Wuhan city. Days after the first flight on Jan. 28 evacuated more than 200 diplomats, their family members and other U.S. citizens, the U.S. called on all Americans still in mainland China to leave the country. Major U.S. airlines suspended flights -- moves widely echoed around the world as concerns grow about the spread of the highly infectious coronavirus. China's Foreign Ministry, meantime, has singled out the U.S. government for criticism on a near-daily basis, characterizing its moves as irresponsible and antagonistic. "The U.S. government hasn't provided any substantial assistance to us, but it was the first to evacuate personnel from its consulate in Wuhan, the first to suggest partial withdrawal of its embassy staff, and the first to impose a travel ban on Chinese travelers," Foreign Ministry spokeswoman Hua Chunying told reporters on Monday. "All it has done could only create and spread fear, which is a bad example." Ms. Hua instead lavished praise on a number of countries that she said have sent aid to China: South Korea, Japan, the U.K., France, Turkey, Pakistan, Kazakhstan, Hungary, Iran, Belarus and Indonesia. China's sharp criticism adds to complications in the U.S.-China relationship built up in recent years over technology and trade, among other issues. The dust is just now settling from a two-year trade dispute following a first-stage deal signed in January, though outstanding issues remain in that realm too. On Jan. 31, the U.S. responded to a World Health Organization designation of China's viral outbreak as a "public-health emergency of international concern" by raising its travel alert for China to the highest level -- "Do Not Travel" -- as well as imposing new checks on arrivals from China, which was followed by the suspension of service to China by major U.S. air carriers. Those moves were followed by similar travel alerts by other countries and the suspension of flight service to China by roughly 30 global carriers, though some of the first steps to limit entry of visitors from China were taken by North Korea and Singapore -- countries that have long enjoyed close relations with Beijing. "The U.S. government is coordinating closely with the [People's Republic of China] government to deliver humanitarian assistance and to evacuate additional U.S. citizens from Wuhan," a spokesman for the U.S. Embassy said in response to Ms. Hua's criticism. Aid to China from the U.S. is coming from private sources, with the help of American authorities. Donations of protective equipment from aviation giant Boeing Co. and two faith-based charities, the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints and Samaritan's Purse, for instance, were being flown into Wuhan on this week's U.S. government-organized flights, according to a person familiar with the U.S. plan. "We saw the comment from China's Foreign Ministry, and to be honest it did sting," said Ker Gibbs, president of the American Chamber of Commerce in Shanghai.  Credit: By James T. Areddy and Liza Lin 
Chinese markets dropped sharply on the first day of trading after the extended Lunar New Year break, because of heightened anxiety over the fast-spreading coronavirus and uncertainty about its impact on the global economy. The benchmark Shanghai Composite Index fell 7.7% on Monday, shedding about 2.6 trillion yuan ($375 billion) in market value in its steepest one-day decline since August 2015. The Shenzhen Composite dropped 8.4%. The drops reflected how China was catching up with the rest of the world's declines last week. Some exchange-traded funds that hold mainland-listed stocks fell 8% last week, foreshadowing the declines in Shanghai and Shenzhen. Other markets in Asia were mixed on Monday, with benchmarks in India and Hong Kong rising alongside U.S. futures, while South Korean and Japanese gauges fell less than 1% each. The offshore yuan weakened to 7.0141 to the dollar. The selloff came even as authorities unleashed a string of both overt and less-publicized measures aimed at calming investors. China's central bank said on Sunday that it would inject 1.2 trillion yuan ($173 billion) into the financial system. The securities regulator last week urged investors to view the coronavirus "rationally and objectively." In addition, brokers were told by the regulator to suspend their securities lending businesses, meaning clients can't borrow shares, according to two mainland-based hedge-fund investors. Such a measure means investors can't bet on market falls by short selling, or selling borrowed stock with the aim of buying it back later at a lower price. One brokerage described the halt in short selling as part of the "political task" of stabilizing the market, according to a screenshot of a memo that investors said originated from Orient Securities Co. An Orient spokeswoman declined to comment. Authorities have sometimes resorted to such discreet interventions to counter volatility, especially since China's stock market suffered a near-$5 trillion rout in 2015. In addition, China's top economic planner said on Monday the virus's impact would be temporary and wouldn't alter the positive long-run outlook. In a front-page editorial, the state-owned China Securities Journal urged investors to maintain hope, saying authorities had acted swiftly to offset pressure on the economy. Financial bloggers were encouraged not to add to the gloom. Hou Anyang, chairman of Shenzhen-based FrontSea Asset Management and a popular financial commentator, posted a message he received from Weibo on Monday that urged him to "watch out for comments and avoid spreading negative information and mood" during this "special time." Weibo is a Twitter-like platform that is popular in China. "So, the market only fell slightly today?" Mr. Hou wrote to his 857,000 followers on Weibo in response. Shares in the consumer, transportation and financial sectors in China were among the many stocks that fell by the maximum 10% daily limit. These included liquor distiller Wuliangye Yibin Co., beer maker Tsingtao Brewery Co., and brokerages such as Citic Securities, Haitong Securities and Huatai Securities. Hainan Airlines Holding and China Eastern Airlines Corp. also shed 10% each. Transportation and tourism stocks have been among the hardest hit globally. Already, a number of airlines have canceled flights to and from China, domestic travel and business activity have dropped, and conferences have been postponed. The fear of infection is keeping many people home. "I would be surprised if we are back to any kind of normalcy by April even in a best-case scenario," said Bill Bishop, a China watcher, over the weekend in his Sinocism newsletter on Chinese current events. "[China's] financial system is likely to come under extreme pressure in the coming weeks." Monday's selloff came as mainland-listed Chinese stocks traded for the first time since Jan. 23, two days before the start of the Lunar New Year holiday. The markets had originally been scheduled to reopen Jan. 31, but China extended the holiday break through Sunday in an attempt to slow the spread of the new coronavirus . Several economists and market watchers have slashed their forecasts for Chinese economic growth because of the virus. "The disruption in China is likely to have bigger global repercussions now than in 2003," said Ben May, director of global macro research at Oxford Economics, referring to when China was hit by the outbreak of severe acute respiratory syndrome, or SARS. Write to Steven Russolillo at steven.russolillo@wsj.com and Xie Yu at Yu.Xie@wsj.com Credit: By Steven Russolillo, Xie Yu and Stella Yifan Xie 
The U.S. expanded screenings of passengers to 20 airports, and other governments took steps to reduce exposure to travelers from China, as the head of the World Health Organization praised Beijing's handling of the outbreak of a new and dangerous coronavirus. The words of encouragement from WHO Director-General Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus in Beijing on Tuesday offered a public boost to a government response that has come under fire for a lack of transparency, but other developments illustrated continuing fears around the globe that China might not be doing enough to contain the fast-spreading virus. The number of confirmed cases and fatalities continued to jump, with China's National Health Commission announcing 26 more deaths, bringing the total count to 132. Confirmed infections leapt to around 6,000. Tibet reported its first suspected infection. The remote mountainous region was previously the only area of mainland China that hadn't reported evidence of the virus. Hong Kong said it would reduce travel links to the mainland, while Singapore said it would ban travelers from China's Hubei province from entering or transiting through the Southeast Asian city-state. The Philippines Bureau of Immigration suspended issuing visas upon arrival for Chinese nationals to discourage tour groups. The U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention advised travelers to avoid all nonessential trips to China and issued a Level 3 warning for the country, citing the virus's spread and the lockdown of cities including Wuhan, which sits at the center of the outbreak. For Wuhan's home province of Hubei, the U.S. State Department issued its highest, Level 4 alert -- the same used for North Korea, Iran and Venezuela. The department evacuated staff from its consulate in Wuhan, as well as a limited number of U.S. citizens, via a charter flight bound for Ontario, Calif., on Tuesday. The U.K. and New Zealand followed the U.S. in advising their citizens against nonessential travel to China. France recommended a suspension of all travel to Hubei and announced plans to evacuate its citizens from Wuhan. Some global companies are adjusting operations in China. Starbucks Corp. said it had temporarily closed more than half its stores in the country due to the outbreak. Apple Inc. limited business travel to the country, closed a retail store and limited store operating hours there. Other chains including McDonald's Corp. and Yum China Holdings Inc. have closed stores. Facebook Inc. restricted all nonessential employee travel to China and is asking those who have recently been there to work from home for a period, according to a person familiar with the situation. Office-space startup We Co.'s WeWork shut 52 locations in eastern China until Feb. 9, in accordance with government demands. United Airlines Holdings Inc. on Tuesday became the first U.S. carrier to cancel flights --suspending 24 round trip-flights between the U.S. and China starting Feb. 1. Air France-KLM said it canceled flights to Wuhan. The airline also is offering rebooking and cancellation at no extra charge to and from China. British Airways and Deutsche Lufthansa AG are offering similar rebooking policies. Meanwhile, health authorities in Germany and in Sri Lanka announced their first confirmed coronavirus cases, and Japan's health minister confirmed two more cases Tuesday, including what was likely the country's first human-to-human transmission. That case involved a tour-bus driver who fell sick after chauffeuring two groups from Wuhan this month. Taiwan's Health Ministry reported its eighth case, a man who was infected by a family member who worked in mainland China. In Russia, tour operators suspended group tours from China and three eastern provinces that border the country halted entering road traffic, although they continue to admit Chinese visitors arriving by plane and train, according to authorities. All arrivals at the border in these provinces are being checked for fever. In Beijing, the WHO's Dr. Tedros, as he is known, expressed confidence in China's approach to controlling the epidemic at a meeting with Foreign Minister Wang Yi and called for people to remain calm, according to a readout by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. Dr. Tedros offered similar praise in a meeting later in the day with Chinese President Xi Jinping, state media reported. The WHO has declined to declare the outbreak a global public-health emergency, citing a limited number of cases abroad and efforts to bring it under control. South Korea also issued an alert urging "restraint" for travel to China and recommended citizens leave Hubei. The European Union is sending two planes to repatriate its citizens from the Wuhan area, EU Commissioner for Crisis Management Janez Lenarcic said. The EU said roughly 250 French citizens would take the first plane and more than 100 EU citizens from other countries would take the second. --- Wenxin Fan, Liza Lin, Kersten Zhang, Yin Yijun, Raffaele Huang, Megumi Fujikawa and Ruth Bender contributed to this article.  Credit: By Stephanie Yang 
The tally of deaths and infections from the spread of the new coronavirus mounted in China on Friday?봶ith authorities canceling large public gatherings and locking down more cities ?봞s the second U.S. case of the virus was confirmed. The number of infections had risen to at least 881 confirmed cases, China's state-run broadcaster China Central Television reported Friday evening, adding more than 300 new cases to the previous day's official count. The official death count ticked higher to 41. Chinese officials have shut down parts of the Great Wall and canceled Lunar New Year events as part of efforts to halt the spread of the respiratory virus. The U.S. case involves a woman in her 60s from Chicago who had traveled to the Central Chinese city of Wuhan, where the outbreak began, in late December and returned to the U.S. on Jan. 13, said Allison Arwady, Chicago's health commissioner. The woman has been isolated in a hospital and is doing well, Dr. Arwady said. A man in his 30s in Washington state, who had traveled to Wuhan, previously was diagnosed with the virus, according to health officials. Officials at the federal Centers for Disease Control and Prevention said they expected the virus would spread to more people in the U.S. and elsewhere around the world. The French health ministry said on Friday that three cases of infections had been identified in France?봳he first in Europe. One patient has been hospitalized in Bordeaux, in the south of France, and had recently traveled to China. The two other patients were hospitalized in Paris. Singapore said it had two new confirmed coronavirus cases, bringing the total number there to three. All are residents of Wuhan. They were on visits to Singapore over the weeklong Lunar New Year holiday. Overall, Singaporean authorities have identified 28 suspected cases of the coronavirus; all but two of them had recently traveled to China. Singapore's Ministry of Health said it believes more imported cases of the disease will emerge, given its high volume of overseas travelers. Thailand, another popular destination for Chinese tourists, also has three confirmed cases. Taiwan's health ministry confirmed two more cases on Friday, bringing the separately governed island's tally to three. The U.S., Hong Kong, Vietnam and Macau, special regions of China, also have confirmed two cases. The Wuhan virus belongs to a family of respiratory viruses that can be spread by coughing, kissing or making contact with saliva . Often, these coronaviruses simply cause common colds. But others have been more serious, even deadly. Health officials believe that the incubation period for the virus is around 14 days, meaning it could take roughly two weeks for someone infected with the virus to develop symptoms. People are most likely not contagious before symptoms develop, health officials said. In the U.S., the CDC said it has been investigating whether 63 patients from 22 states have been infected with the virus. Only the two have tested positive so far, while eleven were negative. U.S. authorities have been screening international travelers arriving at five major airports for fevers and other symptoms of an infection, while alerting hospitals to take measures to screen people who have traveled to Wuhan. The CDC said that it is currently re-evaluating the screening process. So far, over 2,000 people coming into the U.S. have been screened from roughly 200 flights. The Chicago woman who was infected didn't show symptoms until a few days after returning to the U.S., Dr. Arwady said. After learning about the woman's trip, her doctor took steps to prevent further spread, including sending the woman to a hospital with infection control. Health authorities are monitoring the woman's close contacts, who haven't shown any signs of infections, Dr. Arwady said. Dr. Arwady expressed doubt the woman transmitted the virus since she didn't have symptoms while flying?봞nd after returning to the U.S., didn't take public transportation or attend any large gatherings. In addition, she didn't have long, close contact with anyone outside her home, Dr. Arwady added. In China's response to the rapid spread of the disease, authorities have halted public transportation out of several cities in Hubei province, which is where the city of Wuhan is located and where the vast majority of the cases have been identified. On Thursday morning, local officials locked down Wuhan , the provincial capital and major transportation hub that is home to 11 million people. Outbound flights and trains were canceled and roads leading out of the city were blocked. Within a day, at least 10 other cities in Hubei had said they would also suspend public transportation, according to the Communist Party's flagship newspaper, People's Daily. Several more cities imposed restrictions Friday on human movement, including Jingzhou?봞 city of 6.6 million people?봶hich banned buses, cars and ferries from leaving. It set up body temperature checkpoints at stations and highways around the city. Related Coverage * Virus Overwhelms Wuhan's Health System * Stocks Close Lower on Outbreak Worries * China's Coronavirus Response Is Questioned: 'Everyone Was Blindly Optimistic' * Racing for the Last Train Out of Wuhan: 'If I Don't Leave Now, I Won't Be Able To' * Coronavirus Forces China to Close Some Famous Landmarks * Spreading Coronavirus Prompts Lockdown of More Chinese Cities * What We Know About the Wuhan Coronavirus In neighboring Henan province, Guangshan county, with a population 860,000, set up its own restrictions on travel, a sign that the lockdowns are spreading beyond Hubei province. Around China, public spaces and events closed or shut down in an attempt to reduce the risk of further contagion. In Beijing, the Forbidden City and sections of the Great Wall were closed until further notice, while Shanghai closed many major venues including museums, movie theaters and Shanghai Disneyland Park. The U.S. and Japan, meantime, warned travelers not to visit Hubei province. The State Department has ordered the departure of all nonemergency personnel and family members, warning that the American government is limited in its ability to provide emergency services to citizens still in the province. Japan said its citizens to avoid Hubei province entirely. The World Health Organization decided not to declare a global public health emergency on Thursday, saying it was still too early for such a move. WHO Director-General Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus added the situation may change in the coming days. Jon Emont in Singapore contributed to this article. Write to Stephanie Yang at stephanie.yang@wsj.com and Brianna Abbott at brianna.abbott@wsj.com Credit: By Stephanie Yang and Brianna Abbott 
On Sunday, more than 10,000 families gathered in Wuhan for a banquet, sharing dishes including spicy duck necks and braised prawns, in a tradition the government had held for years to mark the Lunar New Year. Days later, Beijing made the unprecedented decision to lock down the city of 11 million people , shutting public transportation, movie theaters, internet cafes and other cultural centers, in an effort to contain the spread of a virus that has killed at least 18 people. Some medical professionals questioned the timing of the mass gathering. "Having a big event like this at a time of an epidemic amounts to a lack of basic common sense," said Li Xinzhou, a respiratory specialist in Shanghai. As China tries to control a coronavirus outbreak that has spread halfway around the world since it was first disclosed in December, it is also facing questions about the pace at which the outbreak was confronted. Wuhan and the nearby cities of Huanggang and Ezhou, which collectively hold more than 20 million people, have been put on lockdown , while authorities in the Chinese gambling center of Macau said they were weighing closures of its casinos. Five other cities in the province of Hubei, of which Wuhan is the capital, also enacted travel restrictions late Thursday. Such drastic measures indicate that the virus, for which no cure has yet been found, is spreading faster than previously anticipated. Many international health experts have credited Chinese officials with responding more quickly, and with greater transparency, than they did during the outbreak of severe acute respiratory syndrome , or SARS, 17 years ago, which claimed nearly 800 lives and infected more than 8,000 people world-wide. But people close to the Wuhan government, including advisers and business executives with which it consults, said officials remained overly optimistic that the outbreak would be contained while they focused on other priorities, including annual Communist Party meetings there. In an interview on Tuesday with China's state broadcaster China Central Television, Wuhan Mayor Zhou Xianwang said local authorities "weren't on alert enough" when they organized Sunday's banquet. Wuhan authorities didn't respond to requests from The Wall Street Journal for further comment. The same day as the banquet, Beijing dispatched a group of the nation's prominent epidemiologists to Wuhan. They determined the virus?봧nitially spread from animals?봦ad been transferred between people for some time, but didn't say for how long, before authorities publicly acknowledged such human-to-human contact was likely, increasing its potential danger. The group's leader, Zhong Nanshan, said in a state-television interview that it had found that more than a dozen medical staff in Wuhan had contracted the virus from one patient, though he didn't say when that had occurred. The virus has sickened more than 600 people in mainland China and a handful in countries including Thailand, South Korea and the U.S. It is fast becoming one of the biggest crises and political tests for President Xi Jinping, who has portrayed China as a responsible world power amid heightened tensions with the U.S. and other Western countries. To contain the surge in infections, Mr. Xi this week ordered the travel bans for cities hit hard by the virus, an official familiar with the president's role in the decision said. The World Health Organization says the scale of such a shutdown is without precedent and it remains to be seen how effective the measures will be. The WHO declined on Thursday to declare the outbreak a global public-health emergency, citing a limited number of cases abroad and efforts under way to bring it under control. Chinese officials said Mr. Xi is determined to avoid a repeat of SARS. But some privately say his top-down style of leadership has also made lower-level bureaucrats wary of acting decisively on their own. "Xi's leadership style has effectively instilled a 'wait and see' attitude within the bureaucracy," said Jude Blanchette, a China specialist at the Center for Strategic and International Studies, a Washington think-tank. That, he said, "is leading to slow and hesitant responses from government officials as they wait for pronouncements from Beijing before taking action." Chinese social media in December made the first references to the virus, prompting health authorities in Wuhan to confirm on Dec. 31 that 27 people had been sickened and to close a wholesale wild-animal market where the virus was suspected to have originated. Within a week, reported infections surged to 44. China informed the WHO of the initial outbreak soon after it was discovered. By early January, Chinese health authorities identified the genome of the virus and determined it was in the same family of pathogens as SARS, a notable breakthrough for the domestic scientific community. Wuhan authorities didn't step up public warnings about the virus, but around the start of the year temporarily detained eight people they alleged had spread false information about the virus, without giving any evidence. For weeks, local officials insisted there was a low risk the virus could be passed from human to human. When the city's top leaders met over several days this month for annual policy meetings?봳ypically held to summarize the government's accomplishments for the year and lay out goals for the next??the virus wasn't on the official agenda, even though some officials privately questioned the city's response. "Everyone was blindly optimistic," an adviser to the Wuhan government said. The focus at the time, the adviser said, was to maintain the facade of stability. "This is where they truly messed up," potentially missing an opportunity to more easily contain the outbreak while the sessions were under way, said Dali Yang, a Chinese politics expert at the University of Chicago. Soon, hospitals throughout Wuhan and nearby cities were reporting more cases to the National Health Commission in Beijing, a cabinet-level group. The surge was serious enough that the committee sent the epidemiologists to Wuhan on Sunday. The group, led by Mr. Zhong, a prominent veteran of the SARS epidemic, concluded that the situation was more severe than local authorities had publicly acknowledged, people familiar with the matter said. The group decided authorities should shut the city, but provincial and municipal officials had no authority to do so, so the team had to return to Beijing, where Mr. Xi eventually signed off on the measure. He issued a directive on Monday urging authorities to "take effective measures to resolutely curb the spread of the epidemic" and instructed the central government to set up a task force to tackle the outbreak. The Wuhan lockdown was announced Thursday morning, less than a day after the senior-most Hubei province officials spent the evening at a Wuhan concert hall enjoying a gala. Some people flashed resentment when the lockdown became public. "If measures had been taken in advance, there would be no need to lock down the city," one user on the Weibo microblogging site wrote. "With the city being blocked now, it shows the situation is already out of control." Write to Lingling Wei at lingling.wei@wsj.com and Chao Deng at Chao.Deng@wsj.com Credit: By Lingling Wei and Chao Deng 
WUHAN, China -- The city in central China where a new coronavirus originated will halt outbound flights and trains and shut its public-transportation system, the Chinese government said, a dramatic escalation in the battle to contain a pneumonia outbreak that has killed at least 17 people. The decision to lock down Wuhan, a major travel hub and a city of 11 million, comes as the country is entering one of its busiest travel periods, its Lunar New Year holiday. Hundreds of millions will travel across China and outside the country, increasing the risk of transmission for the virus. After days in which authorities appeared reluctant to impose sweeping bans on the movement of the general public in Wuhan, the mood began to shift on Monday, when the number of confirmed cases jumped and health authorities confirmed the virus could be transmitted between humans. That day, President Xi Jinping gave his first public direction to officials to work with international authorities and share information more openly. Since then, as the number of deaths and confirmed cases has risen, authorities in Wuhan have stepped up their own countermeasures. The lockdown will begin at 10 a.m. local time on Thursday and continue for an indefinite period, Wuhan health authorities said. Service on subways, city buses, long-distance coaches and ferries will also be suspended. At Wuhan's Hankou rail station, thousands of travelers hustled to catch trains, many booked or changed at the last minute, to get out of the city before the lockdown on public transportation. Inside the station, people wearing face masks and dragging luggage jogged to catch departing trains. Almost every seat on the trains was occupied. Lai Xuan, a 25-year-old accountant, was awakened by her husband, Tang Hao, at 2 a.m. after he read about the pending transportation closure. "I wanted to flee immediately," said Ms. Lai. Chinese authorities have suggested that the newly identified coronavirus is spreading between people primarily through coughing, kissing or contact with saliva. The number of infections from the new pneumonia-causing coronavirus has multiplied in recent days, with 568 confirmed cases in mainland China as of the end of Wednesday, according to the Communist Party mouthpiece People's Daily, up from more than 300 announced on Tuesday. Public anxiety, the holiday and cold, wet weather had cleared many from Wuhan's streets, restaurants, subway and airport by Wednesday, but the entrances to front-line hospitals were busy, with patients' relatives dropping off food and other daily supplies. "My dad is 65, and he's right in that vulnerable age of danger," said a woman waiting inside the Wuhan Medical Treatment Center. From its initial emergence in a seafood and livestock market in Wuhan, the virus has spread across China and into the U.S., Japan, South Korea and Thailand. In Hong Kong, health authorities on Thursday said they were investigating two patients who are suspected of having been infected with the new coronavirus, in what would be the Chinese territory's first confirmed cases. One of the patients, a 39-year-old man from Wuhan, had arrived in Hong Kong on Tuesday, Hong Kong Food and Health Secretary Sophia Chan said at a press conference. Preliminary examinations had shown the man testing positive for the virus, Ms. Chan said. The other is a 56-year-old Hong Kong resident who traveled to Wuhan this month to visit relatives, authorities said. Additionally, across the Pearl River, the Chinese territory of Macau confirmed its first case on Wednesday: a 52-year-old woman who had taken a high-speed train from Wuhan, Chinese state media reported. Several other provinces and territories in China, including Fujian, Anhui, Liaoning and Guizhou, announced their first confirmed infection cases on Wednesday, according to CCTV and local authorities. The province of Hubei, of which Wuhan is the capital, late Wednesday reported a total 444 cases, up from 270 announced the previous day. It has been the only region to report deaths from the virus so far -- rising to 17 from six a day earlier. Outside mainland China, health authorities have tallied at least three infected patients in Thailand, and one each in Japan, South Korea and Taiwan. On Tuesday, health officials confirmed that a man who had recently arrived in Washington state after a visit to Wuhan had become the U.S.'s first confirmed case. The World Health Organization on Wednesday postponed for a day a decision on whether to declare that the outbreak constitutes a public-health emergency of international concern. After debating the matter for hours, the emergency committee was split on the decision, said Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, the WHO's director-general. The start of the Lunar New Year this week has prompted fears of a repeat of the crisis involving severe acute respiratory syndrome, or SARS, which spread through China in late 2002 and early 2003, also overlapping with the holiday. SARS, caused by a different strain of coronavirus, spread globally and killed 774 people after its emergence in southern China. Public-health officials are particularly concerned about the new virus because there are many unknowns. It is unclear, for example, how many people have actually been infected, and how transmissible it is from one person to another. The more it spreads, the greater the chance of a mutation that could make the virus even deadlier, scientists say. In Beijing, Chinese health officials said on Wednesday that they are still working to understand more about the virus, while pledging to release timely information. China's government is paying attention to the possibility of superspreaders -- infected patients who have been able to pass on the virus to several people -- Gao Fu, a director at China's Center for Disease Control and Prevention, said at the government's press briefing. On Tuesday, the epidemiologist Dr. Zhong, who leads an expert committee organized by the Beijing government, said one patient in Wuhan had infected more than a dozen medical staff. But Mr. Gao said there was no evidence yet of superspreaders. --- What We Know About the Illness When did the outbreak start? The new respiratory virus outbreak is believed to have originated in December in a seafood and meat market in Wuhan. After spreading throughout China and other countries in Asia, the virus recently arrived in the U.S. The U.S. case involves a Washington state man who recently traveled to Wuhan. In China, the outbreak is responsible for hundreds of confirmed cases and more than a dozen deaths. What is a coronavirus? The Wuhan virus belongs to a family of viruses known as coronaviruses. These viruses, named for the crown-like spikes on their surfaces, infect mostly pigs, cats and other animals. But they mutate easily and can jump from animals to humans, and from one human to another. In recent years, they have become a growing player in infectious-disease outbreaks world-wide. How is the virus spread among humans? Seven strains are known to infect humans, including the virus in Wuhan. They can be spread by coughing, kissing or making contact with saliva, Chinese officials say. Four of the strains cause common colds. Two other strains, however, have been extremely deadly: Severe acute respiratory syndrome, known as SARS, and Middle East respiratory syndrome, or MERS, are coronaviruses. What are the symptoms? Patients have had a fever, cough and other symptoms of pneumonia. Diagnostic tests are being used to confirm whether a patient has the Wuhan coronavirus or another infection. Five major airports in the U.S. are screening arriving international travelers for fever; those who have one are then screened for other symptoms. How does the virus compare with SARS and MERS? So far, the Wuhan virus appears to be milder than SARS or MERS, though it has sickened some people severely and there have been deaths. MERS killed about a third of those infected; SARS resulted in the deaths of about one in 10. So far, the mortality rate from the Wuhan virus is tracking at roughly 3%. Many patients who have died were over 60 years old, had other illnesses such as diabetes and were admitted to hospitals when their illness was advanced. Are there drugs to treat coronaviruses? There aren't any drugs or vaccines approved specifically for the Wuhan virus. Antivirals already on the market might treat the infection, which researchers say they will start to investigate. A few vaccine makers recently have said they would begin developing products targeting the Wuhan virus. -- Betsy McKay  Credit: By Shan Li, James T. Areddy and Chao Deng 
Hundreds of Americans who had been passengers on a coronavirus-stricken cruise ship in Japan landed in the U.S. on Monday, including 14 people who tested positive for the virus and were allowed to join the evacuation operation at the last minute. The number of virus cases aboard the Diamond Princess ship rose to 454?봞bout one in eight of those originally on the ship?봯rompting more questions about whether Japan made the outbreak worse by confining potential virus carriers in a narrow space that wasn't designed for a long-term quarantine. Fourteen of those who tested positive for the novel coronavirus were among the Americans who arrived home Monday in two chartered cargo jets . One landed at Travis Air Force Base near Sacramento, Calif., while the other arrived at Lackland Air Force Base in Texas. Tracking the Coronavirus * 14 Americans repatriated to the U.S. from the Diamond Princess tested positive for the virus. * An additional 99 people aboard the ship tested positive for the virus on Monday, bringing the total to 454. * Beijing is weighing plans to postpone its biggest political assembly as the government races to contain the coronavirus epidemic. Ten infected passengers, as well as some of their spouses, were flown on to Omaha, where they were brought to the University of Nebraska for additional monitoring. The remaining patients were brought to area hospitals near Travis Air Force Base in California, State Department officials said. None of the 14 infected passengers showed symptoms of the virus, such as sore throats or coughing, the officials said. The U.S. initially said no one with the virus would be allowed on the repatriation flights. But during the 40-minute bus ride from the ship to the airport, word arrived that 14 passengers in the group had tested positive based on tests conducted two days before the evacuation, U.S. officials said. Rather than turn them back, officials decided to seat the 14 in an isolated section apart from other plane passengers, according to a joint statement by the State Department and the Department of Health and Human Services. The statement said the infected passengers didn't have symptoms of the viral disease and would be sent to "an appropriate location for continued isolation and care" in the U.S. "Infection prevention and control measures are difficult to implement in a ship environment," said Sylvie Briand, the director of global infectious hazard preparedness at the World Health Organization, who noted that these difficulties aren't specific to the new virus. The Chinese government reported more than 72,000 cases on the mainland, with more than 1,860 deaths. Only three deaths and 794 cases have occurred outside of China, the World Health Organization has said, with the majority of those cases aboard the Diamond Princess. Meanwhile, the remaining Americans who tested negative must serve out two weeks of quarantine in the U.S. after nearly two weeks quarantined aboard the cruise ship, which remains docked in Yokohama, south of Tokyo, with more than 2,000 people aboard. As of Friday, there were 15 cases of the novel coronavirus in the U.S., the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention said. The number of cases in Japan unrelated to the cruise has jumped to more than 60 in recent days, including doctors and nurses who treated earlier victims. Fearing a greater spread in the general population, the Tokyo Marathon on Monday canceled public entries because of the coronavirus outbreak , cutting more than 30,000 runners from one of the biggest races in the world. Only around 200 elite runners will now be allowed to take part in the March 1 race. About 380 Americans and family members of Americans were on board the Diamond Princess when the quarantine started Feb. 5 . Some who had earlier tested positive for the virus remain in Japan in hospitals across the Tokyo region. The last-minute discovery of infected passengers bound for the chartered flights caused hours of delay, and most of the people who were repatriated were up all night in preparation for the flights to the U.S., which departed shortly before 7 a.m. Tokyo time Monday. SHARE YOUR THOUGHTS Do you think U.S. steps to limit exposure to the coronavirus are appropriate? Why or why not? Join the conversation below. Amy Ellefson, 73 years old, from Eden Prairie, Minn., estimated it took an hour and a half to board the plane, after which passengers were asked to disembark and start all over again. After another long line, they boarded again. It was a "nightmarish journey," said Ms. Ellefson. Other countries including Canada and Italy are also preparing flights to repatriate citizens from the Diamond Princess. Health News in Your Inbox Get a curated weekly look at features, columns and headlines on personal health and the health industry. Sign up . Hong Kong's security secretary, John Lee, said the semiautonomous Chinese territory has arranged for two chartered planes that would carry about 350 people with Hong Kong connections, including 260 Hong Kong permanent residents. He said they would be sent to quarantine camps for 14 days. Japan is testing everyone aboard the cruise ship before they disembark, with some 160 members of its military including doctors and nurses helping on and around the ship. Its health ministry said Monday that an additional 99 people aboard the ship have tested positive for the virus, bringing the total to 454. Russia said one of its citizens was in that group, the first Russian diagnosed with the virus. More * Coronavirus Outbreak Sets Back China's Biggest Political Assembly * Chinese Stocks Recover From Coronavirus-Driven Selloff * Working From Home Tests Employees' Endurance * South Korea Tracks, Publishes Patients' Travels * Handshake or Elbow Bump? With Coronavirus, It's Not Business as Usual * China Defends Coronavirus Measures WHO is working with Japanese authorities and the chief medical officer on the ship, in order to strike a balance between protecting the health of those in Japan and other countries and protecting the health of the passengers on the boat, Dr. Briand said. Health ministry official Yosuke Kita said the ministry was on track to finish most of the testing by Wednesday, the day the two-week quarantine ends. He said as many as 1,000 passengers may be able to leave the ship that day, and most of the other passengers will be allowed to go on shore by Friday. The rapid spread of the virus on board has led some outside specialists to question Tokyo's strategy of keeping everyone inside the cruise ship for two weeks unless they tested positive for the virus or had another compelling reason to be taken off. Dr. Masahiro Kami, an expert in infectious diseases, said once it was clear around Feb. 7 that the number of virus cases on the ship was growing fast, the government should have rushed to test everyone and released everyone who tested negative. Some people who tested negative later tested positive, so such a step could have exposed people in the community to virus carriers, but Dr. Kami said that was a risk worth taking because the virus was likely already spreading in Japan through a variety of sources. Shigeru Omi, a former WHO official who is helping the Japanese government respond to the virus outbreak, said early data suggested the number of cruise passengers newly acquiring the infection dropped quickly after Feb. 5, when the quarantine started, showing it "had a very positive impact for reducing" the disease's spread. Still, Dr. Omi acknowledged that the Diamond Princess "was not designed for isolation for several weeks." He said crew members, who circulated on board during the quarantine to deliver food and do other work, continued to get infected at a worrisome rate. "The goal was to keep service going," said a waiter on board, who has developed a cough and was waiting Monday for his test results. Brianna Abbott, Joanne Chiu and Miho Inada contributed to this article. Write to Suryatapa Bhattacharya at Suryatapa.Bhattacharya@wsj.com Credit: By Suryatapa Bhattacharya 
The World Health Organization said Thursday it was too early to declare a peak in the spread of the coronavirus, a day after China marked its deadliest day since the outbreak began. Separately, Singapore -- home to the second-largest number of cases outside mainland China -- reported two new infections, including one with no apparent link to China. The city-state warned the public to be "prepared for the possibility of new infection clusters involving locals within the community," and that new cases may not arise from recent travel to China or contact with travelers from there. Early Friday in China, government authorities raised the death toll from the virus from the virus to 636 from 563. There were 31,161 confirmed illnesses, up from 28,018. The deaths and new cases have been concentrated in the central Chinese city of Wuhan, where the outbreak began, and the surrounding province of Hubei, an area of nearly 60 million people that has been quarantined. Though the number of new cases declined from Wednesday's 3,925, "this is nothing to celebrate -- it's still a great worry," said Mike Ryan, executive director of the WHO's Health Emergencies Program, speaking to reporters in Geneva. "It's right now too early to make predictions on numbers." But Dr. Ryan said it was heartening that the number of cases in Chinese provinces outside of Hubei hadn't accelerated, and that the number of new infections over the prior 24 hours in China had fallen from the previous day. In Singapore, the two new infections bring the total of confirmed cases to 30, the Ministry of Health said. One of the patients is a 41-year-old citizen who the Health Ministry said had no recent travel history to China. The second is a 27-year-old man who attended a business meeting with people from Hubei and elsewhere in China. Others at the meeting, from South Korea and Malaysia, also tested positive. Also Thursday, the U.S. State Department offered Americans stranded in Hubei a last chance for evacuation: Two planes, departing as soon as Thursday night, headed for the U.S. The department told passengers in an email that it expected about 410 people, including Canadians, to be on board. The plan was to drop off Canadians in Vancouver before going to a U.S. destination, which is expected to be in California, it added. Passengers were expected to pay about $1,000 for a ticket. A separate flight organized by the Canadian government left Wuhan Friday with 176 passengers, Canadian officials said. As deaths and infections from coronavirus-caused respiratory illnesses rise, governments including the U.S., Taiwan and Japan are taking increasingly aggressive steps to evacuate and quarantine citizens, while companies are scaling back operations in China. Hundreds of Americans already left Wuhan for home in three government-organized evacuation flights over the past 10 days. Washington last week raised its travel alert for China to the highest level of "Do Not Travel," and advised Americans in China to consider departing through commercial means. Singapore also was preparing a second evacuation flight soon, according to people with knowledge of the situation. WHO announced that it will bring together an international group of scientists and public health experts on Feb. 11 and 12 to identify research priorities and coordinate funding. The aim is to fast-track the development of testing, vaccines and other treatments, said WHO Director-General Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus. On Wednesday, the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention began shipping its diagnostic test kit to labs, hoping to speed up virus detection. Roughly 200 kits will be distributed within the U.S. and a similar amount internationally, the CDC said. Each can run about 700 to 800 patient samples. Saudi Arabia on Thursday suspended all travel to China for both its citizens and residents. Saudi Arabia's General Directorate of Passports in a statement said citizens who violate the ban would be penalized, while residents wouldn't be allowed back in the kingdom. Meantime, Japan's health authorities reported 41 new cases of coronavirus infection among people on a cruise liner quarantined near Tokyo, raising the total on the ship to 61. The ship, carrying around 3,700 passengers and crew, has produced one of the largest clusters of infection with the virus outside China. The outbreak on the ship, the Diamond Princess, is believed to have come from an 80-year-old man who left the vessel midway through a two-week cruise around Asia. Health Minister Katsunobu Kato said 21 of the new cases reported Friday were Japanese passengers. All were to be taken to hospitals on land. --- Alastair Gale, Chun Han Wong, Joyu Wang and Brianna Abbott contributed to this article.  Credit: By Liza Lin and Stu Woo 
The World Health Organization said Thursday it was too early to declare a peak in the spread of the coronavirus, a day after China marked its deadliest day since the outbreak began. Separately, Singapore?봦ome to the second-largest number of cases outside mainland China?봱eported two new infections, including one with no apparent link to China. The city-state warned the public to be "prepared for the possibility of new infection clusters involving locals within the community," and that future cases might not arise from recent travel to China or contact with travelers from that country. Early Friday in China, government health authorities raised the death toll from the virus to 636 from 563. There were 31,161 confirmed illnesses, up from 28,018. THE LATEST ON THE CORONAVIRUS * A Chinese doctor who issued an early warning on the virus died after becoming infected with it . * The State Department offered Americans in Wuhan a last chance at evacuation * China reported its highest single-day death toll on Wednesday, with 73 deaths * Japan confirmed 10 more cases on the ship that has been quarantined there The deaths and new cases have been concentrated in the central Chinese city of Wuhan, where the outbreak began, and the surrounding province of Hubei, an area of nearly 60 million people that has been quarantined. Though the number of new cases world-wide declined from Wednesday's 3,925, "this is nothing to celebrate?봧t's still a great worry," said Mike Ryan, executive director of the WHO's Health Emergencies Program, speaking at a news conference in Geneva. "It's right now too early to make predictions on numbers." But Dr. Ryan said it was heartening that the number of cases in Chinese provinces outside of Hubei hadn't accelerated, and that the number of new infections over the prior 24 hours in China had fallen from the previous day. In Singapore, the two new infections bring the total of confirmed cases to 30, the Ministry of Health said. One of the patients is a 41-year-old citizen who the Health Ministry said had no recent travel history to China. The second is a 27-year-old man who attended a business meeting with people from Hubei and elsewhere in China. Others at the meeting, from South Korea and Malaysia, also tested positive. Also Thursday, the U.S. State Department offered Americans stranded in Hubei a last chance for evacuation: Two planes, departing as soon as Thursday night, headed for the U.S. The department told passengers in an email that it expected about 410 people, including Canadians, to be on board. The plan was to drop off Canadians in Vancouver before going to a U.S. destination, which is expected to be in California, it added. Passengers were expected to pay about $1,000 for a ticket. A separate flight organized by the Canadian government left Wuhan early Friday with 176 passengers, Canadian officials said. As deaths and infections from coronavirus-caused respiratory illnesses rise, governments including the U.S., Taiwan and Japan are taking increasingly aggressive steps to evacuate and quarantine citizens, while companies are scaling back operations in China. Hundreds of Americans already left Wuhan for home in three government-organized evacuation flights over the past 10 days. Washington last week raised its travel alert for China to the highest level of "Do Not Travel," and advised Americans in China to consider departing through commercial means. Related Coverage * China's Coronavirus Outbreak Prompts Patients to Scramble for Remedies * Outbreak Strains Global Medical-Mask Market * Yum China Shows Outbreak Is Curbing Consumption * Cruise Passengers Face Infection Worries, Blown Travel Plans and Boredom * Wuhan Coronavirus Hospitals Turn Away All but Most Severe Cases Singapore also was preparing a second evacuation flight soon, according to people with knowledge of the situation. WHO announced that it will bring together an international group of scientists and public health experts on Feb. 11 and 12 to identify research priorities and coordinate funding. The aim is to fast-track the development of testing, vaccines and other treatments, said WHO Director-General Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus. On Wednesday, the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention began shipping its diagnostic test kit to approved labs, hoping to speed up virus detection. Roughly 200 kits will be distributed within the U.S. and a similar amount internationally, the CDC said. Each can run about 700 to 800 patient samples. Saudi Arabia on Thursday suspended all travel to China for both its citizens and residents. Saudi Arabia's General Directorate of Passports in a statement said citizens who violate the ban would be penalized, while residents wouldn't be allowed back in the kingdom. Taiwan on Thursday banned the visit of all international cruise ships, after saying earlier that only ships that had docked in China or the Chinese territories of Hong Kong and Macau would be barred. Taiwan, a self-ruled island that China considers part of its territory, said it had 11 confirmed coronavirus cases as of Thursday, and that Chinese residents would be barred entry starting Thursday. Meantime, Japan's health authorities reported 41 new cases of coronavirus infection among people on a cruise liner quarantined near Tokyo, raising the total on the ship to 61. The ship, carrying around 3,700 passengers and crew, has produced one of the largest clusters of infection with the virus outside China. The infected people were being taken to hospitals, while those remaining on the vessel face two more weeks of quarantine onboard . In Hong Kong, passengers and crew on the cruise ship World Dream were stopped from leaving the ship on Wednesday, pending health checks. SHARE YOUR THOUGHTS What more could the U.S. be doing to help China combat the coronavirus outbreak? Join the conversation below. The city said Thursday it had confirmed a new case of the virus, bringing its total cases to 22. A Hong Kong health official said the city had at least three patients infected with the virus without recent travel history, expressing concern about the increasing incidence of the disease being transmitted locally. Virgin Australia airline said Thursday it was permanently halting service between Australia and Hong Kong. In a statement, the airline, one of Australia's biggest, said it reached that decision after considering both the coronavirus outbreak and the already-low demand for flights because of the civil unrest in the specially governed Chinese city. Airlines around the world, including American Airlines Group Inc., British Airways and Delta Air Lines Inc., have suspended service to mainland China, with many citing significant declines in demand. Health News in Your Inbox Get a curated weekly look at features, columns and headlines on personal health and the health industry. Sign up. Spain's flagship carrier, Iberia Airlines, said Thursday it would extend the suspension of its single China route, which serves Shanghai, through April. Chun Han Wong, Joyu Wang and Brianna Abbott contributed to this article. Write to Liza Lin at Liza.Lin@wsj.com and Stu Woo at Stu.Woo@wsj.com Credit: By Liza Lin and Stu Woo 
Airbus SE shut down a factory in China that accounts for almost 10% of the production of its most-popular jet, as precautions taken to contain the coronavirus outbreak ricochet across global industries. Hyundai Motor Co. said this week it was idling all seven of its plants in South Korea because of a lack of parts from suppliers in China. It was the first big auto maker to shut down production outside China because of supply-line bottlenecks resulting from widespread factory outages and strict limits on worker movements in the country. Tesla Inc., meanwhile, warned of delivery delays in China. Tao Lin, a vice president for the electric-car maker, posted on chat service Weibo on Tuesday that deliveries set for early February would be affected. Tesla's new factory in Shanghai has been closed due to the outbreak. Many multinational companies have suspended production, closed offices and shut retail outlets in China. In many cases, they have extended shutdowns scheduled for the Lunar New Year. To slow the spread of the deadly coronavirus, the Chinese government has ordered most big plants to stay closed until Feb. 10. Airbus, which had closed its factory for the holiday, said Wednesday it would extend the suspension indefinitely, pending further guidance from Beijing. The list of companies suffering from stoppages in China includes major foreign auto makers as well as technology giants such as Apple Inc. and the biggest assembler of its devices, Foxconn Technologies Co. Other companies are bracing for supply-line shocks. Industrial giant Siemens AG set up a crisis team to help navigate obstacles resulting from the epidemic. Chief Executive Joe Kaeser told reporters Wednesday that the team was monitoring potential bottlenecks in the German company's supply chain. So far, Siemens hasn't encountered problems purchasing components and Mr. Kaeser said the crisis team was to "make sure it stayed that way." China is also one of Siemens's largest markets, accounting for roughly 10% of the group's total sales. Almost all of its products sold in China -- from medical equipment to factory automation -- are at least partially produced there, according to a Siemens spokesman. Hiroki Totoki, Sony Corp.'s chief financial officer, said the disruptions in China could affect the supply chain for the Japanese company's image-sensor business, its most-profitable segment this fiscal year. "We are going to move forward with business while carefully monitoring the condition of the virus," he told reporters earlier this week. Airbus, the world's largest jet maker by deliveries, said that domestic and international travel restrictions were hampering operations at its factory in Tianjin, China. The plant manufactures Airbus's bestselling A320neo narrow body, the rival to Boeing Co.'s 737 MAX. The factory currently produces about six jets a month; Airbus makes just over 60 of the aircraft a month globally. The plant's closure is likely to cause some delivery delays for Asian carriers. If extended, it could affect cash flow at the plane maker, since customers typically pay for planes on delivery. "Airbus is constantly evaluating the situation and monitoring any potential knock-on effects to production and deliveries and will try to mitigate via alternative plans where necessary," the company said. Telecom-equipment maker Ericsson AB said it has suspended production in China. A spokesman said the Swedish company has 11,000 employees in China and 450 in Wuhan, the epicenter of the coronavirus outbreak. Ericsson has 99,000 employees globally. "We have a global supply chain, and [while] China is a big market, we have manufacturing in other countries as well," the spokesman said. --- Ruth Bender and Parmy Olson contributed to this article.  Credit: By Benjamin Katz and Kwanwoo Jun 
Macau planned to shut its casinos , and a technology hub near Shanghai unveiled severe restrictions on residents' movements, the latest in a series of extreme measures that governments have taken to combat the fast-spreading new virus . The number of confirmed cases of the coronavirus rose above 20,000 on Monday, and Hong Kong reported its first death from the virus, which has killed at least 425, all but two of them in mainland China. Belgium reported its first confirmed case, one of the nine Belgian nationals repatriated on Sunday from Wuhan, Health Minister Maggie De Block said on Tuesday at a press conference. The patient had no symptoms and was being quarantined in a hospital. Gambling center Macau, whose casinos racked up revenue roughly six times that of the Las Vegas Strip last year, is closing casinos for 15 days because of the coronavirus, Chief Executive Ho Iat-seng said Tuesday. Two local residents confirmed to have the virus Tuesday worked for casinos, health authorities said. The city had 10 cases as of Tuesday afternoon. The Latest on the Coronavirus * Confirmed cases topped 20,000. * The death toll is at least 425. * The U.S. is preparing another evacuation of Americans from central China. * Macau is closing its casinos . The Chinese special territory had previously restricted only entry to the casinos by people who had been to China's Hubei province, of which Wuhan is the capital. In China, a member of the National Health Commission's group to study the virus, acknowledged in an interview with state broadcaster China Central television that resources in Wuhan weren't adequate to handle the high number of cases there. Jiang Rongmen said that was part of the reason there is a higher death rate in the city. The death rate from the virus is 4.9% in the city but 2.1% nationwide, according to the health commission. Another official with the health commission sought to offer reassurance at a press conference on Tuesday. Most infected patients have only mild symptoms, Jiao Yahui said. Still, the list of local governments restricting movement also grew. Hangzhou, home to tech giant Alibaba Group Holding Ltd. and the world's No. 1 maker of surveillance cameras, Hangzhou Hikvision Digital Technology, said it was closing all public places other than markets and pharmacies. It also joined other cities in allowing each household to send out only one person every two days for basic necessities, according to a government notice published Tuesday. Hangzhou has more than 100 confirmed cases of the virus. The city of about 10 million people is a popular tourist destination about two hours' drive from Shanghai and the capital of Zhejiang province. Wenzhou, about 200 miles south in the same province, had previously imposed similar movement restrictions. Several other cities across China?봧ncluding Harbin, more than 1,500 miles north of Wuhan, with 63 confirmed cases??introduced similar controls. Nike Inc. on Tuesday said it had closed about half of its stores in China, joining other retailers in responding to the outbreak. Hong Kong, a special territory that neighbors Macau, recorded its first death from the coronavirus, a 39-year-old man who had been to the central city of Wuhan in January. It was the second coronavirus death outside mainland China, following the death in the Philippines of a 44-year-old man from Wuhan on Saturday. Hong Kong Chief Executive Carrie Lam has faced calls from some politicians and medical professionals in the city to fully close the border with the mainland. The city, which has 18 confirmed cases of the coronavirus, is set to shut some of its busiest checkpoints with mainland China late Tuesday night, tightening the border for the second time since the outbreak began. Singapore's Ministry of Health reported six new cases, four of them resulting from local human-to-human transmission, but said there was no evidence of sustained community transmission. The city state, among the first countries to impose travel restrictions on people from mainland China, has more than 20 confirmed cases. Meanwhile, the U.K. upgraded its travel warning, telling citizens who were in China to leave if they were able. Previously, the advisory had applied only to Hubei. New Zealand issued a similar advisory. India said it had banned all Chinese citizens and others who had recently been in the virus-stricken country, from entering the country, and Taiwan said on Tuesday that it would refuse entry starting Friday to foreigners who had been to mainland China in the past two weeks. Chinese nationals largely aren't permitted by their own government to travel to the self-ruling island as tourists. Related * The Middle Seat: How to Handle Air Travel During Outbreak * Outbreak a Major Test of China's System, Says Xi Jinping * Officials Err on Side of Caution * Tracking the Coronavirus * The Economic Impact of Coronavirus, by the Numbers * Coronavirus Closes China to the World, Straining Global Economy Taiwan also imposed limits on purchasing face masks, which are in short supply in the region as people try to protect themselves against infection. South Korea was set to implement a law on Wednesday that would punish hoarding protective masks with up to two years in prison and a fine of more than $40,000. The Macau government's website had a page that updated every 15 minutes to track which stores had face masks in stock and how many. In South Korea, Hyundai Motor Co. said it would suspend production at all of its plants in Korea as its supply chain had been crippled by the outbreak in China. Suspension schedules would vary by line, as it sought suppliers outside China. Hyundai had to shut down one of its major assembly lines in the southern city of Ulsan on Tuesday amid a lack of auto components after its China-based parts suppliers suspended work. The car maker has seven major factories in South Korea, including five in Ulsan, and 10 plants overseas. In Japan, a cruise ship with about 3,700 people was quarantined in Yokohama after a man who had been on the ship tested positive for the virus, said the ship's operator, Carnival Japan Inc. Quarantine officials were conducting checks on passengers. SHARE YOUR THOUGHTS How do you think China has been handling the coronavirus outbreak? Is there something you would change or replicate in other countries? Join the conversation below. The United Arab Emirates followed several other Middle Eastern countries, including Qatar and Iran, in restricting travel to China. Flights, except those going to Beijing, will be suspended indefinitely starting Wednesday, the aviation authority there said on Monday. Chinese stock markets steadied Tuesday, after plunging on the first day of trading after the Lunar New Year holiday, despite liquidity injections from the central bank and vows to support financial institutions. The People's Bank of China injected a further $71.2 billion of liquidity through reverse repurchase agreements into the financial system Tuesday, adding to the $171 billion injected Monday. The benchmark Shanghai Composite Index closed up 1.3% Tuesday, one day after falling 7.7% and notching its steepest one-day decline since August 2015. According to the state-run People's Daily newspaper, China has spent roughly $6.7 billion on epidemic prevention, with the majority going to patient treatment and subsidies for medical workers. Health News in Your Inbox Get a curated weekly look at features, columns and headlines on personal health and the health industry. Sign up. Following the opening of a newly built hospital in Wuhan on Monday, several other cities have begun construction of hospitals designated for coronavirus patients. They include Guangzhou and Shenzhen in the southern province of Guangdong, which has the second-highest number of confirmed cases in China, with 725. State media reported that Wuhan is setting up field hospitals inside a sports stadium and two exhibition halls. The transformation is expected to be finished as early as Tuesday night. The three hospitals will have a total of 3,400 beds for patients with mild symptoms, according to Xinhua News Agency. Joyu Wang, Grace Zhu, Yin Yijun, Jing Yang, Liyan Qi, Wenxin Fan, Miho Inada and Valentina Pop contributed to this article. Write to Stephanie Yang at stephanie.yang@wsj.com Credit: By Stephanie Yang 
The number of people in China infected by a fast-spreading new coronavirus surpassed that of severe acute respiratory syndrome, or SARS, cases as airlines halted flights to the country and governments around the world worked to repatriate their citizens from the city at the center of the outbreak. Taken together, the airlines' moves serve as a harbinger of more cutbacks to services to the Chinese mainland, as safety concerns rise and demand drops sharply -- triggered by the virus's rapid spread around the globe. In a matter of weeks, the pathogen has killed at least 170 people and infected more than 7,700 people in China, according to China's National Health Commission. That latter number topped SARS, which also originated in China, killing 349 people and infecting 5,327 on the Chinese mainland during its nine-month outbreak in 2002 and 2003. The number of SARS infections world-wide -- 8,098 -- is still higher than the total for the new coronavirus -- 6,065, according to the World Health Organization. The WHO said it would decide on Thursday whether to declare the outbreak an international public-health emergency, based on an increasing number of cases and evidence of human-to-human transmission outside China. Michael Ryan, executive director of the WHO's health-emergencies program, praised China's response to the outbreak on Wednesday. "Myself and the director-general have never seen the scale, commitment of an epidemic response at this level," Dr. Ryan said. Governments globally were evacuating their citizens from Wuhan, the city in central China where the virus emerged late last year. Several countries, including Japan and South Korea, are planning evacuations of their citizens. Meanwhile, new cases continued to emerge around the world. The United Arab Emirates's Health Ministry said Wednesday that a family of four visiting from Wuhan had contracted the new coronavirus, the Middle Eastern nation's first confirmed cases. Kazakhstan, which shares a border with China, said Wednesday that it would suspend all transport links to the country in addition to stopping the issuance of entry visas to Chinese citizens over the coronavirus. Georgia was suspending all direct air traffic with China as a preventive measure, the former Soviet republic's air-traffic authority said. In Russia, all tour operators have stopped selling tours to China, including charter flights, according to Russia's national tourism agency, Rostourism. New Zealand followed the U.S. in advising against nonessential travel to China, and Australia urged its citizens to reconsider travel to the country. Hong Kong leader Carrie Lam on Tuesday urged residents to return home from the mainland immediately and to quarantine themselves at home for 14 days after. The Communist Party-run People's Daily, via an official social-media account, asked that passengers who had made any of 116 domestic journeys by public transport -- the post listed specific train, plane and bus numbers -- quarantine themselves at home and report to authorities in their communities. Passengers from just two of those trips, taken Jan. 6 to Jan. 23, had been found, according to the posting. --- Denise Roland, Anthony O. Goriainoff, Benjamin Katz, Fanfan Wang and Ben Otto contributed to this article.  Credit: By Stephanie Yang and Julie Wernau 
Hong Kong-listed stocks dropped sharply on their first trading day after the Lunar New Year break, as investors assessed the spreading Wuhan coronavirus and its impact on global growth. The benchmark Hang Seng Index dropped 2.8% on Wednesday, catching up with a slide in global markets that took place earlier in the week. Early Thursday, the benchmark was down a further 1.8%. Markets in mainland China remain closed for the holiday. They are scheduled to reopen next week. Investors bet against Chinese companies. The Hang Seng China Enterprises Index, which tracks large Chinese companies listed in Hong Kong, fell 3.3%. Exchange-traded funds composed of A-shares listed on the mainland fell even more. The ChinaAMC CSI 300 Index ETF, which is designed to mimic the performance of the biggest stocks in Shanghai and Shenzhen, dropped 5%. The declines come as the number of confirmed cases and fatalities from the pneumonia-causing coronavirus continues to rise. "Financial markets are reacting nervously to the spread of the coronavirus, and more and more questions are being asked about the economic consequences," said Charlie Lay, a foreign-exchange strategist at Commerzbank AG in Singapore. The Hong Kong government unveiled measures to limit travel to and from mainland China to try to contain the outbreak, though it stopped short of shutting the border. The main concern among global investors is that the virus could turn into a pandemic that cripples transportation, shopping, business meetings and weighs on economic growth. Luxury retailers, travel companies and casino stocks have been among the hardest hit shares in recent weeks. On Wednesday, shares of Macau resort and casino operator Sands China Ltd. dropped 5.6%, while Galaxy Entertainment Group fell 5.2%. Chinese property-developers China Evergrande Group and Sunac China Holdings Ltd. declined 4.2% and 5.2%, respectively. Meanwhile, stock indexes in South Korea, Australia and Japan rose Wednesday. The gains came after U.S. stocks rebounded on Tuesday, with the S&P 500 rising 1% after suffering its steepest loss since October on Monday. The yuan strengthened slightly in offshore trading on Wednesday, then fell back to 6.9659 per U.S. dollar. Seema Shah, chief strategist at Principal Global Investors, said part of the concern weighing on markets is the speed at which information travels today. The global spread of severe acute respiratory syndrome, or SARS, in 2003, by comparison, took place before the dawn of modern-day social media. "The echo chamber to amplify market anxiety has never been more powerful," she said.  Credit: By Steven Russolillo 
Stocks pulled back after Federal Reserve Chairman Jerome Powell offered investors a mixed outlook on the economy, deflating the stock market's recovery from an early-week selloff. The central bank left interest rates unchanged, which initially kept the stock market steady. Stocks started slipping after Mr. Powell, in his press conference later in the afternoon, said the fast-spreading coronavirus may pose risks to global growth and offered a more tempered outlook on economic growth. "There are grounds for what I would call cautious optimism for the global economy," said Mr. Powell. "We are not at all assured of a global rebound but there are signs and reasons to expect it -- and then comes the coronavirus." Mr. Powell added that it is too early to speculate on the macroeconomic implications for China. Still, major U.S. stock indexes relinquished most of their gains by the end of the session. The Dow Jones Industrial Averaged ended the day up 11.60 points, or less than 0.1%, to 28734.45, despite advancing more than 200 points earlier in the session. The S&P 500 fell into negative territory, shedding 2.84 points, or 0.1%, to 3273.40. The Nasdaq Composite rose 5.48 points, or less than 0.1%, to 9275.16. All three indexes remain down for the week. Most of the losses occurred on Monday, when the Dow fell roughly 454 points on reports that the number of people infected and killed by the coronavirus had jumped over the weekend. "We still haven't dug down into the amount of people exposed to the coronavirus and numbers seem to be coming in much higher than a typical flu," said Larry Peruzzi, managing director of international equity trading at Mischler Financial. "It warrants the concern the market has showed it in recent days." Earnings drove some of the biggest moves in individual stocks. Shares of Apple rose 2.1%, or $6.65, to $324.34 after the company reported record revenue and a return to profit growth in the latest quarter. General Electric shares added 10%, or $1.21, to $12.94 after the conglomerate gave an upbeat outlook for 2020. Shares of McDonald's rose 1.9%, or $4.05, to $214.44 after the chain topped analysts' expectations. Shares of Advanced Micro Devices, one of the stock market's biggest gainers last year, slid 6%, or $3.02, to $47.51 after the chip maker gave a conservative outlook for 2020. Hess shares fell 6.9%, or $4.30, to $57.82 after the energy company reported a bigger-than-expected loss for the fourth quarter. L Brands jumped 13%, or $2.66, to $23.22 after The Wall Street Journal reported that Chief Executive Leslie Wexner is in discussions to step aside and is exploring strategic alternatives for the lingerie brand, citing people familiar with the matter. Boeing, meanwhile, added 1.7%, or $5.46, to $322.02 after it posted its first annual loss in more than two decades because of issues surrounding its 737 MAX jets. Shares remain down 12% over the past 12 months. In after-hours trading, Facebook shares dropped about 8%, despite reporting stronger-than-expected growth in earnings, revenue and daily users. Expenses rose. Tesla shares climbed about 12% after hours when the electric-car maker reported record deliveries and higher revenue. Elsewhere, the Euro Stoxx 600 rose 0.4%. At midday in Tokyo, the Nikkei 225 Stock Average was down 1.6%. Elsewhere in the Asia/Pacific region, South Korea's Kospi was down 0.9% and Australia's S&P/ASX 200 was down 0.5%. --- Steven Russolillo contributed to this article.  Credit: By Michael Wursthorn and Avantika Chilkoti 
Investors who began the year feeling largely sanguine about the stock market are struggling to make sense of whether a growing coronavirus outbreak could upend their bets on a global economic recovery. Just days ago, global stocks looked poised to close out January on a strong note. Benchmark indexes from the S&P 500 to the Stoxx Europe 600 to India's S&P BSE Sensex climbed to records. Investors projected that with issues including the U.S. and China's trade war and central-bank rate increases in the rearview mirror, the global economy would likely be able to stage a modest rebound in 2020. Now that view is being tested. The viral outbreak that originated in Wuhan, China, has infected thousands and spread to the U.S., Japan, South Korea and other countries. The disease threatens to hamper an already-slowing Chinese economy, in turn potentially jeopardizing the global recovery that many investors had counted on to materialize this year. Markets bounced higher Tuesday, paring losses after anxiety over the outbreak sent stocks from Japan to Germany to the U.S. to their biggest one-day declines in months Monday. "I don't think markets anticipated how contagious this disease has proven to be and how quickly it's spreading," said Michael Farr, chief executive of investment-management firm Farr, Miller & Washington. Over the past several months, Mr. Farr said his firm has been gradually selling some of its riskier investments, reasoning that the stock market had already managed to run up well past what most had expected in 2019. "It really has yet to be seen whether this [downturn] will gain traction or not," Mr. Farr said. "But it certainly seems like the ingredients for a further decline are coming together." Experts caution that it is still too early to understand how big an economic impact the virus will have. So far, health officials say the Wuhan virus appears to be less severe than prior strains, such as the SARS coronavirus. During prior outbreaks, markets proved resilient. Charles Schwab analysts found the MSCI World Index declined 5.5% in the month after January 2016, when the Zika virus spread to several countries, but returned 2.9% over the course of six months. In their analysis of 13 outbreaks since 1981, analysts at the firm found the index returned an average of 0.8% over a one-month period following an outbreak and 7.1% over a six-month period. Nevertheless, the timing of this year's outbreak is in some ways more worrisome than in prior cases. Data earlier in the month showed China's economy grew 6.1% in 2019. While that increase was within the government's target, it marked the slowest pace of expansion in nearly three decades. Should the coronavirus outbreak fail to stabilize by March, first-quarter growth in China could slow to below 6%, Societe Generale economists said in a report. Even just days into the deepening crisis, markets outside China have been hit by volatility. Copper has fallen for nine straight days in their longest losing streak since October 2016. Prices for the industrial metal tend to pick up when investors are more optimistic about the prospects for economic growth. Shares of airlines and casino operators such as Wynn Resorts Ltd., Las Vegas Sands Corp. and American Airlines Group Inc. have dropped, reflecting investors' anxieties about a potential pullback in travel spending. In the U.S., the S&P 500 ended Monday down 1.6%, marking its worst session since October. The broad index rose 1% on Tuesday. Morgan Stanley predicted the S&P 500 could drop as much as 5% before the current stretch of declines is over. Ultimately, however, money managers have more questions than answers. During the SARS outbreak in 2003, "the hit to economic growth was measurable, albeit short-lived," said Katie Nixon, chief investment officer at Northern Trust Wealth Management, in emailed comments. The extent to which the markets slide this time around will depend on "the length, depth and breadth of the economic impact" of the outbreak, Ms. Nixon said, adding that she would be carefully monitoring news reports in the coming days.  Credit: By Akane Otani 
U.S. stocks climbed Tuesday as investors turned their attention to earnings season and improving economic data, though bond markets briefly flashed a recession signal for the first time since October. The Dow Jones Industrial Average rose 187.05 points, or 0.7%, to 28722.85, while the S&P 500 rose 32.61 points, or 1%, to 3276.24. Both indexes suffered their steepest losses since October on Monday as investors reacted to efforts world-wide to contain a deadly virus outbreak in China. The technology-heavy Nasdaq Composite gained 130.37 points, or 1.4%, to 9269.68. The Stoxx Europe 600 gauge gained 0.8%, while exchanges in China and Hong Kong remained closed for the Lunar New Year holiday. The coronavirus is obviously serious, but investors are turning back toward earnings and economics reports, said Ryan Detrick, senior market strategist at LPL Financial. "The U.S. economy is in pretty good shape and should be able to withstand the fallout from the coronavirus, should it spiral," he said. After the closing bell, Apple?봳he largest U.S. company?봱eported record revenue and a return to profit growth in its latest quarter behind strong sales of iPhones, apps and its AirPod wireless earbuds. Shares climbed 2.6% after hours. Results from Microsoft, Facebook and Amazon.com are on deck later this week. The outbreak of coronavirus, which has killed more than 100 people and infected over 4,500 in China, risks further stunting an already slowing Chinese economy, which is increasingly important for global growth . Travelers in recent weeks have carried the infection to other countries including the U.S., Australia, Germany and Japan. Investors were largely expecting a slight uptick in growth this year and are now reaching for safer assets like U.S. government bonds. Rising concern about the potential impact of the Chinese outbreak has led to a flattening of the yield curve. "If you take China's growth out the equation, then the basis for your global growth forecast starts to fall apart," said Seema Shah, chief strategist at Principal Global Investors. The yield on the 10-year Treasury briefly slipped below that of the three-month bill, before paring back declines and then rising to 1.642%. The three-month U.S. government debt is currently at about 1.560%. When longer-dated debt offers smaller returns than bonds with shorter maturities, it can be an indicator of fixed-income investors' growing concern about the economy. Still, the yield curve can invert a number of times before the start of a recession: last year, markets went on to largely shrug off the event. Among equities, McCormick dropped $6.65, or 3.9% to $166.06 after the spice company's fourth-quarter revenue missed analysts' expectations and it issued disappointing guidance for 2020. Harley-Davidson fell $1.05, or 3%, to $33.79 after the motorcycle maker reported earnings and sales that fell short of expectations. 3M slid $10.05, or 5.7%, to $165.58 after the maker of everything from Post-it Notes to molar crowns said it would eliminate 1,500 jobs as part of a broad restructuring effort. Over in Asia, South Korea's Kospi index ended Tuesday down 3.1%?봳he biggest drop since October 2018?봞fter markets in the country resumed trading following the Lunar New Year holiday. The retreat was led by declines in tourism and technology stocks. Major exchanges in Hong Kong are scheduled to open Wednesday, while bourses on the mainland will be closed until next week after Chinese authorities extended the holiday in a bid to curtail mass migration and contain the virus. On the economic front, the U.S. Commerce Department reported that durable-goods orders rose 2.4% in December, driven by defense spending. However, a key measure that excludes aircraft orders and defense spending fell 0.9%. Caitlin Ostroff and Anna Hirtenstein contributed to this article Write to Anna Isaac at anna.isaac@wsj.com and Paul Vigna at paul.vigna@wsj.com Credit: By Anna Isaac and Paul Vigna 
U.S. businesses with operations in China are taking precautions amid China's coronavirus outbreak, closing restaurants in affected areas and offering free changes or refunds at resort destinations. Walt Disney Co. said it would temporarily close its Disneyland and Disneytown parks in Shanghai starting Saturday, as the death toll from China's spreading coronavirus rose. "We will continue to carefully monitor the situation and be in close contact with the local government," Shanghai Disney Resort, which operates the parks, said in a statement Friday. McDonald's Corp. said it has closed stores in Wuhan, the central China city where the virus originated, and surrounding cities that have suspended local public transportation due to the outbreak. McDonald's restaurants in Hubei province operated normally where transportation was available, a company spokesman said. He didn't say how many restaurants were shut. SHARE YOUR THOUGHTS Has the coronavirus outbreak altered any of your upcoming travel plans? How so? Join the conversation below. "We will maintain close communication with local health and other relevant authorities," a spokesman said. The outbreak comes amid the weeklong Lunar New Year holiday, typically a busy travel period. The official death count related to the coronavirus is 41. The McDonald's spokesman said the company is providing hand sanitizer in restaurants, increasing disinfection of areas with frequent customer contact, requiring delivery drivers to wear masks, and measuring temperatures of store crews upon arriving to work to monitor for fevers. McDonald's had 2,902 stores in China during its latest quarter, making it one of the company's largest foreign markets. Starbucks Corp. said Saturday that it would shut all outlets in Hubei province, after earlier closing its Wuhan stores. China is the company's second-biggest market outside the U.S. "We are working closely with local health authorities, taking actions with the health of partners and customers top of mind," a company spokesman had said earlier. McDonald's and Starbucks each instituted daily temperature checks for their workers across China and were distributing masks to their staff, the companies said. Starbucks said workers in the country are now required to sanitize their hands every half hour. Disney said it would offer refunds for Disneyland tickets, the resort's hotel rooms and tickets for the Beauty and the Beast Mandarin production that were booked through the company's official platforms. We Co.'s WeWork shut three locations in China?봳wo in Wuhan and one in Shenzhen. The company said it had taken measures including installing hand sanitizers at the entrances of all of its locations in China, replacing communal cups with disposable ones in some offices, and setting up an emergency-management team. WeWork, which operates in 33 countries, is adopting similar measures across the Asia-Pacific region, a spokeswoman said. Delta Air Lines Inc. and American Airlines Group Inc. are allowing passengers traveling between Jan. 24 and Jan. 31 to and from Beijing and Shanghai to change flights with no fee. United Airlines Holdings Inc. is waiving fees to reschedule flights between Jan. 24 and Feb. 7 to Beijing, Shanghai and Chengdu. Airlines also said they would refund tickets to Wuhan. Carriers also are stocking flights to China with hand sanitizer and face masks for crew members. No U.S. carriers offer direct service to Wuhan but they offer connecting flights on partner airlines. Flights from the city have been halted. Cruise lines Carnival Corp. and Royal Caribbean Cruises Ltd. said they aren't allowing anyone who lives in or recently passed through Wuhan to board. Carnival's medical team is in touch with the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and the World Health Organization about recommended screenings for passengers, monitoring and ship protocols, a spokesman said. Those measures could include temperature and questionnaire screening for travelers entering cruises from China and other areas, as well as an illness and disease reporting protocol, he said. Royal Caribbean will work with its guests on itinerary modifications, a spokesman said. Marriott International Inc. and Hilton Worldwide Holdings Inc. said they are waiving cancellation fees through Feb. 8 for reservations at its hotels in China, and for guests from China traveling to hotels in other countries. Hyatt Hotels Corp. said it is letting guests who reserved between Jan. 23 and Feb. 10 through Hyatt's booking platforms to cancel at no charge. The waiver also applies to guests from Greater China who have booked stays at Hyatt's properties in the Asia-Pacific region, including South Korea, Japan and several Southeast Asian countries, a Hyatt spokesman said. "Our hotels are following the guidelines of local authorities and reinforcing recommended measures on appropriate hygiene standards," Marriott said in a statement. Marriott, with more than 350 properties across mainland China, Hong Kong, Macau and Taiwan, and Hilton with 225 properties in the region said it is tracking updates from the CDC, WHO and local health departments. The Wuhan virus has spread from China to other countries including South Korea, Japan and the U.S. For some companies, the outbreak is having an immediate effect on business. Honeywell International Inc. said it is seeing a surge in demand for protective face masks in China, as well as in Europe and the U.S. Honeywell said it is increasing production at multiple facilities around the world. DuPont de Nemours Inc., which makes medical body suits and other protective gear, said it would donate equipment to agencies in China that are handling medical cases and would work to boost supply of its products to meet customer demand. DuPont said it is handing out protective masks to its employees in affected areas in China. 3M Co. said it would boost production of respirator masks as a result of the outbreak. The St. Paul, Minn., company said it has seen increased demand in China for its respiratory protection products. In Macau, casino-resort workers at Wynn Resorts Ltd., MGM Resorts International and Las Vegas Sands Corp. have been ordered by the government to wear protective masks. The companies are monitoring body temperatures of customers and staff, and have implemented increased hygiene and cleaning measures, according to the companies and analysts. The Las Vegas-based casino giants derive as much as 70% of their revenue from Macau, the special administrative region of China near Hong Kong. Two people in Macau were found infected with the virus as of Friday, and both were in stable condition at a hospital, according to the Macau government. Ten people had close contact with those patients, but none have shown any symptoms of the virus, the government said. The Macau government called off a New Year parade and other public events. Hotel cancellations are likely, though no widespread cancellations were apparent as of Friday, analysts said. More than 13 million protective face masks were delivered in the region. "We are closely monitoring the viral pneumonia situation," said MGM spokesman Brian Ahern on Thursday. "We will proactively cooperate with the guidelines announced by the government and carry out respective measures to protect our guests and team members." The Wuhan virus can be spread by coughing, kissing or making contact with saliva. Often, coronaviruses simply cause common colds, although this latest outbreak is far more serious. In the U.S., the CDC said it has been investigating whether 63 patients from 22 states have been infected with the virus. Only two have tested positive so far, while 11 have tested negative. Authorities in Singapore, a popular destination for Chinese tourists, have identified 28 suspected cases of the coronavirus; all but two of them had recently traveled to China. Thailand, another destination for Chinese tourists, has three confirmed cases. Katherine Sayre and Liza Lin contributed to this article. Write to Dave Sebastian at dave.sebastian@wsj.com , Heather Haddon at heather.haddon@wsj.com and Alison Sider at alison.sider@wsj.com Credit: By Dave Sebastian, Heather Haddon and Alison Sider 
U.S. businesses with operations in China are taking precautions amid China's coronavirus outbreak, closing restaurants in affected areas and offering free changes or refunds at resort destinations. Walt Disney Co. said it would temporarily close its Disneyland and Disneytown parks in Shanghai starting Saturday, as the death toll from China's spreading coronavirus rose. "We will continue to carefully monitor the situation and be in close contact with the local government," Shanghai Disney Resort, which operates the parks, said in a statement Friday. McDonald's Corp. said it has closed stores in Wuhan, the central China city where the virus originated, and surrounding cities that have suspended local public transportation due to the outbreak. McDonald's restaurants in Hubei province operated normally where transportation was available, a company spokesman said. He didn't say how many restaurants were shut. SHARE YOUR THOUGHTS Has the coronavirus outbreak altered any of your upcoming travel plans? How so? Join the conversation below. "We will maintain close communication with local health and other relevant authorities," a spokesman said. The outbreak comes amid the weeklong Lunar New Year holiday, typically a busy travel period. The official death count related to the coronavirus is 26, with the number of infections rising to at least 881 confirmed cases . The McDonald's spokesman said the company was providing hand sanitizer in restaurants, increasing disinfection of areas with frequent customer contact, requiring delivery drivers to wear masks and measuring temperatures of store crews upon arriving to work to monitor for fevers. McDonald's had 2,902 stores in China during its last quarter, making it one of the company's largest foreign markets. Disney said it would work to refund tickets to Disneyland, resort hotel rooms and tickets for the Beauty and the Beast Mandarin production booked through Disney's official ticket-purchasing platform. Delta Air Lines Inc. and American Airlines Group Inc. are allowing passengers traveling between Jan. 24 and Jan. 31 to and from Beijing and Shanghai to change flights with no fee. United Airlines Holdings Inc. is offering refunds only on trips to, from or through the Chinese city of Wuhan. Carriers also are stocking flights to China with hand sanitizer and face masks for crew members. No U.S. carriers offer direct service to Wuhan but they offer connecting flights on partner airlines. Flights from the city have been halted. Cruise lines such as Carnival Corp. and Royal Caribbean Cruises Ltd. said they aren't allowing anyone who lives in or recently passed through Wuhan to board. Carnival's medical team is in touch with the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and the World Health Organization about recommended screenings for passengers, monitoring and ship protocols, the spokesman said. Those measures could include temperature and questionnaire screening for travelers entering cruises from China and other areas, as well as an illness and disease reporting protocol, he said. Royal Caribbean will work with its guests on itinerary modifications, a spokesman said. Marriott International Inc. and Hilton Worldwide Holdings Inc. said they are waiving cancellation fees through Feb. 8 for reservations at its hotels in China, and for guests from China traveling to hotels in other countries. Hyatt Hotels Corp. said it is letting guests who reserved between Jan. 23 and Feb. 10 through Hyatt's booking platforms to cancel at no charge. The waiver also applies to guests from Greater China who have booked stays at Hyatt's properties in the Asia-Pacific region, including South Korea, Japan and several Southeast Asian countries, he said. "Our hotels are following the guidelines of local authorities and reinforcing recommended measures on appropriate hygiene standards," Marriott said in a statement. Marriott, with more than 350 properties across mainland China, Hong Kong, Macau and Taiwan, and Hilton with 225 properties in the region said it is tracking updates from the CDC, WHO and local health departments. The Wuhan virus has spread from China to other countries including South Korea, Japan and the U.S. For some companies, the outbreak is having an immediate effect on business. Honeywell International Inc. said it is seeing a surge in demand for protective face masks in China, as well as in Europe and the U.S. Honeywell said it is increasing production at multiple facilities around the world. DuPont de Nemours Inc., which makes medical body suits and other protective gear, said it would donate equipment to agencies in China that are handling medical cases and would work to boost supply of its products to meet customer demand. DuPont said it is handing out protective masks to its employees in affected areas in China. 3M Co. said it would boost production of respirator masks as a result of the outbreak. The St. Paul, Minn., company said it has seen increased demand in China for its respiratory protection products. In Macau, casino-resort workers at Wynn Resorts Ltd., MGM Resorts International and Las Vegas Sands Corp. have been ordered by the government to wear protective masks. The companies are monitoring body temperatures of customers and staff, and have implemented increased hygiene and cleaning measures, according to the companies and analysts. The Las Vegas-based casino giants derive as much as 70% of their revenue from Macau, the special administrative region of China near Hong Kong. Two people in Macau were found infected with the virus as of Friday, and both were in stable condition at a hospital, according to the Macau government. Ten people had close contact with those patients, but none have shown any symptoms of the virus, the government said. The Macau government called off a New Year parade and other public events. Hotel cancellations are likely, though no widespread cancellations were apparent as of Friday, analysts said. More than 13 million protective face masks were delivered in the region. "We are closely monitoring the viral pneumonia situation," said MGM spokesman Brian Ahern on Thursday. "We will proactively cooperate with the guidelines announced by the government and carry out respective measures to protect our guests and team members." The Wuhan virus can be spread by coughing, kissing or making contact with saliva. Often, coronaviruses simply cause common colds, although this latest outbreak is far more serious. In the U.S., the CDC said it has been investigating whether 63 patients from 22 states have been infected with the virus. Only two have tested positive so far, while 11 have tested negative. Authorities in Singapore, a popular destination for Chinese tourists, have identified 28 suspected cases of the coronavirus; all but two of them had recently traveled to China. Thailand, another destination popular with Chinese tourists, has three confirmed cases. Katherine Sayre contributed to this article. Write to Dave Sebastian at dave.sebastian@wsj.com , Heather Haddon at heather.haddon@wsj.com and Alison Sider at alison.sider@wsj.com Credit: By Dave Sebastian, Heather Haddon and Alison Sider 
BEIJING?봎ore people in China are staying closer to home during this week's Lunar New Year holiday as a newly identified virus and financial pressures push more to dial back travel plans. The movement of hundreds of millions of people across China and outside the country each year during the Spring Festival?봢ither to visit family or, increasingly, to take a vacation?봧s commonly described as the world's largest annual human migration. But some say they are reconsidering their plans amid growing concerns and broad domestic media coverage of the outbreak of the coronavirus, part of a class of pathogens that cause a range of respiratory illness. As the virus spreads nationwide, travelers worry about unwanted exposure as they crisscross the country in packed trains and planes. There has been human-to-human transmission of the virus, one of China's best-known epidemiology experts told a state broadcaster Monday. Before the outbreak, China's largest travel platform, Ctrip.com, a unit of Trip.com Group Ltd., estimated that Chinese would take roughly 450 million trips within China for the Lunar New Year between Jan. 24 and Jan. 30, an 8.4% increase from last year. But as economic growth slows in China, travel out of the country decelerated last year and will continue to slow, a UBS Securities survey of Chinese travelers in October found. While Chinese authorities aren't urging travelers to stay home because of the virus, the Shanghai Municipal Center for Disease Control and Prevention issued a statement Monday warning potentially vulnerable people to avoid crowded public places and wear a face mask to reduce their risk of exposure. The virus originated in Wuhan, a large city in central China, but authorities reported on Monday new confirmed and suspected cases in Beijing in the north, Shanghai in the east and in the southern province of Guangdong, which borders Hong Kong. As of Monday, 218 cases had been confirmed and three people had been killed by the virus, according to Chinese state media and health authorities. Lynn Lin, a 34-year-old health-care worker based in southern China, said she had planned to spend the long holiday in Beijing with her husband and 5-year-old son. But she canceled the trip at the last minute after learning that cases of the virus had reached the capital. "I cannot risk the safety of my whole family, especially the kid," Ms. Lin said. Ms. Lin said she and her husband had booked their tickets almost two months ago at a cost of 10,000 yuan ($1,456) and can't get a refund. They also had to forfeit another 1,200 yuan in hotel deposits. She recalled her experience when the deadly severe acute respiratory syndrome, or SARS, swept across China in late 2002 and early 2003. That viral respiratory illness, which was caused by another strain of coronavirus, spread world-wide within a few months and overlapped with the Spring Festival travel season, ultimately killing around 800 people, mostly in mainland China and Hong Kong. "I am afraid it could turn out to be another SARS, even though it is not as severe and fatal as SARS so far," Ms. Lin said. SHARE YOUR THOUGHTS How do you foster safe travel when facing a public health concern? Join the conversation below. Beyond China's borders, the coronavirus has infected travelers in Japan, South Korea and Thailand?봳hree of the most popular destinations for Lunar New Year travelers. All of them had recently traveled through Wuhan. Airports in neighboring countries were expanding the body-temperature monitoring of arrivals. Travel destinations around the world rely increasingly on Chinese tourism dollars, particularly during the Lunar New Year. China's domestic economy, too, counts on the millions of Chinese who return to their hometowns or spend the annual holiday traveling to domestic tourist sites. China's economy grew 6.1% last year, the lowest level in nearly three decades , official data showed last week?봶eighing on consumer spending. UBS expects the year-over-year increase in Chinese outbound travel to have slowed to 12% in 2019 from 15% a year earlier, and then to decelerate to an average of 8% over this year and 2021. "It is very difficult for the Chinese tourism sector because of the Chinese economy," said Chen Xin, China tourism analyst at UBS Securities. "Most of the Chinese outbound travelers are preferring to stay in Asia." Zhou Yongxiang, a 29-year-old manager at a Guangdong-based toy company, said he had planned to spend 10-12 days with his wife in Italy, France and Germany during the Lunar New Year holiday, but canceled this month. His factory has been feeling more economic pressure over the past year, he said, and the yuan has weakened against the euro, making his trip to Europe more costly. "We don't want to spend some 40,000 to 50,000 yuan just to throw ourselves into a crowd of tourists, five or six meters away from the tiny Mona Lisa and seeing nothing. It's just a waste of money," he said. Raffaele Huang contributed to this article. Write to Julie Wernau at Julie.Wernau@wsj.com Credit: By Julie Wernau 
A widening outbreak of a mysterious pneumonia-like virus helped propel shares of some Chinese drugmakers to multiyear highs, while travel stocks fell, as investors made bets on the potential economic impact of the disease in the region. Shares of a Hong Kong-listed company that makes a generic version of the antiviral drug Tamiflu jumped 19.4% to a record closing high. The firm, YiChang HEC Changjiang Pharmaceutical Co., is China's dominant producer of the drug known as oseltamivir, which can help quickly alleviate flu symptoms in patients. In Shanghai, shares of Jiangsu Bioperfectus Technologies Co., a company that develops influenza virus kits and rapid test kits, rallied 20% to the maximum level allowed on the exchange's six-month-old Science and Technology Innovation Board. Several other Chinese pharmaceutical stocks jumped about 10% on the main Shanghai and Shenzhen bourses. Chinese health authorities said Monday the number of patients infected with a recently discovered strain of coronavirus jumped to 198, up significantly from a total of 62 reported a day earlier. The virus, which was first identified among individuals who were sickened in the central Chinese city of Wuhan, has so far killed three people and spread to more population centers within the country, including Beijing. Outside mainland China, there have been suspected cases of people with the coronavirus in cities including Hong Kong and Singapore, but only a few confirmed cases in Thailand, South Korea and Japan. Health authorities in many areas have also been on high alert, especially with increased travel around the Lunar New Year holiday this month. Cyrus Ng, a health-care analyst at Jefferies Hong Kong, said speculative buying was behind much of the drugmakers' rally Monday, but a severe outbreak of the virus may lead to greater demand for drugs and related products. Even stocks of some Chinese makers of surgical masks jumped about 10% in Shanghai. Shares of Chinese airlines, tour and hotel operators, on the other hand, sank Monday on the possibility that people could cut back on travel in the region if the viral outbreak worsens significantly. The Hong Kong-listed shares of Chinese state-owned carrier Air China closed 7.1% lower, while Shanghai-listed Chinese travel agent BTG Hotels Group Co. fell 9.1%. Frank Benzimra, head of Asian equity strategy at Soci챕t챕 G챕n챕rale, said it is too early to tell how bad the situation might get. "It certainly has the potential to impact the market but it really depends on the economic impact of the virus," he said. So far, the newly discovered coronavirus is believed to be less serious than severe acute respiratory syndrome, or SARS, which killed hundreds of people after it was first discovered in southern China in late 2002. Many stocks, including airlines, plunged during that global epidemic, which curbed global travel and pushed Hong Kong into a recession in 2003. Write to Joanne Chiu at joanne.chiu@wsj.com and Steven Russolillo at steven.russolillo@wsj.com Credit: By Joanne Chiu and Steven Russolillo 
BEIJING?볾 leading Chinese health official said that a newly identified virus originating in central China has spread between humans, heightening health officials' concerns that it could be transmitted more quickly as the country's busiest travel season begins. The prospect of human-to-human transmission of the coronavirus, which causes a potentially deadly pneumonia that already has claimed three lives, comes as tens of millions of Chinese citizens crisscross the country this week for the annual Lunar New Year holiday. Related * Virus in China Is Part of a Growing Threat * Chinese Stick Closer to Home Over Holiday as Virus Spreads The World Health Organization said that Director General Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus will convene an emergency committee Wednesday to determine whether to declare the outbreak a public-health emergency of international concern. The designation signals risk that an outbreak could spread to other countries, and helps the WHO mobilize resources to prevent and combat that. The WHO said Monday the spread of the disease was likely the product of "some limited human-to-human transmission occurring between close contacts." The outbreak is believed to have started in the central Chinese city of Wuhan, where a number of infected patients were exposed to a large seafood and livestock wholesale market. Coronaviruses most commonly infect mammals, including pigs and cats, but can jump from animals to humans. They can also then jump from one human to another. Some patients have said they didn't visit the market and only came into contact with people in Wuhan. The Wuhan market is close to the city's main railway station, an important travel hub in the center of the country. Zhong Nanshan, one of China's most highly-regarded epidemiology experts, urged heightened vigilance in a live interview on state broadcaster China Central Television Monday, citing the risk of human-to-human transmission. "Right now is the time when we should increase alert," said Dr. Zhong, who rose to national prominence nearly two decades ago as an authoritative voice during China's fight against severe acute respiratory syndrome, or SARS. In that outbreak, a similar coronavirus killed 774 people after its emergence in southern China beginning in late 2002. Share Your Thoughts How worried are you about the new virus spreading from central China? Join the conversation below. The new warnings came on a day when the number of confirmed cases of the new coronavirus more than tripled to 218, according to Chinese state media and health authorities, including in Beijing, Shanghai and the southern metropolis of Shenzhen?봳hree of the country's biggest and most affluent cities. It also appeared in South Korea for the first time. Dr. Zhong, who is leading an expert committee on the outbreak for China's cabinet-level National Health Commission, said 14 medical staff involved in treating the new coronavirus have themselves been infected with the disease. It is unclear whether these medical staff members were included in the reported patient figures. One reason for the rapid increase in reported cases is that a diagnostic test for the virus is now available. That means infections that would otherwise have gone unnoticed are being identified. U.S. health officials said last week that they expect more cases to be diagnosed in China and other countries as testing for the virus expands. Yang Gonghuan, the former deputy head of the Chinese Center for Disease Control and Prevention, said in a separate interview with the China Business Journal newspaper Monday that human-to-human transmission of the disease had occurred. The sudden increase in cases is likely to spark questions over the transparency of disclosures by Chinese health authorities. President Xi Jinping earlier Monday urged authorities to make efforts to prevent and control the spreading infection , according to the state-run Xinhua News Agency. Officials should "release outbreak information in a timely manner and deepen international cooperation," he said. China is working with other countries to prevent and control the outbreak, Chinese Foreign Ministry spokesman Geng Shuang said at a regular media briefing in Beijing on Monday. "We've formulated prevention and control plans, treated patients, monitored their close contacts, conducted epidemiological research and released information in a timely matter," he said. South Korean authorities said Monday that a 35-year-old Chinese woman who had flown into the country from Wuhan had contracted the coronavirus. The previous three patients who have been identified outside China?봳wo Chinese tourists in Thailand and a man from Japan ?봦ad all traveled from the Wuhan area. In the U.S., where no cases have so far been detected, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and Department of Homeland Security's Customs and Border Protection have begun screening people traveling from Wuhan for fevers, coughs or difficulty breathing. Health authorities in Wuhan, a densely populated city of 19 million people, said Monday that the number of patients infected with the new coronavirus jumped to 198, from 62 on Sunday. The statement said 35 of those cases were severe, while nine were critical. The death of a third infected patient occurred over the weekend, Wuhan authorities said Monday, without offering details. In the case of the two earlier fatalities, authorities had previously said the men suffered from existing illnesses . The overall count of confirmed cases doesn't include suspected cases that have sprung up in a number of Chinese provinces, including Shandong on the east coast, Sichuan in the interior and Yunnan and Guangxi on the southwestern border with Vietnam, according to CCTV's report Monday. Separately, five suspected cases were reported by health authorities in coastal Zhejiang province, just south of Shanghai on the country's east coast. Related * Virus Is Part of a Growing Threat * Chinese Drugmakers' Shares Surge, Travel Stocks Fall * Chinese Stick Closer to Home Over Holiday as Virus Spreads The newly discovered coronavirus so far is significantly less deadly than SARS. However, it is in the same class of pathogens, and this outbreak is clearly larger than scientists and officials initially believed. The availability of detection kits at more Chinese hospitals will likely lead to more confirmed cases, said David Hui, an infectious disease specialist at the Chinese University of Hong Kong. Dr. Zhong, the Chinese epidemiologist, told CCTV on Monday that transmission from wild animals to humans was a "big possibility." His frank acknowledgment of human-to-human transmission was a notable break from earlier statements by Chinese authorities who rated the risk of human-to-human transmission as being relatively low. Chinese health authorities are urging people to wear face masks and to report quickly to a hospital if they have a fever. In an exchange with state media, Dr. Zhong cited two cases in Guangdong where the patients hadn't traveled to Wuhan but were in contact with family members returning from there. In many cases, patients did travel to Wuhan and showed symptoms of fever and fatigue. The Chinese patient in South Korea had flown into Incheon International Airport from Wuhan and was quarantined by airport authorities before being transferred to a medical center for treatment, according to South Korea's Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. In Shanghai, the one confirmed case was a 56-year-old female who had traveled from Wuhan, according to the city's health authorities. Beijing has five confirmed cases, according to state media; a district authority has said that two patients had returned from Wuhan. One of the confirmed cases in southern Guangdong province is 10 years old, according to local authorities. Most of the other infected patients who have been identified by authorities were elderly. Xiao Xiao, Natasha Khan, Wenxin Fan, Eun-Young Jeong and Betsy McKay contributed to this article. Write to Chao Deng at Chao.Deng@wsj.com and Jonathan Cheng at jonathan.cheng@wsj.com Credit: By Chao Deng and Jonathan Cheng 
China, widely perceived as a global leader in artificial intelligence, doesn't measure up to the U.S. and several other countries when it comes to an important component of AI strategy?봞doption by businesses that aren't startups?봞 new study found. The report by research firm Cognilytica compared countries using five metrics and determined that China lagged behind in one of them: AI activity by major corporations. The other metrics were the country's AI strategy, government funding, research activity, and venture-capital and startup activity. The four countries in the top tier, classified as having the strongest AI strategies?봳he U.S., France, the U.K., and Israel?봲cored top marks across all five categories. Nations in the second tier?봀hina, Canada, Germany, Japan and South Korea?봶ere behind in one of the five metrics, according to the report released this month. More From WSJ Pro AI * AI Helps Diagnose Coronavirus * Lawmakers Discuss How to Curb Bias in AI * Trump Wants to Double Spending on AI, Quantum Computing When it comes to AI, enterprise investment and adoption is important because it affects companies' ability to compete internationally, which in turn has economic implications for a country, according to Cognilytica principal analyst Ronald Schmelzer, a co-author of the report. In China, he said, "The action is happening in the government, and the action is happening in the startup community. The action is not happening as strongly in the enterprise." He added: "The only area that China is less competitive, if you will, than the United States is the extent to which their enterprises?봳heir banks, their manufacturing companies, their shipping companies?봞re adopting AI." Stephen Rodriguez, senior adviser at the Atlantic Council's Scowcroft Center for Strategy and Security, said his research echoes the findings of the Cognilytica report. He said China is known for widespread adoption of consumer-facing AI, such as facial-recognition systems used in retail, but the country "does lag when it comes to commercial enterprise adoption of AI technologies." The U.S. is investing heavily in AI to maintain its global edge. The White House on Feb. 10 proposed roughly doubling nondefense research-and-development spending on artificial intelligence and quantum information sciences, citing fierce global competition. Under the plan, annual spending on AI would rise to more than $2 billion within the next two years. Write to Jared Council at jared.council@wsj.com Credit: By Jared Council 
HONG KONG?봙olkswagen AG said Monday it would postpone production restarts at some of its Chinese plants until next week, while the organizers of China's biggest car show said the event would not go ahead in April as planned, as the outbreak of a new coronavirus continued to weigh on the world's biggest automotive market. Volkswagen's delay, by an additional week until Feb. 24, highlights the difficulties that companies are facing amid the virus epidemic. The German auto giant, which has extended Lunar New Year holidays at its plants, blamed "national supply chain and logistics challenges as well as limited travel options for production employees." Volkswagen, which operates 33 plants in various locations in China away from the outbreak's epicenter, ceased production on Jan. 23. Some of its plants have already resumed production. The virus, which causes an acute respiratory illness called Covid-19, has killed 1,770 in mainland China and infected more than 70,000. The outbreak is further denting growth in an economy that was already slowing. The quarantine of nearly 60 million people in Wuhan and surrounding Hubei province, the center of the epidemic, means that workers who visited family in the region over the Lunar New Year holiday can't get back to their jobs. On top of that, many Chinese cities, including Beijing, the capital, and Shanghai, its main financial center, are asking most people entering from elsewhere to quarantine themselves at home for 14 days before going to work. In a trade group survey of 109 companies with manufacturing operations in Shanghai and nearby areas that was released Monday, 41% said a lack of staff is their biggest challenge over the next month or so, while 30% said logistical problems are their greatest headache. Among the respondents to the survey conducted by the American Chamber of Commerce in Shanghai, 78% said they don't have sufficient staff to run a full production line. Meanwhile, Auto China, which is one of the global industry's marquee events and draws more than 800,000 visitors, is being postponed amid efforts to curb the virus, the organizers said Monday. The Beijing vehicle expo was the latest among the many business and political events to have been delayed indefinitely. While wreaking havoc inside China, the coronavirus has also jolted global supply chains which depend on Chinese suppliers. Fiat Chrysler Automobiles NV and Hyundai Motor Co. are among auto makers reporting disruption at assembly plants outside China. Also at risk is the annual conclave of China's national legislature. The National People's Congress, comprising nearly 3,000 members, typically gathers in early March to set out China's policy agenda for the coming year. The standing committee of the Congress will weigh plans to postpone the meeting, the state-run Xinhua News Agency reported Monday. In a sign of how deeply concerned the government is about the economic fallout from the virus outbreak, President Xi Jinping urged local authorities to step in to help revitalize sales amid the continuing epidemic. In remarks to the Politburo Standing Committee?봀hina's top political body?봯ublished Saturday by a Communist Party periodical, Mr. Xi said officials should counter the economic impact of the outbreak by supporting household consumption, including automobile purchases. In particular, restrictions on vehicle purchases designed to fight traffic congestion in several of China's biggest and wealthiest cities, including Beijing and Shanghai, should be eased, Mr. Xi said. He made the remarks on Feb. 3, according to the periodical, Qiushi. Auto makers in China expect their first-quarter performance to be decimated by the viral outbreak, with sales set to fall 40% and production to slump by up to 60%, according to research firm Jefferies. Only around one-fifth of car dealerships are currently open nationally. More * Coronavirus Outbreak Sets Back China's Biggest Political Assembly * Chinese Stocks Recover From Coronavirus-Driven Selloff * South Korea Tracks, Publishes Patients' Travels * Handshake or Elbow Bump? With Coronavirus, It's Not Business as Usual * China Defends Coronavirus Measures The unfolding catastrophe at home will only push Chinese auto makers to double down on plans to develop new markets abroad and limit the risk of being too dependent on domestic sales, said Jing Yang, corporate research director at Fitch Ratings. For years China's auto makers were largely content to ride a decadeslong domestic boom in auto sales, but two straight years of sputtering sales at home, a reverse compounded by the epidemic, have added a new sense of urgency to efforts to develop foreign sources of growth. On Sunday, General Motors Co. said it would sell its plant in Thailand to Chinese auto maker Great Wall Motors Co. The move comes a month after GM said it was selling its last remaining India plant to Great Wall, one of a group of Chinese car companies aggressively targeting sales in overseas markets to offset tough conditions at home. "The global strategy of Great Wall Motors has begun to take shape after more than 10 years of development," Liu Xiangshang, Great Wall's vice president, said in a statement, outlining the company's plans to use the Thai plant to produce vehicles for sale in Southeast Asia and Australia. Alongside Great Wall, the global push has been led by Zhejiang Geely Holding Group Co., which owns Volvo Cars and has operations spanning Europe and Asia; and state-run SAIC Motor Corp., which owns another former GM plant in India as well as factories in Southeast Asia. GM also said it would wind down its operations in Australia and New Zealand, moves that would complete the company's full retreat from Asia-Pacific markets with the exception of China. The Detroit-based company also pulled out of Europe in 2017. "We are restructuring our international operations, focusing on markets where we have the right strategies to drive robust returns," Mary Barra, GM's chief executive, said in a statement. The Thai deal will be completed by the end of this year, subject to regulatory approval, the companies said. Raffaele Huang contributed to this article. Write to Trefor Moss at Trefor.Moss@wsj.com Credit: By Trefor Moss 
The S&P 500 and Nasdaq Composite rose to records as investors focused on signs of strength in the economy. For the S&P 500, it was the ninth record close of 2020, rising 24.38 points, or 0.7%, to 3352.09. The tech-heavy Nasdaq Composite notched its 11th record of the year, adding 107.88 points, or 1.1%, to 9628.39. The Dow Jones Industrial Average gained 174.31 points, or 0.6%, to 29276.82, nearing the record high it reached last week. Monday's advances came after major U.S. indexes posted their biggest weekly gains in months, as stronger-than-expected corporate earnings and employment data outweighed fears that the coronavirus outbreak in China could drag down global economic growth. The jobs report Friday showed U.S. hiring strengthened in January as more Americans joined the labor market, a positive sign for the economy at the start of 2020. "It's really a tug of war between good solid earnings growth, employment prospects in the United States versus the China issue related to the coronavirus," said Joe Quinlan, head of CIO Market Strategy for Merrill and Bank of America Private Bank. "The two largest economies in the world, they're tacking in different directions in the near term." The growth of new cases could accelerate further, the World Health Organization warned, even as officials across the world try to quarantine people to contain the spread. The degree to which equity markets have been driven by concern about the impact of the coronavirus has ebbed and flowed in recent weeks, leading to increased volatility. Before Monday, the S&P 500 had jumped or fallen more than 1% in five of the past 10 trading sessions, after previously not moving that much on a single day since October. The broad stock index dropped 3.1% between Jan. 17 and Jan. 31 but has since returned to record territory. "I think there's a major shift in investors' mind-set, that you buy into weakness, you don't sell into weakness, and that's causing the pullbacks to be muted," said Andrew Slimmon, senior portfolio manager atMorgan Stanley Investment Management. Microsoft rose $4.81, or 2.6%, to $188.70, closing above $1.4 trillion in market value for the first time and regaining the title of largest U.S. company by market capitalization, according to Dow Jones Market Data. Apple had held that position since Oct. 31, 2019. Electric-car maker Tesla, whose stock has been on a tear in recent days, gained $23.21, or 3.1%, to $771.28. Betting that the stock would fall has cost investors $8.4 billion since January. As earnings season continued, shares of CNA Financial jumped $3.96, or 8.5%, to $50.81 after the insurance company beat expectations for earnings. Shares of Restaurant Brands International gained $1.75, or 2.7%, to $65.61 after the fast-food company reported revenue and earnings ahead of projections. Companies scheduled to report Tuesday include Hilton Worldwide Holdings, Lyft and Under Armour. Analysts expect S&P 500 earnings for the fourth quarter of 2019 to register modest growth from a year earlier. Investors will listen Tuesday as Federal Reserve Chairman Jerome Powell begins two days of testimony before Congress. At their meeting last month, Fed officials held their benchmark interest rate steady and maintained their wait-and-see policy stance. The yield on the benchmark 10-year U.S. Treasury dropped to 1.547% from 1.578% Friday. Bond yields fall as prices rise. Overseas Monday, the Stoxx Europe 600 index rose 0.1%, while Japan's Nikkei 225 index closed down 0.6%, Hong Kong's Hang Seng Index fell 0.6%, the Shanghai Composite rose 0.5% and South Korea's Kospi lost 0.5%. Early Tuesday, the Hang Seng was up 1.2%, the Shanghai benchmark was up 0.2% and the Kospi was up 1.3%. Japan's stock market was closed for Founders Day holiday.  Credit: By Karen Langley and Anna Isaac 
U.S. stocks rebounded Monday after last week's steep decline, though oil prices continued to slide on concerns that China's coronavirus outbreak will reduce energy consumption. The Dow Jones Industrial Average rose 143.78 points, or 0.5%, to 28399.81, reversing course from a sharp selloff last week. The S&P 500 gained 23.40, or 0.7%, to 3248.92. The Nasdaq Composite climbed 122.47, or 1.3%, to 9273.40. With the bounce, the S&P 500 is back in positive territory for the year. A big drop Friday?봳he worst day for the broad-based index since August?봦ad briefly wiped out its year-to-date gains for 2020. Oil prices, meanwhile, fell on worries that the virus will continue to disrupt the world's second-largest economy. U.S. crude oil futures fell $1.45, or 2.8%, to settle at $50.11 a barrel on Monday. They are now down more than 20% from their recent peak in early January. Futures on Brent crude, the global oil benchmark, fell $2.17, or 3.8% to $54.45 a barrel, their lowest settle in more than a year and more than 20% below where they were in September. Saudi Arabia is pushing for significant oil-production cuts in a bid to prop up prices, according to OPEC officials. Representatives of the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries and its allies are set to meet Tuesday and Wednesday to discuss next steps. U.S. stock investors may have seen Friday's selloff as a buying opportunity, said Michael Mullaney, director of global markets research at Boston Partners. He noted that with past outbreaks, such as severe acute respiratory syndrome, or SARS, stocks have tended to drop initially, only to bounce back once the rate of new infections slows. More * Saudis Weigh Oil Cuts in Response to Virus "Once you see a slowdown in the uptick of new cases, historically the market has generally done quite well after that," Mr. Mullaney said. Chinese authorities have quarantined millions of people to contain the virus, which has infected more than 17,000 people and has been linked to more than 360 deaths. Major global airlines have suspended flights to mainland China. Chinese markets tumbled sharply Monday, the first day of trading following the extended Lunar New Year break. The Shanghai Composite Index closed 7.7% lower in its steepest drop since August 2015, with many stocks dropping by the maximum 10% that is allowed. But the move had been largely expected because Chinese markets closed just as the outbreak was beginning to draw widespread attention. Investors were also closely watching Monday's presidential caucuses in Iowa for insights into whether a candidate who supports a bigger role for government may beat out rival Democratic contenders. The state is expected to play a key role in winnowing down the field of Democratic candidates as the party chooses who will take on President Trump in November. "Markets have previously reacted quite strongly when left-wing populist Democratic candidates have performed well," said Oliver Jones, market economist at Capital Economics. In an upbeat sign for the U.S. economy, new data showed the U.S. factory sector improved in January, moving into expansionary territory for the first time since July. The Institute for Supply Management said Monday that its manufacturing index rose to 50.9 in January from 47.2 in December. Readings above 50 indicate activity is expanding across the manufacturing sector, while those below 50 signal contraction. Manufacturing has been a weak spot for the U.S. economy, which has continued growing over the past year largely on the strength of consumer spending. In corporate news, Tesla shares jumped $129.43, or 20%, to a record close of $780 after analysts at Argus Research and ARK Invest raised their price targets for the electric-car maker. Gilead Sciences climbed $3.16, or 5%, to $66.36. The drugmaker on Friday said it had provided doses of an experimental antiviral drug to doctors for the emergency treatment of a small number of patients infected by the coronavirus. Exxon Mobil shares slid $1.39, or 2.2%, to $60.73 after analysts at Goldman Sachs cut their rating on the energy giant to "sell" from "neutral." Slumping oil prices also weighed on Exxon, making it the second-worst performer in the Dow on Monday. In the U.K., the British pound fell 1.6% against the U.S. dollar. The move reflected concerns about fresh trade talks between the European Union and the U.K., said Jordan Rochester, a foreign-exchange strategist at Nomura Holdings. The U.K. formally exited the EU Friday and entered into a transition period. Both sides fired opening salvos on Monday as they begin the complex negotiations that will determine the terms of their future relationship. The pan-European Stoxx Europe 600 gained 0.2%. "We expect a tough talk in the opening rounds of the Brexit talks," Mr. Rochester said. "Today, the EU and the U.K. are setting out their stalls." Steven Russolillo contributed to this article. Write to Alexander Osipovich at alexander.osipovich@dowjones.com and Anna Isaac at anna.isaac@wsj.com Credit: By Alexander Osipovich and Anna Isaac 
It took investors a few days, but they think they have the effect of the new coronavirus from China worked out. The broad thrust: Suppliers to China, and travel and holiday stocks, will suffer, but nasty effects for the market as a whole will be offset by central banks. The virus will be controlled enough that it won't cause a recession in the West. This coldblooded analysis rests on several assumptions that may turn out to be unsound -- notably, the big risk that this virus could follow a different pattern than the 2003 outbreak of severe acute respiratory syndrome, or SARS, the financial effects of which are being widely used as a model. The new coronavirus has spread rapidly in China since emerging in Wuhan in December. So far its spread outside China has been limited, with around 100 cases and, so far, not much human-to-human infection -- although the U.S. State Department is concerned enough to warn against all travel to China. Investors have reacted in what looks like a rational way. Since human-to-human infection was confirmed on Jan. 20, the biggest China exchange-traded fund, iShares MSCI China ETF, is down 11%; the U.S. airline sector is off 7% and Brent crude oil, the global benchmark for the main transport fuel, is down 13%. Stocks in China-dependent Taiwan and South Korea have lost 6% and 9%, respectively, in dollar terms, while the S&P 500 is down only 3%. Bond yields are lower, and investors are pricing in a 60% chance of a Federal Reserve interest-rate cut by June -- compared with just a 15% chance before human-transmission confirmation. Those lower yields are again cushioning the impact on U.S. stocks, following the lesson of the past decade that equities thrive when money is cheap. The trouble is the assumptions underlying the market reaction. The first is that the effects of the virus will be short-lived, and so can be (mostly) ignored. Investors care much more about the long-term prospects for earnings than a short-term hit to sales; there are going to be lots of profit warnings blaming the infection. But, investors assume, things will rapidly return to normal. Unfortunately, we have little idea whether this is true. If people can pass on the virus before they show symptoms, or if it turns out to be easier to catch than first thought, it may spread rapidly outside China. Second, investors are assuming that the wider population outside China remains calm and that preventive action by governments and companies isn't terribly disruptive. If people aren't willing or able to go about their ordinary lives, the economy will be hit hard and so will stocks. Confidence is a fragile thing and hard to predict. If confidence crumbles, it will be doubly bad. The S&P 500 was the most highly valued since 2002 just before the outbreak, with investors verging on exuberant, so any loss of faith could hit prices hard. Worse, the U.S. economy has been reliant on confident consumers for the past year as manufacturers and exporters struggled. If consumers close their wallets, there is no backup source of demand. Third, investors assume there are no cliff-edge effects, such as highly indebted companies just clinging to life that could be tipped over. "For a few weeks, it's not a big deal, but if it lasts a few months, then sustainability of debt becomes an issue," said Vincent Mortier, deputy chief investment officer at Paris-based fund manager Amundi. A series of vulnerable companies collapsing would probably push up corporate-bond yields and make it more difficult for junk-rated companies to borrow, in turn hurting the economy. Analysis is difficult partly because of the shortage of precedent. SARS in 2003 was mainly a China threat, reflected in a big hit to Hong Kong stocks but not much impact on assets in the rest of the world. Hong Kong stocks bottomed out when new SARS cases started to fall, anticipating the end of the problem, which makes sense. But it is a poor example for the rest of the world, where the picture was clouded by the U.S. invasion of Iraq just as the virus began to spread globally. The effects of previous pandemics -- and note that so far this is very far from a pandemic -- on stock prices are similarly obscured by other events. In 1918, for example, the Dow Jones Industrial Average rose as the Spanish flu intensified, just as World War I was nearing its end. When the index finally fell, losing 11% during the winter, it took the Dow back only to where it stood in June, three months after the infection was first identified. Trying to separate how prices were affected by the flu from how they were affected by the end of the World War I is a matter of guesswork. Two other flu pandemics, in 1957-58 and 1968-70, killed one million or more people world-wide and coincided with U.S. recessions but didn't obviously cause them. The Congressional Budget Office attempted to model the economic effects of a flu pandemic in 2009. It estimated that additional U.S. deaths of around 100,000, comparable to the 1957 and 1968 outbreaks, would knock about 1% off the U.S. economy -- but probably wouldn't cause a recession. A 1918-style pandemic could create a full-blown recession on its own, but as the researchers said, there are uncertainties both about patterns of infection and about the economic effects. Medicine is far better today, but the world is better connected, speeding contagion. We should hope that markets are right and that this infection can be contained to China. My concern is that investors are overly confident in their assumption that easy money will keep the U.S. economy and stocks up.  Credit: By James Mackintosh 
Stocks climbed as investors turned their attention to earnings season and improving economic data. The Dow Jones Industrial Average rose 187.05 points, or 0.7%, to 28722.85, while the S&P 500 rose 32.61 points, or 1%, to 3276.24, on Tuesday. Both indexes suffered their steepest losses since October on Monday as investors reacted to efforts world-wide to contain a deadly virus outbreak in China. The technology-heavy Nasdaq Composite gained 130.37 points, or 1.4%, to 9269.68. The Stoxx Europe 600 gauge gained 0.8%, while exchanges in China and Hong Kong remained closed for the Lunar New Year. Investors are turning back toward earnings and economics reports, said Ryan Detrick, senior market strategist at LPL Financial. "The U.S. economy is in pretty good shape and should be able to withstand the fallout from the coronavirus, should it spiral," he said. The Commerce Department reported that durable-goods orders rose 2.4% in December, driven by military spending. However, a closely watched measure that excludes aircraft orders and military spending fell 0.9%. After the closing bell, Apple -- the largest U.S. company -- reported record revenue and a return to profit growth in its latest quarter behind strong sales of iPhones, apps and its AirPod wireless earbuds. Shares climbed 1.3% after hours. Results from Microsoft, Facebook and Amazon.com are on deck this week. The outbreak of coronavirus risks further stunting an already slowing Chinese economy. Travelers in recent weeks have carried the infection to other countries, including the U.S., Australia, Germany and Japan. Investors largely expected a slight uptick in growth this year and are now reaching for safer assets like U.S. government bonds. Rising concern about the potential impact of the Chinese outbreak has led to a flattening of the yield curve. "If you take China's growth out of the equation, then the basis for your global growth forecast starts to fall apart," said Seema Shah, chief strategist at Principal Global Investors. The yield on the 10-year Treasury briefly slipped below that of the three-month bill before paring declines and rising to 1.642%. When short-term yields exceed longer-term ones, it can be a recession signal. Tech stocks were the best performers in the S&P 500 ahead of Apple's results, rising 1.9% and nearly erasing Monday's sharp decline. PulteGroup was the biggest gainer among the stocks in the broad index, climbing $2.54, or 5.7%, to $46.84 after reporting stronger-than-expected quarterly earnings and a pickup in housing demand. Xerox Holdings also beat earnings expectations, pushing its shares up $1.73, or 4.9%, to $36.78. On the losing side, McCormick dropped $6.65, or 3.9%, to $166.06 after the spice company's fourth-quarter revenue missed analysts' expectations and it issued disappointing guidance for 2020. Harley-Davidson fell $1.05, or 3%, to $33.79 after the motorcycle maker reported earnings and sales that fell short of expectations. 3M slid $10.05, or 5.7%, to $165.58 after the maker of everything from Post-it Notes to molar crowns said it would eliminate 1,500 jobs as part of a broad restructuring effort. South Korea's Kospi ended Tuesday down 3.1% -- the biggest drop since October 2018. Early Wednesday, the benchmark was up 0.5%. At midday in Tokyo, the Nikkei was up 0.5% and Hong Kong's Hang Seng Index was down 2.5% on its first trading day after the Lunar New Year. --- Caitlin Ostroff and Anna Hirtenstein contributed to this article.  Credit: By Anna Isaac and Paul Vigna 
Investors around the globe stepped up their retreat from stocks and many commodities, reflecting intensifying fears that a viral outbreak in China will deliver a setback to the outlook for world economic growth. The Dow Jones Industrial Average posted its fifth consecutive daily decline, dropping 453.93 points, or 1.6%. The S&P 500 also declined 1.6%, its first drop of more than 1% since October. Meanwhile, the yield on the benchmark 10-year Treasury note fell to 1.605%, its lowest level since October, a signal investors are eschewing risk as they reconsider an outlook that just recently had been brightening. The Cboe Volatility Index, which measures expected moves in the S&P 500 index, also climbed to its highest level since October. "It's probably too early to determine the impact to global growth from the outbreak of this virus," said Allen Bond, portfolio manager at Jensen Investment Management. "The impact on global growth is probably the key uncertainty." Concern about the coronavirus intensified as the tally of infections jumped over the weekend. The virus has infected more than 4,500 people and killed at least 106, mostly in China's Hubei province. It has spread to other countries including the U.S., Japan and South Korea, and public-health officials have warned that it is growing more contagious. Shares of tourism-related companies and those with ties to China were among the hardest hit, after the country imposed travel restrictions in response to the outbreak. Wynn Resorts, which has a large presence in gambling hot spot Macau, declined 8.1%. American Airlines Group, one of the world's largest carriers, dropped 5.5%, and Apple, which counts China among its biggest markets, fell 2.9%. The selloff jolted an equity market that had been unusually calm: The S&P 500 hadn't logged a daily rise or fall of more than 1% since October. It also hadn't suffered two consecutive daily declines since Dec. 10. The broad stock-market index fell 51.84 points to 3243.63, weighed down by losses in all 11 sectors. The energy, technology and materials sectors, all of which are sensitive to China and any growth-related fears, dropped more than 2%. The 30-stock Dow Jones Industrial Average, meanwhile, gave up its gains for the year, falling to 28535.80, less than 0.1% below the level at which it ended 2019. And the technology-heavy Nasdaq Composite dropped 175.60 points, or 1.9% -- its largest one-day decline since August -- to 9139.31. "Clearly, the news today is just hit the sell button first and worry about the details later," said Jack Ablin, chief investment officer at Cresset Capital. U.S. stocks have steadily risen since mid-October when the Trump administration indicated it was nearing a phase-one trade deal with Beijing. Meanwhile, improving economic data -- and three interest-rate cuts by the Federal Reserve -- eased fears about a manufacturing slowdown bleeding into the broader economy. Shares have been trading at relatively high multiples of earnings, which has made them more vulnerable to pullbacks in response to negative headlines, said Yousef Abbasi, global market strategist at INTL FCStone. "Investors were considering and really looking forward to improved global growth," he said. "Uncertainty like this causes people to step back and reassess the amount of risk they're taking." As investors fled stocks, they sought safety in gold, which rose 0.4%, settling at the highest value since April 2013. Making the matter more difficult to assess for investors is the fluid nature of the outbreak and the impenetrability of Chinese politics. The mayor of Wuhan said rules imposed by Beijing limit what he could disclose about the threat posed by the pathogen, suggesting the government was partially responsible for a lack of transparency about the outbreak. In addition to developments around the virus, investors are looking ahead to a big week of corporate earnings reports. Among the companies on tap for Tuesday are Apple, Pfizer and Lockheed Martin. With about 17% of S&P 500 companies having reported for the fourth quarter, 70% have topped analysts' earnings expectations, according to FactSet. Still, analysts anticipate earnings for the S&P 500 as a whole to register a drop of 1.9% from a year earlier, before climbing again in the first quarter of 2020. Investors also will be keeping an eye on the Federal Reserve's meeting Wednesday, though the central bank is expected to hold its benchmark rate steady. Overseas, the Stoxx Europe 600 retreated 2.3%. Markets in China, Hong Kong and South Korea were closed Monday for a public holiday. Japan's Nikkei 225 index closed down 2% on Monday and at midday was down 0.9%. In the U.S., hotel, cruise and airline stocks were among the biggest decliners on the day. The U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention issued a warning to avoid nonessential travel to the Hubei province of China. Las Vegas Sands dropped $4.58, or 6.8%, to $63.27 and MGM Resorts International lost $1.22, or 3.9%, to $30.35. United Airlines Holdings shares fell $4.27, or 5.2%, to $77.63 and Delta Air Lines shares declined $1.98, or 3.4%, to $56.83. With renewed questions about growth in China, the world's largest consumer of industrial commodities, shares of mining company Freeport-McMoRan fell 94 cents, or 7.9%, to $10.90. Oil prices slumped, extending their losing streak to five sessions, as the virus outbreak threatens to damp economic growth in China, the world's biggest energy consumer. Brent crude, the global benchmark, declined 2.3% to settle at $59.32 a barrel, the lowest mark since Oct. 21.  Credit: By Karen Langley 
The biggest food-delivery companies in the U.S. are seeking to shore up their finances through mergers or public listings, according to executives in an industry that has generated rapid growth but spotty profits. DoorDash Inc., Postmates Inc. and Uber Technologies Inc.'s Eats have each discussed merging in various combinations last year, according to people familiar with those talks. None resulted in a deal. Postmates, which privately filed to go public early last year, is looking at going public again, according to a person familiar with its strategy. The person said the company chose not to go public last year after lackluster offerings from Uber and Lyft Inc. and the botched listing of office-sharing startup WeWork's parent, We Co. DoorDash is also considering a public listing and is open to raising more money from private investors, said a person familiar with the company's plans. At Grubhub Inc., the biggest U.S. public company focused on food delivery, profit has shrunk, and shares have dropped 39% in the past year, as the company ramped up services to restaurants to compete. The Chicago-based company says it has talked to advisers about strategic options and sees itself as a potential buyer. Food delivery, always an expensive undertaking, has gotten harder in the U.S. Companies that began with largely separate strongholds now overlap in many markets. Customer loyalty has dropped, as companies have pumped out deals to try their services, industry metrics show. Food delivery and restaurant executives say consolidation makes sense. "By midyear, I believe there will be more clarity in our industry," Grubhub Chief Executive Matt Maloney said in an interview. The sector is also consolidating globally. British food-delivery company Just Eat PLC recently agreed to merge with Dutch company Takeaway.com NV. Germany's Delivery Hero SE agreed to buy a South Korean competitor for $4 billion in December. Food delivery grew rapidly in the U.S. over the past five years, thanks to a flood of venture capital. Companies with food-delivery operations raised nearly $16 billion between 2016 and last year, according to data firm PitchBook. Delivery companies used the cash to expand across the U.S. and invade each other's strongholds. DoorDash, Uber Eats, Postmates and Grubhub all say that they can deliver to about three quarters of the U.S. population. Delivery has grown to some 5% of the roughly $600 billion U.S. restaurant market, according to Morgan Stanley. "You have competitors in every market now," said Adam Price, who was chief executive of delivery company Waitr Holdings Inc. until last month. Waitr's shares have lost about half their value in the past year since its purchase of another delivery company, Bite Squad, failed to spur promised growth and efficiencies. Waitr said last month that it was scaling back plans to expand its operations. This month the company started laying off its employee drivers, issuing more than 3,000 notices to workers in Louisiana, Texas and Alabama, according to state labor department records. A Waitr spokesman said the company is converting its employee drivers to contractual workers. Share Your Thoughts Are you loyal to any food delivery services? Why or why not? Join the conversation below. DoorDash, whose backers include SoftBank Group Corp., surged last year to become the biggest U.S. delivery company with 37% of the domestic market, according to data firm Second Measure. Grubhub was in second place with 31% of the market. At Uber, the Eats business accounted for 75% of adjusted losses before interest, tax, depreciation and amortization in the three months through December. Uber Chief Executive Dara Khosrowshahi has said he would pull out of markets where Eats isn't the No. 1 or No. 2 player. Uber stopped delivering food in South Korea in September and last month sold its food-delivery unit in India . Mr. Khosrowshahi has said those exits helped put Uber on a path to profitability by the end of the year. Uber previously expected to reach that milestone by the end of 2021. In a presentation to investors this month, Uber said it was working to boost earnings at Eats with more advertising and other means. A person familiar with Uber's strategy said the company doesn't plan to sell its Eats business in the U.S. but is open to discussing consolidation with rivals. At Grubhub, in addition to discussing financial options, executives have discussed how they would respond to an activist shareholder, according to people familiar with those discussions. The period to nominate members to Grubhub's board is open until Feb. 21. Grubhub's preferred metric for profitability, adjusted earnings per order, fell to $1.04 in its most recent year. The low since the company went public in 2014 came as the company has expanded its delivery markets, added more chain restaurants and introduced new services to draw business. "Investors are looking for more profits," Mr. Maloney said. "The longer these unprofitable models execute, the more money they are draining, and the less runway they have." More * China's Delivery Drivers Offer a Lifeline as They Brave Coronavirus Risk Write to Preetika Rana at preetika.rana@wsj.com and Heather Haddon at heather.haddon@wsj.com Credit: By Preetika Rana and Heather Haddon 
TOKYO?볾merican passengers on the coronavirus-stricken Diamond Princess cruise ship departed from a Tokyo airport early Monday on flights home that the U.S. government arranged after a high-level political push in Washington. Buses carried the Americans from the ship, the site of the biggest coronavirus outbreak outside China, to Haneda airport, where they boarded two charter flights organized by the State Department. The Defense Department said one plane would go to Travis Air Force Base near Sacramento, Calif., and the other would land at Lackland Air Force Base in Texas. The Americans spent nearly two weeks in quarantine aboard the cruise ship and must serve out an additional 14-day quarantine after arriving in the U.S. SHARE YOUR THOUGHTS What further steps do you think world leaders should take to help limit exposure to the virus? Join the conversation below. About 380 Americans and family members of Americans were on board the ship when the quarantine started Feb. 5. Some later tested positive for the novel coronavirus and were brought to hospitals across the Tokyo region. Dr. Anthony Fauci, director of the National Institutes of Health infectious diseases institute, said on Sunday before the flights took off that 40 Americans from the ship had been infected. Those who tested positive or showed symptoms weren't allowed on the evacuation flights. Some remain in hospitals across Tokyo. Japan said 150 members of its military were on board the ship helping with the departure and other issues. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention said the decision to repatriate Americans was due to the "dynamic nature of the outbreak," meaning the number of cases has been rising on the ship. The number of confirmed coronavirus cases among passengers and crew climbed to 355, Japan's health ministry said Sunday, with 70 additional people who tested positive being brought to hospitals on shore. Israel said Sunday two of its citizens were among those infected, the first Israelis to catch the novel coronavirus. Canada said Saturday it would send a chartered plane to repatriate its citizens and would follow a protocol similar to the U.S. for screenings and further quarantine. The decision was taken "because of the extraordinary circumstances faced by passengers" and "to lighten the burden on the Japanese health-care system," according to a statement. Italy's prime minister said his country would send a plane to pick up 35 Italians on the ship. In China, the national health commission said there were more than 70,000 confirmed cases as of the end of Sunday with 1,770 deaths. In Hubei province, the center of the outbreak , the government said Sunday it would limit vehicle travel to those who are carrying supplies, transporting patients or otherwise contributing to control of the epidemic. The Diamond Princess had more than 3,700 passengers and crew when the quarantine started. Initially, Japan resisted testing everyone, citing logistical hurdles, and it had said it would let everyone who was feeling well leave on Feb. 19. On Saturday it reversed course and said everyone would be tested before disembarking. Those who test negative will be allowed to leave, but many are likely to have to stay beyond Feb. 19 because of the time needed to get test results. On Saturday, staff on the ship were told they would start a new quarantine for an unspecified period after the last passenger has disembarked. The U.S. repatriation effort followed a push by some lawmakers in Washington. Sen. James Risch (R., Idaho) raised the issue with President Trump on Thursday and they talked about "how important it is that the people on the cruise ship get the support they need" from the U.S. government, said a spokeswoman for Sen. Risch. On the same day, Rep. Phil Roe (R., Tenn.) sent a letter to several U.S. agencies citing "deteriorating conditions" on the ship and what he called "flawed approaches to isolation among passengers." Arnold Hopland, a 73-year-old primary-care doctor from Tennessee who was on the cruise with his wife and cousin's family, said his children in the U.S. alerted Rep. Roe to the issues on the ship, and that he spoke by videoconference with the congressman. Rep. Roe "is a personal friend for many years," Dr. Hopland said. Dr. Hopland said he expressed concern that the measures to prevent additional infections on board were inadequate. The ship "is not meant to be a quarantine facility. The flaws are many," he said. He said at one point people who shared a cabin were asked to stay 6 feet apart and wear a mask. "My wife and I giggled over that," he said. "These are not practical measures." Health News in Your Inbox Get a curated weekly look at features, columns and headlines on personal health and the health industry. Sign up . Dr. Hopland had hoped to depart Sunday but learned at the last minute that his wife tested positive and would be brought to a hospital in Japan, so he decided to stay behind. The two planes that arrived in Tokyo late Sunday to pick up the Americans were both cargo jets. Passengers were told that the seats were uncomfortable, there were no overhead bins for luggage and food wasn't plentiful. Tammy Smith, a retired primary-school principal from Southern California, initially hesitated to join the repatriation flight because of the additional quarantine, but ultimately decided to pack her bags. "I just want to get to the U.S. ASAP," she said. Yin Yijun in Shanghai and Dov Lieber in Tel Aviv contributed to this article More * South Korea Tracks, Publishes Patients' Travels * Handshake or Elbow Bump? With Coronavirus, It's Not Business as Usual * China Defends Coronavirus Measures * Chinese Businesses Struggle to Survive Write to Suryatapa Bhattacharya at Suryatapa.Bhattacharya@wsj.com Credit: By Suryatapa Bhattacharya 
Fiat Chrysler Automobiles NV said it is temporarily halting production at a car factory in Serbia because it can't get parts from China, a sign of how the coronavirus outbreak is creating a domino effect in a straining global supply chain. At the same time, union officials at two major General Motors Co. factories in the U.S. are warning more production outages could come as certain parts at SUV and truck plants in Michigan and Texas run low. Fiat Chrysler's planned shutdown next week at a factory in Kragujevac, Serbia, is the first publicly disclosed closure of a large car plant outside Asia. Shortages of China-made parts have already begun to ripple through the automotive supply chain, leading Hyundai Motor Co. and France's Renault SA to temporarily idle some assembly lines in South Korea. Nissan Motor Co. has had to adjust production at some of its plants in Japan because of problems getting parts from China. Fiat Chrysler said it was moving up a planned shutdown previously planned for later in the month at the factory, which makes the Fiat 500L sedan. The factory, Fiat Chrysler's only one making the 500L, has more than 2,000 employees. That stoppage had been scheduled to adjust production to slumping demand. The company said it didn't expect the change in scheduling will affect its total monthly production. Fiat Chrysler said it is working to get the parts, which it declined to identify, from other suppliers. It declined to comment further. Closer to home, a factory in Flint, Mich., which makes heavy-duty versions of GM's Chevrolet Silverado and GMC Sierra pickup trucks, faces shortages of at least two parts sourced from China, said Chad Fabbro, a financial secretary at the United Auto Workers' local representing workers at the plant. In Arlington, Texas, GM's assembly plant is confronting the possibility of running out of certain parts from China, said Terry Valenzuela, president of UAW's local chapter. The situation remains fluid, he said. That factory makes Cadillac Escalades and Chevrolet Suburbans. GM said it doesn't anticipate an impact on truck production for now. "We continue to monitor our supply chain and are in close communications with our Tier One suppliers to mitigate any risk to production in North America," the company said in a statement. "The car industry is in a supply chain twilight zone right now," said Warren Browne, a former car industry executive who now works as a consultant. "If you know it's going to last six or seven months you start moving production around. If it's going to be six weeks you don't move anything because it's not worth the trouble." The outbreak of the disease that health authorities are now calling Covid-19 led China's government to impose extended shutdowns of manufacturing plants throughout the country after the traditional break for the Lunar New Year holiday, in hopes of slowing the disease's spread. Many auto companies said they planned to restart plants in China this week. It is unclear how many have. Analysts say the impact of supply-chain disruptions and worker quarantines make it difficult to anticipate when production will return to normal. The outbreak has halted assembly lines at several car plants in China, and forecasters at LMC Automotive expect the outbreak to depress Chinese auto production by around 1.2 million cars this quarter. Last year, GM produced nearly 640,000 cars -- nearly 40% of its Chinese production -- in Hubei province, the origin of the outbreak where most of the infections have been diagnosed, LMC Automotive said. The factory in Flint is one of GM's largest U.S. factories, employing about 5,000 workers. The plant would likely run out of decals and vents first, both of which can be installed after a near-finished truck rolls off the assembly line, Mr. Fabbro said. But longer delays could affect more critical components, he said. "This is going to be a day-by-day monitoring thing," he said. "If it goes six weeks, then we all have bigger problems." GM has arranged for parts to be flown by chartered jet from China when parts are available, he said. A GM spokesman declined to comment.  Credit: By Ben Foldy in Detroit and Eric Sylvers in Milan 
If a building can be considered ironic, there might not be a better example than the hospital that was built in just 10 days in Wuhan, China, last month to treat victims of the new coronavirus. The feat of constructing a large medical facility from scratch so swiftly was hailed by many observers -- in China and elsewhere -- as a testament to Chinese administrative efficiency, a vindication of the kind of state-directed economic system that has made the country a powerhouse in the past few decades. Imagine trying to build a hospital in 10 days in this country, scoffed some American admirers of the Chinese economic model; getting the planning permission alone would take two years. This is, I would respectfully submit, monumentally missing the point. Marveling at the achievement is a little like accidentally sawing off your right leg below the knee and then boasting about how brilliant you are because you managed to fit a prosthetic device to replace it. The salient fact that we have learned about Chinese administrative and managerial practices from this latest outbreak is not that China is capable of impressive infrastructure projects but that its vaunted system of top-down decision-making, state control and central planning is directly responsible in large part for the virulence, intensity and rapid spread of the disease that has already claimed more than 1,300 Chinese lives. According to reports from Wuhan in this and other news outlets, one of the principal reasons that the virus spread so quickly and infected so many was because officials in Wuhan, bludgeoned by years of subservience to their masters in Beijing, were simply terrified of taking any initiative. Zhou Xianwang, Wuhan's mayor, told reporters that he didn't take measures to deal with the epidemic earlier because he needed authorization from his political bosses. This culture of central control, which has tightened significantly in the six years of Xi Jinping's presidency, is compounded by the elevation of political ideology and loyalty to the leader over technical or managerial skills as criteria for bureaucratic success. We also know that early warnings about the virulence of the disease were dismissed by public officials for fear that they might make the government look bad. The tragic case of Li Wenliang -- the doctor who tried to raise the alarm, was slapped down and later died from the disease -- shows how ossified the policy-making process is in a country that places loyalty to the leadership above free speech. The outbreak should promote a further reconsideration of the roots of China's economic success. A large tribe of China admirers in business and predictable parts of the media sees the central role played by the state as a model, a factor critical to the country's rapid growth. They look at gleaming high-speed rail networks, high levels of digital connectivity, and new airports and roads constructed at a breakneck pace and wish we could have the kind of economy guided by the steady hand of those wise men in Beijing. True, China was able to install much of this infrastructure because of the nature of its political system. That kind of investment is made easier by the long-term planning horizon afforded a government that doesn't have to submit itself to the people's approval every few years, and the absence of a pesky rule of law that protects individual and civic rights means that the government can ride roughshod over the usual obstacles we face in the West. But the primary reason for China's economic success in the past few decades is the exact opposite. It was the introduction of market reforms under Deng Xiaoping in 1979, extended by his successors in the 1980s and 1990s, that led to the flowering of entrepreneurship, the discipline of the market and the price mechanism. Indeed, China's economic performance since the 1980s has been on a roughly similar trajectory to that of Japan in the 1950s and 1960s and South Korea in the 1960s and 1970s -- developing economies that benefited from massive inputs of capital and an export-led economic structure. In the past five years, as Mr. Xi has tightened central controls and expanded the role of state-owned enterprises and state-directed lending, growth has slowed, and financial imbalances have grown rapidly. If the latest epidemic out of China helps us relearn the lessons of economic progress here and around the world, some benefit will emerge from the tragedy.  Credit: By Gerard Baker 
If a building can be considered ironic, there might not be a better example than the hospital that was built in just 10 days in Wuhan, China, last month to treat victims of the new coronavirus. The feat of constructing a large medical facility from scratch so swiftly was hailed by many observers?봧n China and elsewhere?봞s a testament to Chinese administrative efficiency, a vindication of the kind of state-directed economic system that has made the country a powerhouse in the past few decades. Imagine trying to build a hospital in 10 days in this country, scoffed some American admirers of the Chinese economic model; getting the planning permission alone would take two years. This is, I would respectfully submit, monumentally missing the point. Marveling at the achievement is a little like accidentally sawing off your right leg below the knee and then boasting about how brilliant you are because you managed to fit a prosthetic device to replace it. The salient fact that we have learned about Chinese administrative and managerial practices from this latest outbreak is not that China is capable of impressive infrastructure projects but that its vaunted system of top-down decision-making, state control and central planning is directly responsible in large part for the virulence, intensity and rapid spread of the disease that has already claimed more than 1,300 Chinese lives . According to reports from Wuhan in this and other news outlets, one of the principal reasons that the virus spread so quickly and infected so many was because officials in Wuhan, bludgeoned by years of subservience to their masters in Beijing, were simply terrified of taking any initiative. Zhou Xianwang, Wuhan's mayor, told reporters that he didn't take measures to deal with the epidemic earlier because he needed authorization from his political bosses. This culture of central control, which has tightened significantly in the six years of Xi Jinping's presidency, is compounded by the elevation of political ideology and loyalty to the leader over technical or managerial skills as criteria for bureaucratic success. We also know that early warnings about the virulence of the disease were dismissed by public officials for fear that they might make the government look bad. The tragic case of Li Wenliang?봳he doctor who tried to raise the alarm, was slapped down and later died from the disease?봲hows how ossified the policy-making process is in a country that places loyalty to the leadership above free speech. The outbreak should promote a further reconsideration of the roots of China's economic success. A large tribe of China admirers in business and predictable parts of the media sees the central role played by the state as a model, a factor critical to the country's rapid growth. They look at gleaming high-speed rail networks, high levels of digital connectivity, and new airports and roads constructed at a breakneck pace and wish we could have the kind of economy guided by the steady hand of those wise men in Beijing. True, China was able to install much of this infrastructure because of the nature of its political system. That kind of investment is made easier by the long-term planning horizon afforded a government that doesn't have to submit itself to the people's approval every few years, and the absence of a pesky rule of law that protects individual and civic rights means that the government can ride roughshod over the usual obstacles we face in the West. But the primary reason for China's economic success in the past few decades is the exact opposite. It was the introduction of market reforms under Deng Xiaoping in 1979, extended by his successors in the 1980s and 1990s, that led to the flowering of entrepreneurship, the discipline of the market and the price mechanism. Indeed, China's economic performance since the 1980s has been on a roughly similar trajectory to that of Japan in the 1950s and 1960s and South Korea in the 1960s and 1970s?봡eveloping economies that benefited from massive inputs of capital and an export-led economic structure. In the past five years, as Mr. Xi has tightened central controls and expanded the role of state-owned enterprises and state-directed lending, growth has slowed, and financial imbalances have grown rapidly. If the latest epidemic out of China helps us relearn the lessons of economic progress here and around the world, some benefit will emerge from the tragedy. Credit: By Gerard Baker 
The rollout of new 5G wireless networks is showing signs of slowing , denting near-term sales prospects for some networking equipment makers and potentially delaying access for some consumers to the lightning-fast data speeds the technology promises. Industry officials say there is no common cause for the slowdown seen across multiple markets, with various countries affected by different dynamics. In some cases, the equipment makers say, telecom providers want certainty that the investments made will reap returns before plowing more money into further infrastructure. Investments required to deploy fifth-generation cellular networks are significant, in part because of how the systems operate. To blanket a city, 5G requires more base stations and local relay points than traditional communications infrastructure to connect devices to the network. Research firm Gartner Inc. estimates companies spent more than $2 billion on 5G wireless infrastructure last year, more than triple the level in 2018. But spending growth is expected to slow somewhat this year, reaching about $4 billion. Quinn Bolton, an analyst at Needham & Co., said delays in the build-out of 5G infrastructure in Asia and the U.S. were causing the slowdown. South Korea was a trailblazer in 5G adoption, and operators that invested heavily in the first half of 2019 have since eased up, he said. Samsung Electronics Co., a major gear manufacturer for South Korean 5G networks, said last month its domestic 5G business would decline this year though grow elsewhere. The 5G rollout in the U.S. is somewhat slower than expected because some cities and towns oppose the massive number of antennas needed to deliver ultrafast 5G data speeds to consumers, industry executives say. Some have banned antennas in residential areas, and a group of cities is suing the Federal Communications Commission over its requirement that cities make decisions on approval of 5G antennas within 60 or 90 days. The protracted antitrust battle over T-Mobile US Inc.'s merger with Sprint Corp. also affected the pace of 5G spending. The two agreed to combine nearly two years ago, but it was only this week that a federal judge gave the go-ahead , siding with the companies over states that had raised antitrust concerns. The companies have yet to formally close the deal. As the companies were awaiting the merger outcome, T-Mobile told contractors in a letter last fall that new work orders were postponed, according to people familiar with the matter. Michael Sievert, T-Mobile's chief operating officer, earlier this month told The Wall Street Journal that engineers overshot their budget at the end of 2019 but the company would ramp up investment again early this year. Pierre Ferragu, an analyst at New Street Research, said the T-Mobile?밪print combination would speed 5G development in the U.S., calling it "positive for equipment vendors." Some makers of networking equipment that pipes data to and from new 5G antennas are still largely awaiting the anticipated spending spree. Juniper Networks Inc. Chief Financial Officer Ken Miller said this week that reaping the 5G opportunity would have to wait until 2021 or 2022. "I think it's going to be a little slower and a little longer spending cycle than maybe people predicted a year or two ago," he said. Juniper makes hardware that manages internet traffic, which network operators will need more of to handle fast-moving 5G data. For companies more directly involved in the 5G deployment, such as Cree Inc., an electronics provider in Durham, N.C., the impact has been more concrete. "We've seen some near-term delays in the 5G rollout," Chief Executive Gregg Lowe said last month. Xilinx Inc., a San Jose, Calif., chip maker, also cut its sales growth outlook and announced it was reducing its workforce by 7% because of U.S. restrictions on some trade with China and a slower 5G outlook. CEO Victor Peng said many telecom operators that spent heavily to put the initial 5G networks in place now are waiting to see if the spending generates anticipated returns before plowing more money into the infrastructure. SHARE YOUR THOUGHTS Which company do you think will take the most advantage of its 5G infrastructure? Join the conversation below. Overseas, Sweden's Ericsson AB?봮ne of the largest telecom equipment manufacturers?봲aid it has encountered higher 5G-related costs and seen a slowdown in North America sales that it attributes partly to Sprint?밫-Mobile merger delays. Ericsson CEO B철rje Ekholm said concerns around the use of Huawei Technologies Co. equipment also have affected deployments. The U.S. has been pressing allies not to use Huawei's 5G gear because of cybersecurity concerns about the Chinese manufacturer?봠oncerns Huawei has rejected. Several countries have been reviewing what role Huawei equipment should have in their systems because of U.S. concerns. The U.K., after months of debate, recently said it would allow some use of Huawei equipment in its 5G infrastructure. Huawei late last year struck a 5G deal in Germany . Some industry analysts expected the U.S. campaign to stem the use of Huawei equipment or to boost other vendors, such as Ericsson. Mr. Ekholm said, "This whole notion that this was a win for Ericsson and Nokia so far has not materialized." Some rollouts in Europe also have been delayed because governments haven't completed the spectrum allocation to operate such systems, industry officials said. Despite the recent slowdown in equipment purchases, executives remain bullish on longer-term 5G prospects. Handset makers are ramping up plans for new devices: Gartner forecasts 221 million 5G smartphones will be sold this year. Samsung, the world's largest smartphone maker, this week unveiled three Galaxy S phones with 5G capability . "There appears to be a significant bifurcation in demand trends currently between the 5G infrastructure and smartphone segments," Mr. Bolton, the Needham analyst, said. Not every network operator is taking a pause, either. AT&T Inc. CEO Randall Stephenson last month said the company's 5G network covered 50 million people and was expected to reach the entire U.S. in the second quarter . "We're not slowing down," he said. Verizon Communications Inc. Chief Executive Hans Vestberg last month projected fast growth of the company's 5G network , though he said it would be more pronounced next year. In China, a key market for 5G handset sales, network rollout plans remain broadly on track, according to analysts. Bernstein Research telecom analyst Chris Lane said Chinese operators were building hundreds of thousands of cell towers and weren't going to slow down, barring any effects of the coronavirus outbreak. Drew FitzGerald contributed to this article. Write to Asa Fitch at asa.fitch@wsj.com Credit: By Asa Fitch 
The two-year trade war between the U.S. and China upended commerce world-wide, slamming the brakes on global trade growth?봟ut also delivering modest benefits to a handful of industries and countries that saw gains as the giants tussled. Growth in global trade sank to a meager 1% last year, down from 4% in 2018 and 6% in 2017. It was the fourth worst showing in 40 years, and the worst ever outside a period of recession, according to International Monetary Fund data. Several factors contributed to the slowdown, but analysts say the U.S.-China trade war was the single-biggest cause. The U.S. and China are the world's great buying engines, each pulling in over $2 trillion a year of goods. Trade between the two nations slowed as a result of tariffs and other measures, and the decline couldn't be entirely made up by purchases from other countries. Behind the slump were falling U.S. sales to China of agriculture products , aircraft and machinery, while China's sales of electronics and industrial supplies to the U.S. dropped. In some cases foreign suppliers were unable to fill the void, so many measures of factory activity and demand slid. "Global growth and investment would have likely been higher in the absence of trade uncertainty" from the U.S.-China fight, said Sergi Lanau, deputy chief economist at the Institute of International Finance. Overall, China's imports dropped $59 billion in 2019, while American imports fell $42 billion, according to U.S. and Chinese trade figures compiled by Trade Data Monitor. But the declines would have been much larger had trade not been diverted to many other countries. Of the 15 countries with the largest change in U.S. imports last year, 11 saw increases while only four saw declines. For China, seven countries experienced increases and eight saw declines. Here's a look at the economies that picked up the slack in the global trading system. Southeast Asia China's loss was Vietnam's gain, accelerating a long-term trend of Chinese factories moving to Vietnam and other Southeast Asian countries where labor costs are lower. Vietnam's apparel trade with the U.S. has been growing for years, and clothing made up about a third of the $66 billion in imports from Vietnam last year. But other categories of purchases from Vietnam are growing rapidly?봠ellphone imports rose by about $6 billion, while furniture, telecommunications equipment and computer chips each saw a $2 billion increase in sales to the U.S. Trade experts caution that such increases can appear larger than they really are, because the figures can reflect the rerouting of products from China "often not changing anything but the label on a box," to circumvent U.S. tariffs , said Dane Chamorro, a partner at the consulting firm Control Risks. Other east and southeast Asian countries recorded smaller gains in U.S. shipments, including Taiwan, South Korea, Thailand, Malaysia and the Philippines. Latin America Latin America's two largest economies?볿razil and Mexico?봲aw limited benefits from the U.S.-China dispute. Brazilian farmers have enjoyed higher demand for soybeans, especially in 2018 after China halted such purchases from the U.S. While the American farm sector was mired in a deep slump, Brazilian oilseed exports to China climbed $8 billion in 2018 alone. Last year wasn't quite as strong for Brazil, with soybean exports slipping amid an outbreak of African swine fever that decimated pig herds in China, cutting demand for soybean meal used as animal feed. Still, China's imports from Brazil climbed $2 billion last year and are up $20 billion since 2017. Although Chinese buyers paid a premium for Brazilian soybeans, that didn't fully compensate for the global decline in commodity prices, said Flavio Fran챌a, a soybean and corn analyst at Datagro in S찾o Paulo. "Farmers here were at least able to sell more and dry up some of their stocks in 2018, and they got some extra income that way," he said. Meanwhile, U.S. imports from Mexico saw the second biggest gain of any U.S. trading partner after Vietnam. That came even while Mexico fielded its own trade issues with the Trump administration, including negotiating the successor to the North American Free Trade Agreement and U.S. threats in mid-2019 to impose tariffs on all Mexican exports unless Mexico slowed the number of Central American migrants arriving at the U.S. border. Europe The export engine of Europe, Germany, suffered from weaker demand in China as that country's economy slowed. Germany also paid a price from Chinese tariffs on U.S. exports: Bayerische Motoren Werke AG and Daimler AG's Mercedes-Benz build SUVs for the Chinese market in the U.S. Meantime, Germany was rattled by a Trump administration threat?봭ever carried out, but never abandoned, either?봳o impose tariffs on global automobile imports. Trade went from a 1 percentage point boost to Germany's economy in 2017 to a 1.3 percentage point drag in 2018. Italy, however, was only marginally affected, and the rest of Europe received a modest support from trade, according to calculations by economists at JPMorgan. While the Trump administration has threatened to impose broad tariffs on Europe for a range of reasons, the only ones actually implemented were global steel and aluminum tariffs in early 2018 and a relatively modest set affecting about $7.5 billion of goods that was allowed by a World Trade Organization ruling over European Union aircraft subsidies. Despite sharp declines in Germany, overall EU exports to the U.S. climbed 10.3% in 2019. The Netherlands and France boosted sales to the U.S. by more than $5 billion each, Ireland by $4 billion, Belgium by $3 billion and Italy by $2 billion. Airbus SE filled a void left by the grounding of Boeing's 737 Max jets , contributing to increased aircraft exports from France. Ireland and Belgium exported more pharmaceuticals and Netherlands boosted exports of petroleum products and industrial machinery. While U.S.-Europe trade has held up surprisingly well amid its efforts to stay neutral in the global trade wars, foreign investment hasn't. According to figures released by the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, foreign direct investment in the EU fell 15% in 2019 from 2018. Japan In 2019, Japan's exports fell 5.6%, marking the first annual decline in three years, according to data from the Ministry of Finance released Jan. 23. Exports to China declined 7.6%, while shipments to the U.S. dropped 1.4%. However, recent signs suggest the worst may be over?봋apan's exports to China rose in December for the first time in 10 months. Some economists say Japan's auto makers benefited from the U.S.-China trade dispute as China reduced tariffs on cars imported from countries other than the U.S. SHARE YOUR THOUGHTS What repercussions do you foresee for U.S. trading partners after the U.S.-China trade war? Join the conversation below. China reduced tariffs on cars imported from countries other than the U.S. and helped companies such as Toyota Motor Corp., which exports its luxury Lexus line to China from Japan. Lexus sales last year in China including Hong Kong rose 25% to 202,000 units. Toyota's overall sales in China rose 9% to 1.62 million vehicles despite the weak market there. Going Forward With the U.S.-China trade war at a standstill, the International Monetary Fund predicts global trade growth will improve to about 3% in 2020, from about 1% last year. For now, that forecast assumes the truces between the U.S. and major trading partners remain in place, and that a number of big emerging markets like Brazil, Mexico, India and Russia experience economic improvements. Bolstering those forecasts, global manufacturing data showed signs of stabilizing early this year. But that outlook was largely formed before the coronavirus outbreak in China added a completely new sort of uncertainty to global trade in 2020. The virus is likely to cause at least some disruption to supply chains and trade as health officials around the world work to contain its spread. And with the U.S. also retaining tariffs on nearly $370 billion a year of Chinese imports, it may be too soon to say the global trading environment will improve. "While Vietnam, for example, may be winning some new factories, a downturn in U.S.-China trade and the rising tide of protectionism globally are big negatives," said Ben Bland, director of the Southeast Asia project at the Lowy Institute. Anthony Harrup in Mexico City, Paul Hannon in London and Megumi Fujikawa in Tokyo contributed to this article. Write to Josh Zumbrun at Josh.Zumbrun@wsj.com and Feliz Solomon at feliz.solomon@wsj.com Credit: By Josh Zumbrun in Washington, Feliz Solomon in Singapore and Jeffrey Lewis in S찾o Paulo 
Nokia Corp. reported a rise in fourth-quarter profit but warned of flat demand for telecom equipment and rising competition for 5G deals in the year ahead. The world's second-largest telecom-gear maker is battling China's Huawei Technologies Co. and Sweden's Ericsson AB for control of the burgeoning market for ultrafast 5G technology, but so far the rollout has been fitful. On Thursday, Finland-based Nokia said that outside of China, its markets would be flat this year compared with 2019. The company pointed to uncertainty in North America related to the much-delayed merger of T-Mobile US Inc. and Sprint Corp. It also flagged challenges in India, where it said demand from mobile-network operators could weaken after a court ruled they must pay retroactive license and spectrum fees. During the past quarter, Nokia said demand grew for 5G network equipment but shrank for earlier technologies. It said growth in South Korea and Japan was offset by declines in China?봶here sales dropped 25%?봞nd North America. "They are increasing their momentum in 5G customer wins, which is a good sign," said Tim Hatt, head of research at GSMA Intelligence. "5G is still broadly positive for telecom gear makers but still competitive." Related * 5G's Growing Costs Sting Swedish Telecom Giant Ericsson (Jan. 24) * With Huawei on Defensive, Ericsson and Nokia Fight Each Other for Edge (May 29, 2019) 5G, which promises to supercharge cellphones and ultimately enable driverless cars and internet-controlled factories, has had a bumpy rollout in part because of security concerns about the use of Huawei's equipment. U.S. officials have pushed governments to ban Huawei's gear from their networks, saying the Chinese company could be legally obliged to allow Beijing to use its staff and equipment to spy on foreign networks. Huawei has denied that it would ever do this. Ericsson Chief Executive B철rje Ekholm recently said 5G demand was "actually slowing down, in many countries" because of geopolitical concerns around the use of Huawei equipment. "That has created more uncertainty for our customers," he told The Wall Street Journal in an interview last month. "I think this whole notion that this was a win for Ericsson and Nokia so far has not materialized." Ericsson last month warned of a slowdown in North America and rising costs associated with the rollout of 5G networks. Nokia said Thursday it expects competition to remain tough in the coming year as other telecom-gear makers look to take market share in the early rollouts of 5G. Over the past year, Ericsson has undercut Nokia on price for some of its equipment. Fierce competition was partly behind Nokia's decision last October to cut profit guidance for 2019 and scrap its dividend. For the fourth quarter, Nokia reported an 11% rise in net profit to ??21 million ($903.1 million) on flat sales of ??.9 billion. Nokia hopes to improve its business performance with new technology that could help it drive down prices for its own products. For instance, it plans to begin shipping a new system-on-a-chip, a technology system embedded in the company's baseband structures, which could make those structures cheaper. While Nokia didn't quantify the potential impact of the coronavirus outbreak on sales, its supply chain in China has been affected. The company has thousands of research-and-development employees in China, while most of its manufacturing in the country is outsourced to third-party electronics makers. The company has restricted nonessential travel to China and required its staff there to work from home this week. Write to Parmy Olson at parmy.olson@wsj.com Credit: By Parmy Olson 
U.S. stocks rose Thursday, brushing off initial losses related to fears about the global coronavirus outbreak. Major indexes began the day lower after reports showed another spike in the number of cases stemming from the outbreak. Airlines canceled flights, several companies shut down factories in China and officials from different countries issued guidance discouraging unnecessary travel. But as the day progressed, shares of airlines and consumer companies?봞mong the worst hit in recent selling?봟ounced off their lows. Traders attributed some of the market's rebound to remarks made by World Health Organization officials, who in a briefing acknowledged the seriousness of the outbreak but said they weren't recommending restrictions on international trade and travel. The Dow Jones Industrial Average ended the day up 124.99 points, or 0.4%, to 28859.44. The S&P 500 added 10.26 points, or 0.3%, to 3283.66, and the Nasdaq Composite rose 23.77 points, or 0.3%, to 9298.93. "I just don't think the panic has reached its peak yet," said Randy Frederick, vice president of trading and derivatives at Charles Schwab. That being said, Mr. Frederick said he was taking comfort in the fact that the market has historically been resilient following prior outbreaks. "We were at all-time highs just last week. It's not like things are crumbling," Mr. Frederick said. A rally in technology shares helped offset the market's initial declines. Tesla jumped $59.82, or 10%, to $640.81 after the electric-car maker exceeded Wall Street's estimates for fourth-quarter adjusted profit and pledged to increase vehicle sales by more than a third this year. Microsoft gained $4.74, or 2.8%, to $172.78 after the software maker said its cloud business helped drive profits, while sales climbed to a record, beating analysts' expectations. SHARE YOUR THOUGHTS What do you think it will take for the market to stabilize? Join the conversation below. Shares of companies with big presences in China continued their recent slide, though. Royal Caribbean Cruises, which canceled a four-day cruise Monday that was set to depart from Shanghai, fell $1.94, or 1.6%, to $119.70. Starbucks, which has closed more than half of its stores in China, lost 88 cents, or 1%, to $85.84. Stocks elsewhere around the world were mostly lower, with the Stoxx Europe 600 down 1% and Hong Kong's Hang Seng losing 2.6%. "We have yet to see the bottom," said Alex Au, managing director at Alphalex Capital Management, a Hong Kong-based hedge fund. He said the "climax of the contagion" could occur when the holiday period ends next week and many people in China return to work. Markets on the mainland are scheduled to remain closed until Feb. 3. Shares of European telecommunications company BT Group dropped 7.4%. The firm said the British government's decision to limit its use of equipment from China's Huawei to build part of its 5G cellular network will cost the U.K. company about 짙500 million ($655 million) over the next five years as it seeks other suppliers. The British pound climbed 0.5% against the U.S. dollar after the Bank of England decided to keep rates steady ahead of the U.K.'s pending exit from the European Union. The move came after traders who had bet on a rate cut unwound their earlier positions, said Kallum Pickering, a senior economist at Berenberg. In the bond market, the yield on the benchmark 10-year U.S. Treasury note edged back below the yield of the three-month bill. The phenomenon, known as a yield-curve inversion, is often interpreted as a recession warning sign. Xie Yu contributed to this article Write to Akane Otani at akane.otani@wsj.com and Caitlin Ostroff at caitlin.ostroff@wsj.com Credit: By Akane Otani and Caitlin Ostroff 
SEOUL?봖amsung Electronics Co. reported a 39% drop in fourth-quarter net profit but projected improved market conditions in 2020, as the chip industry starts to pull out of a protracted slump. The South Korean company reported a quarterly net profit of 5.2 trillion won ($4.4 billion) for the last three months of 2019, versus 8.46 trillion won the prior year. The decline was somewhat less dramatic than the third quarter's 52% slide. Samsung, the world's largest memory-chip maker, posted revenue of 59.9 trillion won, a 1.1% increase from a year earlier. Earlier this month, Samsung forecast results that beat analysts' estimates , which had been weighed down over the past year by a semiconductor glut and the U.S.-China trade fight. Since then, other chip makers, including Intel Corp. and Taiwan Semiconductor Manufacturing Co., the world's largest contract semiconductor maker, have delivered robust results and forecasts, raising expectations for 2020. Samsung, based in Suwon, South Korea, has also been shielded somewhat from Trump administration restrictions on U.S. companies' doing business with China's Huawei Technologies Co. On Tuesday, U.S. chip maker Xilinx Inc. said it planned to cut about 7% of its workforce, pointing to lost business with Huawei and lax adoption of superfast 5G networks. Samsung weathered challenges in 2019 from a global slump in memory-chip demand that ended a string of record profits. Net profit bottomed out in the first quarter, reaching its lowest point since 2016's global recall of Galaxy Note 7 smartphones. Operating profit in 2019 was down by nearly half from its peak in 2018. The company, which generated about 75% of operating profit from semiconductors in 2018, started showing signs of a rebound in the second half of 2019, as memory-chip prices rose and smartphone sales came in better than expected. Investors had bet on a turnaround earlier than that. In 2019, Samsung shares rose 44%, alongside those of rivals Micron Technology Co. and SK Hynix Inc. Shares of Samsung continued to hit highs this month after the company reported preliminary results for the fourth quarter. Samsung, the world's largest smartphone maker, will unveil a new high-end lineup next month, and a bolder consumer embrace of 5G phones could boost sales. Huawei and Samsung are the top sellers of 5G phones, accounting for nearly three-quarters of the 18.7 million shipped out in 2019, according to Strategy Analytics, a market researcher. Several demand drivers for memory chips are lined up for 2020, including the rollout of 5G-enabled phones and the planned launch of Microsoft Corp.'s new Xbox game console. "We're seeing increasing demand from data-center customers," Han Jin-man, senior vice president of Samsung's semiconductor business, said on Thursday's earnings call. "But we'll have to see whether this trend of growing demand will continue into the second half of the year." Most analysts expect the recovery to continue in 2020, but not reach the levels of 2017 and 2018. "There's a lot of positive momentum, but also factors that can damp that," said Park Jun-hong, an analyst at S&P Global Ratings in Hong Kong. The U.S.-China trade agreement hasn't done enough to reassure global markets, he said. It retains tariffs for later negotiations to deal with. In China, coronavirus is raising concerns around production challenges and consumer demand. About 50% of the world's memory chips are shipped to China for domestic and export use by companies both Chinese and foreign, according to Kim Nam-hyung, an analyst at Arete Research in Los Angeles. "China is the world's No. 1 market for smartphones and TVs, and the No. 2 market for PCs," said Mr. Kim. "If consumer demand dries up there, it can create a huge shock." Earlier this week, Apple Inc.'s chief executive said some factories in China, where the company has a huge production base, have pushed back plans to reopen after the Lunar New Year by more than a week due to the outbreak. Samsung manufactures its consumer electronics, display panels and some of its NAND memory chips in China. A company spokeswoman said the postholiday reopenings of some plants there have likewise been postponed, in line with Chinese government policy. Separately on Thursday, Samsung said in regulatory filings that it will adopt electronic voting in its shareholder meetings. Write to Eun-Young Jeong at Eun-Young.Jeong@wsj.com Credit: By Eun-Young Jeong 
On Sunday, more than 10,000 families gathered in Wuhan for a banquet, sharing dishes including spicy duck necks and braised prawns, in a tradition the government had held for years to mark the Lunar New Year. Days later, Beijing made the unprecedented decision to lock down the city of 11 million people, shutting public transportation, movie theaters, internet cafes and other cultural centers, in an effort to contain the spread of a virus that has killed at least 25 people. Some medical professionals questioned the timing of the mass gathering. "Having a big event like this at a time of an epidemic amounts to a lack of basic common sense," said Li Xinzhou, a respiratory specialist in Shanghai. As China tries to control a coronavirus outbreak that has spread halfway around the world since it was first disclosed in December, it is also facing questions about the pace at which the outbreak was confronted. Wuhan and the nearby cities of Huanggang and Ezhou, which collectively hold more than 20 million people, have been put on lockdown, while authorities in the Chinese gambling center of Macau said they were weighing closures of its casinos. Five other cities in the province of Hubei, of which Wuhan is the capital, also enacted travel restrictions late Thursday. Such drastic measures indicate that the virus, for which no cure has yet been found, is spreading faster than previously anticipated. Many international health experts have credited Chinese officials with responding more quickly, and with greater transparency, than they did during the outbreak of severe acute respiratory syndrome, or SARS, 17 years ago, which claimed nearly 800 lives and infected more than 8,000 people world-wide. But people close to the Wuhan government, including advisers and business executives with which it consults, said officials remained overly optimistic that the outbreak would be contained while they focused on other priorities, including annual Communist Party meetings there. In an interview on Tuesday with China's state broadcaster China Central Television, Wuhan Mayor Zhou Xianwang said local authorities "weren't on alert enough" when they organized Sunday's banquet. Wuhan authorities didn't respond to requests from The Wall Street Journal for further comment. The same day as the banquet, Beijing dispatched a group of the nation's prominent epidemiologists to Wuhan. They determined the virus -- initially spread from animals -- had been transferred between people for some time, but didn't say for how long, before authorities publicly acknowledged such human-to-human contact was likely, increasing its potential danger. The group's leader, Zhong Nanshan, said in a state-television interview that it had found that more than a dozen medical staff in Wuhan had contracted the virus from one patient, though he didn't say when that had occurred. The virus has sickened more than 800 people in mainland China and a handful in countries including Thailand, South Korea and the U.S. It is fast becoming one of the biggest crises and political tests for President Xi Jinping. To contain the surge in infections, Mr. Xi this week ordered the travel bans for cities hit hard by the virus, an official familiar with the president's role in the decision said. The World Health Organization says the scale of such a shutdown is without precedent and it remains to be seen how effective the measures will be. The WHO declined on Thursday to declare the outbreak a global public-health emergency, citing a limited number of cases abroad and efforts under way to bring it under control. Chinese social media in December made the first references to the virus, prompting health authorities in Wuhan to confirm on Dec. 31 that 27 people had been sickened and to close a wholesale wild-animal market where the virus was suspected to have originated. Within a week, reported infections surged to 44. China informed the WHO of the initial outbreak soon after it was discovered. By early January, Chinese health authorities identified the genome of the virus and determined it was in the same family of pathogens as SARS. Wuhan authorities didn't step up public warnings, but around the start of the year temporarily detained eight people they alleged had spread false information about the virus, without giving any evidence. For weeks, local officials insisted there was a low risk the virus could be passed from human to human. When the city's top leaders met this month for annual policy meetings, the virus wasn't on the official agenda. "Everyone was blindly optimistic," an adviser to the Wuhan government said. Soon, hospitals throughout Wuhan and nearby cities were reporting more cases to the National Health Commission in Beijing, a cabinet-level group. The surge was serious enough that the committee sent the epidemiologists to Wuhan on Sunday. The group concluded that the situation was more severe than local authorities had publicly acknowledged, people familiar with the matter said. The group decided authorities should shut the city, but provincial and municipal officials had no authority to do so, so the team had to return to Beijing, where Mr. Xi eventually signed off on the measure. The Wuhan lockdown was announced Thursday morning, less than a day after the senior-most Hubei province officials spent the evening at a Wuhan concert hall enjoying a gala. Some people flashed resentment when the lockdown became public. "If measures had been taken in advance, there would be no need to lock down the city," one user on the Weibo microblogging site wrote. "With the city being blocked now, it shows the situation is already out of control."  Credit: By Lingling Wei and Chao Deng 
The newly identified coronavirus claimed its first life outside China, as the number of U.S. cases ticked up to eight and the Pentagon said it was setting up quarantine centers for travelers who screened positive for the illness. A 44-year-old man in the Philippines from the Chinese city of Wuhan, where the outbreak began in December, died on Saturday, the Philippine Department of Health said on Sunday. The man was one of two confirmed cases in the Philippines, the other being his 38-year-old female companion. The number of cases has expanded dramatically around the world to more than 20 countries. There are now nearly 15,000 cases of the virus in China, resulting in more than 300 deaths overall. Some 150 people outside China have been sickened . SHARE YOUR THOUGHTS How do you protect yourself from contracting infectious diseases? Join the conversation below. Heath officials said a University of Massachusetts Boston student in his 20s who had recently visited Wuhan had been infected, raising the number of cases in the U.S. to eight. The man, who went to doctors soon after returning from China, is in isolation and his close contacts are being monitored, they said. Countries and airlines around the world have limited their contact with China after the World Health Organization designated the coronavirus outbreak a public health emergency of international concern. The U.S., Australia and New Zealand have raised their travel alerts for all of China to their highest levels , "Do Not Travel," and Indonesia, South Korea and the Philippines imposed new restrictions over the weekend. The U.S. has set entry restrictions on foreign nationals and quarantines on Americans returning from Hubei, the province at the center of the outbreak. The Pentagon announced it was preparing four military bases, in California, Colorado and Texas, as centers for overseas travelers who are screened and identified as needing to be quarantined. It said it acted at the request of the Department of Health and Human Services, and was prepared to provide quarters for up to 1,000 people through the end of February. No one had yet been received at any of the four installations, Defense Department officials said Sunday. Military officials would only provide housing support for people potentially infected by the virus to have individual rooms, and wouldn't be responsible for caring for the patients, the statement said. People found by Health and Human Services personnel to be ill with the virus would be transferred to local civilian hospitals, the Pentagon said. In Hong Kong, thousands of hospital workers voted to press ahead with a five-day strike starting Monday, in a bid to force the government to fully shut its borders to mainland China as coronavirus cases climb there. Chinese authorities have been pushing to learn more about the new virus, but they have made little progress in stopping it from spreading. Restrictions on citizens' movements expanded to the coastal city of Wenzhou where the government closed 46 high-speed toll stations and prohibited households from allowing more than one person out every two days, marking the first city outside of Hubei province to impose such drastic measures. U.S. national security adviser Robert O'Brien said the U.S. was prepared to send a team of American health professionals from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention to help Beijing but that Chinese officials hadn't responded to the offer. "I think we can be helpful if we're on the ground right now," Mr. O'Brien said Sunday on CBS. "We've made the offer, and we'll see if they accept the offer." Mr. O'Brien spoke as reports indicated Chinese officials may have contributed to the spread of the virus by purposely hiding initial indications of the disease. Mr. O'Brien said Beijing had begun to be more forthcoming. "We've asked them for transparency," he said. In an attempt to support Chinese financial markets, which are scheduled to reopen on Monday after an extended Lunar New Year holiday, China's central bank said it would inject 1.2 trillion yuan ($173 billion) of liquidity into the market. Related * Tracking the Coronavirus * The Economic Impact of Coronavirus, by the Numbers * New York City Investigating Possible First Case of Coronavirus * In Virus-Hit China, Markets Brace for a Fall as Authorities Urge Calm * Avian Influenza in China Adds to Economic Concerns Amid Coronavirus Spread * Coronavirus Is Declared a Global Health Emergency as Threat Rises Outside China The People's Bank of China, which has vowed to provide more aid for financial institutions during the deadly outbreak, said there will be 900 billion yuan more liquidity in the system compared with the same period a year earlier. Chinese health officials said in a trial guideline that the remains of deceased coronavirus patients should be disinfected and placed in sealed bags, cremated in designated facilities and not transferred between provinces, China's official Xinhua News Agency reported Sunday. The guideline included a ban on certain funeral traditions for coronavirus victims. Both patients in the Philippines were being treated in isolation at a hospital in Manila, health authorities said. The man developed severe pneumonia due to viral and bacterial infection, the statement added, and while he had shown signs of improvement, his condition deteriorated rapidly in his final 24 hours. Philippine health authorities urged calm. "I would like to emphasize that this is an imported case with no evidence of local transmission," said Health Secretary Francisco T. Duque III. Raffaele Huang, Grace Zhu, Rachel Pannett, Chuin-Wei Yap, Jon Emont and Cameron McWhirter contributed to this article. Write to Stephanie Yang at stephanie.yang@wsj.com , Feliz Solomon at feliz.solomon@wsj.com and Gordon Lubold at Gordon.Lubold@wsj.com Credit: By Stephanie Yang, Feliz Solomon and Gordon Lubold 
Fiat Chrysler Automobiles NV said it is temporarily halting production at a car factory in Serbia because it can't get parts from China, a sign of how the coronavirus outbreak is creating a domino effect in a straining global supply chain. At the same time, union officials at two major General Motors Co. factories in the U.S. are warning more production outages could come as certain parts at SUV and truck plants in Michigan and Texas run low. Fiat Chrysler's planned shutdown next week at a factory in Kragujevac, Serbia, is the first publicly disclosed closure of a large car plant outside of Asia. Shortages of China-made parts have already begun to ripple through the global automotive supply chain, leading Hyundai Motor Co. and France's Renault SA to temporarily idle some assembly lines in South Korea. Nissan Motor Co. has had to adjust production at some of its plants in Japan because of problems getting parts from China. Fiat Chrysler said it was moving up a planned shutdown previously planned for later in the month at the factory, which makes the Fiat 500L sedan. The factory, Fiat Chrysler's only one making the 500L, has more than 2,000 employees. That stoppage had been scheduled to adjust production to slumping demand. The company said it didn't expect the change in scheduling will impact its total monthly production. Fiat Chrysler said it is working to get the parts, which it declined to identify, from other suppliers. It declined to comment further. Closer to home, a factory in Flint, Mich., which makes heavy-duty versions of GM's Chevrolet Silverado and GMC Sierra pickup trucks, faces shortages of at least two parts sourced from China, said Chad Fabbro, a financial secretary at the United Auto Workers' local representing workers at the plant. In Arlington, Texas, GM's assembly plant is confronting the possibility of running out of certain parts from China, said Terry Valenzuela, president of UAW's local chapter. The situation remains fluid, he said. That factory makes Cadillac Escalades and Chevrolet Suburbans. GM said it doesn't anticipate an impact on truck production for now. "We continue to monitor our supply chain and are in close communications with our Tier One suppliers to mitigate any risk to production in North America," the company said in a statement. "The car industry is in a supply chain twilight zone right now," said Warren Browne, a former car industry executive who now works as a consultant. "If you know it's going to last six or seven months you start moving production around. If it's going to be six weeks you don't move anything because it's not worth the trouble." The outbreak of the disease that health authorities are now calling Covid-19 led China's government to impose extended shutdowns of manufacturing plants throughout the country after the traditional break for the Lunar New Year holiday, in hopes of slowing the disease's spread. Many auto companies said they planned to restart plants in China this week. It is unclear how many have. Analysts say the impact of supply-chain disruptions and worker quarantines make it difficult to anticipate when production will return to normal. The outbreak has halted assembly lines at several car plants in China, and forecasters at LMC Automotive expect the outbreak to depress Chinese auto production by around 1.2 million cars this quarter. Last year, GM produced nearly 640,000 cars?봭early 40% of its Chinese production?봧n Hubei province, the origin of the outbreak where most of the infections have been diagnosed, LMC Automotive said. The factory in Flint is one of GM's largest U.S. factories, employing about 5,000 workers. The plant would likely run out of decals and vents first, both of which can be installed after a near-finished truck rolls off the assembly line, Mr. Fabbro said. But longer delays could impact more critical components, he said. "This is going to be a day-by-day monitoring thing," he said. "If it goes six weeks, then we all have bigger problems." GM has arranged for parts to be flown by chartered jet from China when parts are available, he said. A GM spokesman declined to comment. GM derives the majority of its global profit from sales of its large pickup-truck and SUV models built in North America. The pickups are built at the Flint factory, along with a plant in Fort Wayne, Ind., and another in Silao, Mexico. The Arlington plant makes all of GM's large SUVs. The company already is trying to replenish truck stocks after a 40-day strike last fall shut down production across its U.S. factories. Mike Colias contributed to this article. Write to Ben Foldy at Ben.Foldy@wsj.com and Eric Sylvers at eric.sylvers@wsj.com Credit: By Ben Foldy in Detroit and Eric Sylvers in Milan 
The World Health Organization said Thursday it was too early to declare a peak in the spread of the coronavirus, a day after China marked its deadliest day since the outbreak began. Separately, Singapore?봦ome to the second-largest number of cases outside mainland China?봱eported two new infections, including one with no apparent link to China. The city-state warned the public to be "prepared for the possibility of new infection clusters involving locals within the community," and that future cases may not arise from recent travel to China or contact with travelers from that country. Seventy-three people died Wednesday in China, government health authorities said, pushing the total to 563. Authorities also confirmed 3,694 new cases, bringing the countrywide total to 28,018. THE LATEST ON THE CORONAVIRUS * A Chinese doctor who issued an early warning on the virus died after becoming infected with it . * The State Department offered Americans in Wuhan a last chance at evacuation * China reported its highest single-day death toll on Wednesday, with 73 deaths * Japan confirmed 10 more cases on the ship that has been quarantined there Most of the deaths and new confirmed cases were in the central Chinese city of Wuhan, where the outbreak began, and the surrounding province of Hubei, an area of nearly 60 million people that has been quarantined. WHO, meanwhile, reported 28,276 confirmed cases globally Thursday, including 3,722 new ones, and 564 deaths. Though the number of new cases declined from Wednesday's 3,925, "this is nothing to celebrate?봧t's still a great worry," said Mike Ryan, executive director of the WHO's Health Emergencies Program, speaking at a news conference in Geneva. "It's right now too early to make predictions on numbers." But Dr. Ryan said it was heartening that the number of cases in Chinese provinces outside of Hubei hadn't accelerated, and that the number of new infections over the prior 24 hours in China had fallen from the previous day. In Singapore, the two new infections bring the total of confirmed cases to 30, the Ministry of Health said. One of the patients is a 41-year-old citizen whom the Health Ministry said had no recent travel history to China. The second is a 27-year-old man who attended a business meeting with people from Hubei and elsewhere in China. Others at the meeting, from South Korea and Malaysia, also tested positive. Also Thursday, the U.S. State Department offered Americans stranded in Hubei a last chance for evacuation: Two planes, departing as soon as Thursday night, headed for the U.S. The department told passengers in an email that it expected about 410 people, including Canadians, to be onboard. The plan was to drop off Canadians in Vancouver before going to a U.S. destination, which is expected to be in California, it added. Passengers were expected to pay about $1,000 for a ticket. A separate flight organized by the Canadian government left Wuhan early Friday with 176 passengers, Canadian officials said. As deaths and infections from coronavirus-caused respiratory illnesses rise, governments including the U.S., Taiwan and Japan are taking increasingly aggressive steps to evacuate and quarantine citizens, while companies are scaling back operations in China. Hundreds of Americans already left Wuhan for home in three government-organized evacuation flights over the last 10 days. Washington last week raised its travel alert for China to the highest level of "Do Not Travel," and advised Americans in China to consider departing through commercial means. Related Coverage * China's Coronavirus Outbreak Prompts Patients to Scramble for Remedies * Outbreak Strains Global Medical-Mask Market * Yum China Shows Outbreak Is Curbing Consumption * Cruise Passengers Face Infection Worries, Blown Travel Plans and Boredom * Wuhan Coronavirus Hospitals Turn Away All but Most Severe Cases Singapore also was preparing a second evacuation flight soon, according to people with knowledge of the situation. WHO announced that it will bring together an international group of scientists and public health experts on Feb. 11 and 12 to identify research priorities and coordinate funding. The aim is to fast-track the development of testing, vaccines and other treatments, said WHO Director-General Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus. On Wednesday, the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention began shipping its diagnostic test kit to approved labs, hoping to speed up virus detection. Roughly 200 kits will be distributed within the U.S. and a similar amount internationally, the CDC said. Each can run about 700 to 800 patient samples. Saudi Arabia on Thursday suspended all travel to China for both its citizens and residents. Saudi Arabia's General Directorate of Passports in a statement said citizens who violate the ban would be penalized, while residents wouldn't be allowed back in the kingdom. Taiwan on Thursday banned the visit of all international cruise ships, after saying earlier that only ships that had docked in China or the Chinese territories of Hong Kong and Macau would be barred. Taiwan, a self-ruled island that China considers part of its territory, said it had 11 confirmed coronavirus cases as of Thursday, and that Chinese residents would be barred entry starting Thursday. Meantime, Japan's health authorities on Thursday said they found 10 new coronavirus cases on a cruise ship with 3,700 passengers and crew. The 10 were taken to hospitals, while those remaining on the vessel face two more weeks of quarantine onboard , sometimes in windowless rooms. In Hong Kong, passengers and crew on the cruise ship World Dream were stopped from leaving the ship on Wednesday, pending health checks. SHARE YOUR THOUGHTS What more could the U.S. be doing to help China combat the coronavirus outbreak? Join the conversation below. The city said Thursday it had confirmed a new case of the virus, bringing its total cases to 22. A Hong Kong health official said the city had at least three patients infected with the virus without recent travel history, expressing concern about the increasing incidence of the disease being transmitted locally. Virgin Australia airline said Thursday it was permanently halting service between Australia and Hong Kong. In a statement, the airline, one of Australia's biggest, said it reached that decision after considering both the coronavirus outbreak and the already-low demand for flights because of the civil unrest in the specially governed Chinese city. Airlines around the world, including American Airlines Group Inc., British Airways and Delta Air Lines Inc., have suspended service to mainland China, with many citing significant declines in demand. Health News in Your Inbox Get a curated weekly look at features, columns and headlines on personal health and the health industry. Sign up. Spain's flagship carrier, Iberia Airlines, said Thursday it would extend the suspension of its single China route, which serves Shanghai, through April. Chun Han Wong, Joyu Wang and Brianna Abbott contributed to this article. Write to Liza Lin at Liza.Lin@wsj.com and Stu Woo at Stu.Woo@wsj.com Credit: By Liza Lin and Stu Woo 
When Muni He triumphed at LPGA Q-Series last November, she seized control of something every professional golfer holds dear: her schedule. Being able to sign up for an event and not have to rely on the streaky nature of Monday qualifiers and the luck of the alternate list feels like a luxury for young players on the highest stage. He, 20, decided early on that she'd skip the first three LPGA tournaments that she was eligible for and start 2020 on a three-week stretch in Asia, playing off of sponsor exemptions in limited-field events in Thailand and Singapore and the Blue Bay LPGA in her native China. No one could've predicted that her first three starts would be canceled due to threats from the coronavirus. That control He worked so hard for went up in a puff of smoke. She'll now make her first start of 2020 in late March at the LPGA event in Phoenix. "I'm really trying hard not to stress," He said by phone from London. Her original plans included a stop first in London to see friends. She decided to go ahead and make that trip and play Wentworth for a few days before heading back to Los Angeles to practice. But not over-practice. Or overthink. It's so difficult not to do both or either with so much unplanned time on the calendar. Golfers live by the calendar. Natalie Gulbis used to literally schedule her sleep for the year, going to bed at 9 p.m. and rising at 5 a.m. Probably still does. Danielle Kang said she was devastated to learn that her next three events had been canceled but agrees with the decision to put safety first. The Asian events are among her favorite on tour. Kang said she hasn't had seven weeks off since high school. "I honestly have no plans," said Kang, who skipped the Australian swing. There's now a four-week gap between tournaments on the LPGA schedule. After having some time to let the news soak in, the world No. 5 started to view the unexpected break as a good thing. Kang didn't have much of an offseason over the winter and found herself feeling tired at the first two events of the year in Florida. The idea of getting into a routine for a long period of time in Las Vegas started to sound appealing. "I only have four weeks left!" said Kang, uttering an unheard phrase this time of year. At the start of the week in Australia, Inbee Park was lamenting over the fact that she so often can't buy groceries at home like a regular person because she's not there long enough to eat them. After collecting her 20th career LPGA victory in the ISPS Handa Australian Women's Open, Inbee Park headed home to South Korea, where she can buy as much as she wants in the produce section with a month off. Park hadn't originally planned to play in Phoenix, but that might change. The top two players in the world, Jin Young Ko and Sung Hyun Park, have yet to hit a shot on the LPGA tour this season. Here's a wild thought: There are now only two events remaining on the schedule before the first major of the year. Ko won the Founders Cup and ANA Inspiration in 2019. Last year He, a former Southern California college standout, put too much pressure on herself to get off to a fast start. "Look at how that turned out for me," she said. He, who goes by "Lily," now views the full season as she did Q-Series, one long marathon. "Now with four more weeks on my hands," she said, "I'm just trying to maintain."  Location: Thailand Southern California Singapore Australia China Los Angeles California Florida Asia Las Vegas Nevada South Korea  People: Kang, Danielle Park, Inbee Gulbis, Natalie Sung Hyun Park  Company / organization: Name: Ladies Professional Golf Association--LPGA; NAICS: 813990  Title: LPGA players face rare waiting game  Publication title: USA TODAY; McLean, Va.  First page: C.5  Publication year: 2020  Publication date: Feb 17, 2020  Section: SPORTS  Publisher: USA Today, a division of Gannett Satellite Information Network, Inc.  Place of publication: McLean, Va.  Country of publication: United States, McLean, Va.  Publication subject: General Interest Periodicals--United States  ISSN: 07347456  Source type: Newspapers  Language of publication: English  Document type: News  ProQuest document ID: 2355788853  Document URL: http://search.proquest.com.ssl.access.yonsei.ac.kr:8080/docview/2355788853?accountid=15179  Copyright: Copyright USA Today, a division of Gannett Satellite Information Network, Inc. Feb 17, 2020  Last updated: 2020-02-17  Database: U.S. Newsstream  ____________________________________________________________  Coronavirus blamed in Philippines death  Author: Bacon, John  Publication info: USA TODAY ; McLean, Va. [McLean, Va]03 Feb 2020: A.2.  http://search.proquest.com.ssl.access.yonsei.ac.kr:8080/docview/2350006259?accountid=15179  Abstract: None available.  Links: http://US2ST5WU6Z.search.serialssolutions.com/directLink?&amp;atitle=Coronavirus+blamed+in+Philippines+death&amp;author=Bacon%2C+John&amp;issn=07347456&amp;title=USA+TODAY&amp;volume=&amp;issue=&amp;date=2020-02-03&amp;spage=A.2&amp;id=doi:&amp;sid=ProQ_ss&amp;genre=article  Full text: A 44-year-old Chinese man hospitalized in the Philippines became the first known fatality outside China from the new virus that has killed more than 300 people and prompted a global health emergency, authorities said Sunday. Also Sunday, China's ambassador to Israel apologized for comparing the decision by several nations to close their borders to Chinese citizens to turning away Jewish refugees during the Holocaust. "There was no intention whatsoever to compare the dark days of the Holocaust with the current situation and the efforts taken by the Israeli government to protect its citizens," the embassy said in a statement. "We would like to apologize if someone understood our message the wrong way." In Manila, the Philippine Health Department said a patient died Saturday after developing severe pneumonia due to viral and bacterial infections. "In his last few days, the patient was stable and showed signs of improvement," Health Secretary Francisco Duque said. "However, the condition of the patient deteriorated within his last 24 hours." China has reported 304 deaths and more than 14,600 cases of the latest coronavirus, all of which draw their name from the virus's elliptical, spiky shape. More than 170 cases have been reported in more than two dozen other countries, including eight cases in the U.S. Duque said the man and his companion, a 38-year-old Chinese woman, arrived in Manila on Jan. 21 via Hong Kong from Wuhan, the city at the center of the outbreak. Four days later both were hospitalized and placed in isolation, where the woman remained Sunday. "I would like to emphasize that this is an imported case with no evidence of local transmission," Duque said. He said his agency was working with the Chinese Embassy to ensure the "dignified management of the remains" while also ensuring containment of the disease. The World Health Organization declared a global health emergency Thursday, recommending an urgent effort to develop vaccines and diagnostics as well as a review of every nation's preparedness plans. WHO Secretary-General Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus said in Geneva that despite the emergency declaration, there is "no reason for measures that unnecessarily interfere with international travel and trade." On Friday, the Trump administration declared the coronavirus outbreak to be a public health emergency in the United States. U.S. citizens who have been in China's Hubei province and are returning to the U.S. will undergo health screenings and be monitored during mandatory quarantines of up to 14 days, officials said. The U.S. also announced a suspension of entry into the United States of foreign nationals who pose a risk for the transmission of the virus. The U.S. and the Philippines government are among several nations issuing temporary bans on many travelers coming from China, Macao and Hong Kong ??drawing the ire of Beijing. "Just as the WHO recommended against travel restrictions, the U.S. rushed to go in the opposite way," foreign ministry spokeswoman Hua Chunying said. "Certainly not a gesture of goodwill." New Zealand announced Sunday it is temporarily banning travelers from China to protect the South Pacific region from the virus. The 14-day ban applies to foreigners leaving China but not to New Zealand residents. Last week, the U.S. flew about 200 Americans out of Wuhan on a chartered plane and indicated that more flights could follow. The European Union sponsored a similar flight last week. This weekend, South Korea and India flew hundreds of their citizens out of Wuhan. Indonesia flew back 241 nationals from Wuhan on Sunday and quarantined them on the remote Natuna Islands for two weeks. Meanwhile, six officials in the city of Huanggang, neighboring the epicenter of Wuhan in Hubei province, have been fired over "poor performance" in handling the outbreak, the official Xinhua News Agency reported. Contributing: The Associated Press 
Drugmakers are hustling to make a vaccine to counter the rapidly spreading respiratory virus that has sickened at least 1,975 people in China and five in the United States. More inside Number of cases rises in U.S. 4A The National Institutes of Health has partnered with a Boston-area company, Moderna, on a vaccine targeting the novel coronavirus. A Pennsylvania biotechnology company, Inovio, also secured a $9 million grant from Norway-based Coalition for Epidemic Preparedness Innovations to develop a vaccine. The company already is developing a vaccine for Middle East respiratory syndrome, or MERS, another type of coronavirus. Officials with the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases say they can quickly develop a vaccine because Chinese scientists rapidly sequenced the virus's genome. "The agency has the funding and technology," said Anthony Fauci, director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases. "Barring any bureaucratic or regulatory holdups, which I don't think will happen, we can almost certainly get into phase one in three months." Even if the vaccine is tested rapidly, it might not come in time to slow the outbreak. Public health efforts to limit the spread of the virus and treat those who are infected will have a more immediate benefit. The virus, which originated in Wuhan, has spread to surrounding regions in China, South Korea, Japan, Singapore, Hong Kong, Macao, Taiwan, Thailand, Vietnam and the U.S. 
The head of the World Health Organization said Wednesday its emergency committee needed more information before it was ready to declare the deadly global coronavirus outbreak a public health emergency, even as the hard-hit Chinese city of Wuhan shut down all air and train traffic to try to contain its spread. The death toll from a new global virus rose to at least 17 on Wednesday while experts from around the world were meeting in Geneva to debate how to address the ominous outbreak. WHO Director-General Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus called the issue an "evolving and complex situation" that required further study. While praising China's cooperation in presenting information about the virus, the WHO leader called for more debate on Thursday. "The decision about whether or not to declare a public health emergency of international concern is one I take extremely seriously, and one I am only prepared to make with appropriate consideration of all the evidence," he said. China has identified more than 500 cases and all the deaths, mostly in and around the central city of Wuhan. The virus has spread to other parts of China, and cases also have been confirmed in the U.S., Thailand, South Korea, Japan and Taiwan. The first U.S. case, reported Tuesday, involves a Washington state resident in his 30s who first displayed symptoms Sunday. He was listed in good condition at Providence Regional Medical Center in Snohomish County north of Seattle. "Our first priority remains public safety," said Washington state Secretary of Health John Wiesman. "We believe the risk to the public is low. And as this situation evolves, we will continue to communicate with the CDC, Snohomish County and the public." Coronaviruses are a large family of viruses that cause illness from the common cold to more severe infections such as pneumonia, Middle East respiratory syndrome (known as MERS) and severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS). Common signs of infection include fever, cough, shortness of breath and breathing difficulties. In more severe cases, infection can cause pneumonia, kidney failure or death. A declaration by WHO of a public health emergency would be a prerequisite for issuing recommendations to countries on guidelines to combat it. To reduce the spread of the virus, the Wuhan local government canceled all flights and trains from the city for Thursday and temporarily closed all public transportation ??bus, subway, ferry and long-distance bus service. Trish Perl, a coronavirus expert at UT Southwestern Medical Center in Dallas, said health officials should take seriously the threat of the virus spreading across the U.S. "We don't know the magnitude of this outbreak, but we know from previous outbreaks that coronaviruses can spread quickly," Perl told USA TODAY. "Some people may not know they're infected." The U.S. representative at the WHO meeting is Martin Cetron, who heads the division of Global Migration and Quarantine at the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. WHO has been here before, recommending emergency declarations made for outbreaks of SARS, MERS, Ebola, Zika and swine flu. In China, the timing of the outbreak could not be worse ??the Lunar New Year is Saturday, and hundreds of millions of people across Asia travel in packed buses, trains and planes to celebrate. Even before the halting of transportation, Chinese health officials had urged the 11 million residents of Wuhan not to leave the city, to avoid crowds as much as possible and to wear masks in public places. To scan travelers, the city has installed 35 infrared thermometers and more than 300 portable infrared thermometers in the city's airports, railway and bus stations since Jan. 14, according to the Health Commission of Wuhan, the China Daily reported. All passengers with higher than normal temperatures will be registered and transferred to nearby medical facilities, the commission said. 
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention on Tuesday confirmed the first U.S. case of a new coronavirus that has killed six people in China. The CDC and Washington state officials said the man, a Snohomish County resident in his 30s, was in good condition at Providence Regional Medical Center in Everett. Coronaviruses are a large family of viruses that cause illness ranging from the common cold to more severe infections such as pneumonia and severe acute respiratory syndrome, or SARS. Nancy Messonnier, director of the National Center for Immunization and Respiratory Diseases, called the news "concerning," particularly in light of reports the virus has begun to spread from person to person in Asia. Washington Gov. Jay Inslee said he expected more cases in the U.S, but "based on what we know now, risk to the general public is low." The CDC, which began enhanced health screenings last week at airports in San Francisco, New York and Los Angeles, said Atlanta and Chicago would be added to the list. All travel from Wuhan, China ??where the outbreak began ??to the U.S. is rerouted to these airports. Hundreds of people in China have been diagnosed in the past few weeks. A handful have been diagnosed in Thailand, South Korea and Japan. The World Health Organization is gathering experts Wednesday in Geneva to determine whether the outbreak constitutes an international public health emergency. 
GAYLE KING: A dangerous virus is spreading rapidly in China and U.S. officials are very worried that it could come here. China has more than two hundred confirmed cases of coronavirus it's called, which produces pneumonia-like symptoms. Three people have already died from this illness which has spread to at least three other Asian countries. New video sent to CBS News claims to show hospital staff wearing protective gear, and that is protective gear, in Wuhan, China, considered ground zero for the outbreak. Ramy Inocencio is there. Ramy, what are you hearing? RAMY INOCENCIO (CBS News Foreign Correspondent): Good morning, Gayle. Yes, people here are understandably very nervous especially after the number of infected exploded over the weekend. The airport here in Wuhan has also started to do body temperature checks of people before they take flight. Not only that when we landed here in Wuhan earlier today, we saw people, many of them wearing masks, around the baggage carousel while we were waiting for our own bags. I took that video there. And you can see people are nervous about the situation. Not only that, taking a look at what's happening in the United States. U.S. officials want to make sure that they are raising the defenses and that is what they are doing because right now, as of now, there has not been a U.S. infection as of yet. (Begin VT) RAMY INOCENCIO: At three airports across the United States, the CDC is on guard. More than one hundred officials in San Francisco, Los Angeles and New York are screening incoming passengers from Wuhan, China to detect the deadly coronavirus. SYLVIA ZHENG (Tourist): If it's issues that are going to affect others it's-- maybe a good choices to, like, be cautious about it. RAMY INOCENCIO: Since Friday, the number of known infections across Asia has more than quadrupled, with cases confirmed in China, Thailand, Japan and now South Korea which reported its first case this morning. Authorities say most of the cases link back to this now-shuttered animal and seafood market in Wuhan. U.S. health officials are concerned this rapid spread could mimic the massive SARS outbreak of the early 2000s which resulted in seven hundred seventy-four deaths in twenty-nine countries. But so far, it does not appear that this disease is easily transmittable between people. (Woman speaking foreign language) RAMY INOCENCIO: Health officials say this strain of the coronavirus has been spread to humans through exposure in handling of animals at the market. DR. WILLIAM SCHAFFNER (Vanderbilt University Medical Center Infectious Disease Specialist): If the virus turns out to be readily transmissible from human to human, then we'll have a much larger problem on our hands. RAMY INOCENCIO: Doctor William Schaffner says public health authorities are already working on ways to fend off the epidemic. DR. WILLIAM SCHAFFNER: There are laboratories around the world already working on really good diagnostic tests and we've already started to work on a vaccine in the event that's necessary. (End VT) RAMY INOCENCIO: Now, I lived through the SARS epidemic in Beijing back in 2003, and at that time there was massive criticism of the government and that centered around transparency. The government at that time withheld a lot of information from the public about that massively growing epidemic. Now, we're going to see if this is actually going to be-- any lessons have been learned looking ahead because the future of the people of China, and not only of Asia but of the world, it could be at stake here. Anthony. ANTHONY MASON: Yeah. Hopefully, they'll be more forthcoming. Ramy, thank you in China. We appreciate it. Vladimir Duthiers is looking at the stories you'll be talking about today. Vlad, what you got? VLADIMIR DUTHIERS: Hey, Anthony. The youngest player at the Australian Open squared off with veteran Venus Williams. Don't touch that dial because we're going to show you how Coco Gauff's victory was a reminder of another stunning win over Williams. Plus, why Brad Pitt and Jennifer Aniston's reunion, Anthony, sent social media spiraling into a meltdown. ANTHONY MASON: It sure did. It was all over the place. Thanks, Vlad. We'll see you in a few minutes. But first, it's seven forty-three, time to check your local weather. (LOCAL WEATHER BREAK) (ANNOUNCEMENTS) TONY DOKOUPIL: Tell your family you'll be stepping back as a senior member for the next few minutes while Vlad's on for What to Watch. GAYLE KING: Uh-Huh. ANTHONY MASON: I love that. VLADIMIR DUTHIERS: I'm ready and available, your majesty. Here are few stories we think you'll be talking about today. Puerto Rico's governor fired three government officials after untouched disaster relief supplies were found over the weekend. Video shows residents breaking into a Ponce warehouse to access tons of supplies. Some of the aid including water bottles and baby food had apparently been sitting there since Hurricane Maria pummeled the island back in 2017. Yesterday, the mayor of Ponce took to Twitter directing all supplies to be distributed to people in hard hit towns. The Category 4 storm prompted widespread devastation across the island. Puerto Ricans who had just faced a series of earthquakes have been accusing the government of withholding relief supplies. TONY DOKOUPIL: I don't know what's-- ANTHONY MASON: Yes. GAYLE KING: That's going to make-- TONY DOKOUPIL: --incompetence or cruelty. GAYLE KING: There you go. That's going to make a lot of people angry, you donate and then you just see it sitting there-- ANTHONY MASON: Sitting there for years. GAYLE KING: --when people can use it. TONY DOKOUPIL: Why is it sitting there? VLADIMIR DUTHIERS: Yeah. David Begnaud interviewed the head of the Puerto Rico National Guard on Sunday. They said they're going to get it to folks. But you're right, people are probably very angry. ANTHONY MASON: They're angry and they have every reason to be. VLADIMIR DUTHIERS: Indeed. GAYLE KING: People should have lost their jobs over that-- VLADIMIR DUTHIERS: That's right. GAYLE KING: --and they did. VLADIMIR DUTHIERS: And they did. GAYLE KING: And they did. VLADIMIR DUTHIERS: All right. As we celebrate the legacy of Doctor Martin Luther King, Jr. today, the Navy is honoring the first African-American to receive the military's second highest combat honor. The next new aircraft carrier will be named after Doris "Dorie" Miller at a ceremony in Pearl Harbor later today. The World War II hero leapt into combat during the December 1941 attack. Miller received a Navy Cross for valor after he manned a machine gun on the USS West Virginia to fire back at attacking Japanese planes. That is incredible, guys, because African-Americans were not allowed to man a weapon in the United States Navy. He was part of the mess team. Their primary role was laundry, shining officers' shoes-- ANTHONY MASON: Yep. VLADIMIR DUTHIERS: --serving food. GAYLE KING: Yeah. ANTHONY MASON: I was-- VLADIMIR DUTHIERS: Real hero. ANTHONY MASON: --I didn't realize that. I was really stunned by that. GAYLE KING: Yeah, I hadn't heard of it either. TONY DOKOUPIL: That is stunning. GAYLE KING: And then when you read about what he did risking his own life to do so, too. VLADIMIR DUTHIERS: He rescued fellow sailors-- GAYLE KING: Yes. VLADIMIR DUTHIERS: --bringing them to safety and then jumped on that .50 caliber machine gun, fired at a couple of Japanese planes. He said he actually took one down. Sadly, he didn't survive World War II. He was killed when a Japanese torpedo attacked his ship. But he's a hero. GAYLE KING: What an honor. VLADIMIR DUTHIERS: All right. The youngest woman in the Australian Open just took down seven time Grand Slam champion Venus Williams. Take a look at this. (Crowd cheering) WOMAN: (INDISTINCT) from the fifteen-year-old. That was big second serve. She went for it. VLADIMIR DUTHIERS: Don't know who that is. That is fifteen-year-old Coco Gauff surging into the second set with a 7-6, 6-3 victory over Serena Williams. The clash was a rematch of Gauff's Grand Slam debut in Wimbledon back in July. That's when Gauff defeated Williams in straight sets. TONY DOKOUPIL: She's amazing. ANTHONY MASON: Yeah. But let's-- at thirty-nine Venus is the-- GAYLE KING: Yes. ANTHONY MASON: --oldest woman in the draw. It is-- I mean, she's amazing. She's still playing and played that well. VLADIMIR DUTHIERS: She's still out there playing. She's still winning. ANTHONY MASON: Yes. TONY DOKOUPIL: Yeah. I'm-- I'm also thirty-nine. I threw my back out changing a diaper-- waving-- waving around and I was like, oh. GAYLE KING: So Coco would beat you, too. TONY DOKOUPIL: Yeah, yeah. VLADIMIR DUTHIERS: All of us. TONY DOKOUPIL: Maybe not at diaper changing, though. VLADIMIR DUTHIERS: All right, guys. This is the feel-good story of What to Watch. GAYLE KING: Yeah. VLADIMIR DUTHIERS: Brad Pitt and Jennifer Aniston stole the show at the Screen Actors Guild Awards. It started with Pitt's acceptance speech after he won an award for his role in Once Upon a Time in Hollywood. Watch this. BRAD PITT: Let's be honest. It was a difficult part. A guy who gets high, takes his shirt off and doesn't get on with his wife. (Crowd cheering) VLADIMIR DUTHIERS: So after that, the camera quickly panned to his ex-wife, Jennifer Aniston, who's smiled and clapped. GAYLE KING: Yes. VLADIMIR DUTHIERS: She also won an award for her role in The Morning Show. The SAG Awards tweeted out video of Brad watching her-- deliver her acceptance speech. But OMG, this reunion back stage between the former lovebirds is breaking the internet. ANTHONY MASON: Oh, man, it's everywhere. VLADIMIR DUTHIERS: Everywhere. ANTHONY MASON: It's everywhere. VLADIMIR DUTHIERS: People are freaking out about this. ANTHONY MASON: Yes. VLADIMIR DUTHIERS: So great. ANTHONY MASON: They-- GAYLE KING: Because people think they look so good together. VLADIMIR DUTHIERS: They do. ANTHONY MASON: Look great-- GAYLE KING: They're going to decide if there's a there. VLADIMIR DUTHIERS: Somebody said the queen is going to make them the new royals. ANTHONY MASON: And they're still buds. He went to her fiftieth birthday party last year. TONY DOKOUPIL: It could happen. ANTHONY MASON: All right. We'll be right back with Lizzo. GAYLE KING: Yay. (ANNOUNCEMENTS) *****************************************************************************(8:00 AM, EDT) GAYLE KING: It's Monday, January 20, 2020. Welcome back to CBS THIS MORNING on this Martin Luther King Day holiday. We're here. Glad to be here, too. I'm Gayle King. Ahead, the run up to President Trump's impeachment trial and what might happen when senators meet tomorrow. ANTHONY MASON: I'm Anthony Mason. Prince Harry says he and Meghan are changing their lives because they had no other option. We'll look at what they are giving up. TONY DOKOUPIL: And I'm Tony Dokoupil. Lizzo sits down with Gayle as we get started on the road to the Grammys. GAYLE KING: She's so fun. But first, here's today's Eye Opener @ 8. GAYLE KING: It will be a working holiday for President Trump and members of Congress who are preparing the case for removing him from office. WEIJIA JIANG: Over the weekend, the President's legal team revealed their main arguments that the entire process was tainted. SAVANNAH RUDICEL: Kansas City police are still investigating. The shooting started when the gunman fired into a line of people at the club. DAVID BEGNAUD: About a thousand people lined up. Many of them are wearing stickers that say "guns save lives." Across the street, a big banner with a picture of an assault rifle, "come and take it." ED O'KEEFE: People in Iowa and New Hampshire are very unlikely to care what the New York Times editorial board has to say, especially if they can't even pick one candidate. And now there is a new fight brewing between two contenders. TONY DOKOUPIL: It will be the San Francisco 49ers versus the Kansas City Chiefs in Super Bowl LIV, February 2nd in Miami. MAN #1: (SINGING) all the way to the White House. MAN #2: The LSU football team went viral for this video before their meeting with the President. WOMAN: The woman in the video, she's the wife of former LSU player Ben Bordelon. TONY DOKOUPIL: Who is their choreographer? ANTHONY MASON: Yes. GAYLE KING: Yes. That's what we need, another dance move I won't be able to learn. END 
