2020-05-27	Chinese President Xi Jinping said his country will strengthen its armed forces and improve its preparedness for military combat, state media said Tuesday, amid rising tensions between Washington and Beijing over the coronavirus outbreak and China's decision to propose legislation that would tighten control over Hong Kong. Xi spoke on the sidelines of China's National People's Congress, an annual political event where legislation approved by China's ruling Community Party is rubber-stamped. China announced over the weekend that it intends to increase its military budget by 6.6% in 2020 to about $178 billion, a slightly lower figure than military analysts forecast before the coronavirus pandemic struck. The United States has the world's largest defense budget ??$738 billion slated for 2020 representing almost 40% of total global military spending, according to the Stockholm International Peace Research Institute, a Sweden-based global security think tank. The United States maintains hundreds of military bases around the world from Germany to South Korea. China has just one, in the Republic of Djibouti in East Africa. President Donald Trump accuses China of misleading the USA and other countries about what, and when, it knew about the origins of the coronavirus. Trump threatened China with a "strong" reaction ??possibly sanctions ??over Beijing's plan to adopt a national security law for Hong Kong that critics said will jeopardize the semiautonomous territory's partial legal and financial independence from China. Beijing disputed suggestions it has not been transparent about its coronavirus information. Hong Kong's pro-China leader, Carrie Law, said Tuesday that the national security legislation proposed by China's legislature will not threaten the territory's civil rights. Lam said there is "no need for us to worry" over the move being considered by China's National People's Congress. "It has come to our attention that some political forces in the U.S. are taking China-U.S. relations hostage and pushing our two countries to the brink of a new Cold War," Chinese Foreign Minister Wang Yi said Sunday, rejecting claims by the Trump administration that Beijing impeded international efforts to determine the roots of the virus. 
2020-05-21	ANTHONY MASON: As more countries ease coronavirus restrictions, many students around the world are returning to classrooms. In Europe, early reports suggest that sending kids back to school has not led to a significant increase in infections. But there are still concerns over how to keep children safe, with the number of reported cases globally now above five million. Holly Williams reports on what different nations are doing. (Begin VT) HOLLY WILLIAMS (CBS News Foreign Correspondent): They're disinfecting classrooms in South Korea, keeping a safe distance apart in France, practicing their hand-washing in Denmark, and having their temperature checked in Belgium. WOMAN: Temperature is normal. Pass, please. HOLLY WILLIAMS: As children begin heading back to school around the globe, the new normal comes with lots of new rules. "It won't be the same," said ten-year-old Clara (ph) in France. "We can't give hugs anymore, but at least it can help stop the virus." The reopening of schools in twenty-two European countries has reportedly not caused a spike in infections though some have only been open for just over two weeks. At this school in Belgium, they've replaced the school bell with the theme from Star Wars in an attempt to inject some fun at a stressful time. For many parents, there's still worry, though it's coupled with relief. More than 1.5 billion students have had their schooling interrupted, according to the U.N. and while some have their resources to learn at home, others are missing out entirely on weeks or even months of education. Danish elementary schools were the first to reopen in Europe last month, but some parents claim their young children were being used as guinea pigs and argued older students should have gone back first. The country's education minister told CBS News it was a tough decision. PERNILLE ROSENKRANTZ-THEIL: The small children have small difficulties with the distance learning than the older children and, therefore, we started out with the young children. HOLLY WILLIAMS: Taiwan is already an old hand at the new normal. It only closed its schools for two weeks in February. At Dahja Elementary School, the children disinfect on the way in and before every class. Masks are compulsory. They eat lunch behind desk dividers. And even learn how to correctly measure social distancing in math class. (Speaking foreign language) It's all a bit of a hassle this group of twelve-year-olds told us. They want things to go back to how they were. School may never be exactly the same as it was, but for children around the world, the first step back to normality is getting back to the classroom. (End VT) HOLLY WILLIAMS: More than two hundred and thirty children in Europe have reportedly been affected by the inflammatory syndrome that's also sickened around two hundred and fifty youngsters in the U.S., and that appears to be linked to the new coronavirus. The World Health Organization has warned medics to be on alert for signs of the-- the rare condition. Anthony. ANTHONY MASON: Holly Williams in Istanbul. So many different solutions to this problem right now, but great to see kids getting back to school, and I wish they replaced the bell in my school with the Star Wars' theme. That's pretty cool. Thanks, Holly. Ahead, Vlad Duthiers looks at the stories you'll be talking about today. But first, it is seven forty-three, time to check your local weather. (ANNOUNCEMENTS) TONY DOKOUPIL: Time for What to Watch. And, Vlad, yesterday we celebrated our one-year show anniversary. I don't know about you, but I am powering through a very serious cake hangover. How you doing this morning? VLADIMIR DUTHIERS: I wish I could have some of that cake with you. I saw your wife Katy coming at you with that knife as soon as the show was over. She wanted a piece of that cake. TONY DOKOUPIL: Hair of the dog. I might have to have some more-- VLADIMIR DUTHIERS: Good to see you all. TONY DOKOUPIL: Good-- VLADIMIR DUTHIERS: Yes. Yes, indeed. Indeed. It's good to see all of you. Hope you're doing well. We're doing well here while we're working from home. And while we're working from home, we're taking a look at some of the stories we think you'll be talking about, including this--Michael Cohen is set to be released from federal prison today over health concerns linked to the coronavirus. President Trump's former personal attorney and fixer is expected to finish his three-year sentence under home confinement. In 2018, Cohen pleaded guilty to charges including lying to Congress and financial crimes including hush money to women alleging affairs with Mister Trump long before he was elected President. The President denies those allegations. Cohen's planned departure is part of a push to release at-risk inmates over fears of COVID-19 outbreaks inside correctional facilities. Tony. TONY DOKOUPIL: Yeah. You know, you'll sometimes see some moaning online about how you're letting prisoners out and they can have it more easily, you know, they're going to have an easier time at-- at home. But let's keep in mind that being cooped up in your house, as we all had a little taste of recently, is no easy business. This is still confinement. It's still a difficult process. The punishment continues. I think that's importance to underscore. Vlad, what's up next? VLADIMIR DUTHIERS: All right. We've got this incredible video of an emotional drive-through graduation in Nashville. And let me tell you, this is capturing the hearts of millions around the globe. Take a look. DONTRAIL SPENCER (internet video): (INDISTINCT) graduating. I love you,(INDISTINCT). Bye, Ms. Bell. Thank you. VLADIMIR DUTHIERS: So that is new high school graduate Dontrail Spencer crying tears of joy and yelling out to his teachers. His mom said he worked really, really hard to earn his diploma. And Spencer says he would not have made it to graduation without the help from Gideon's Army. That's a local organization that works to keep kids off the streets. Gayle, I actually watched this video and I was ashamed that I didn't have the same reaction graduating from high school. You know, it's the little things. He's so happy and so thrilled at this moment. Some things we take for granted. GAYLE KING: Vlad, I thought the exact same thing. That I just so took it for granted about graduating from high school and graduating from college, too, for that matter. To see what it means, clearly Dontrail has been on quite a journey and he said, listen, all he could do was do-- all he could do was cry tears of joy. And that's what he did. His mother said she went crazy, too. So, it just made you happy to see what it meant for them. I really love that story, too. What else do you have? VLADIMIR DUTHIERS: You could hear his mom in the back seat crying those tears of joy, too, Gayle. GAYLE KING: Yes, yes. Yeah. VLADIMIR DUTHIERS: All right. So, let me tell you what else I got for you. You ready for this? Only on CBS THIS MORNING, we're talking to nineteen-time Grammy Award winner Emilio Estefan. You're looking at the video he produced for the new song he wrote called "One World, One Prayer" for Bob Marley's band The Wailers. The song features Marley's daughter Cedella and grandson Skip. Estefan told me he channeled the heart of the legendary reggae performer to write a tune that will bring people together in this very dark time. EMILIO ESTEFAN: I wanted to carry on what he'd say, one love. He said one love. I say one world. (Bob Marley singing) EMILIO ESTEFAN: Sending a message "One World, One Prayer" because we're all the same. We come from different places in the world, but we go through hard times and that we have to help each other and send messages of love and unity. VLADIMIR DUTHIERS: The song is set to debut today at the Paramount Miami Worldcenter with a musical lighting salute to our COVID-19 heroes. The event comes on the thirty-ninth anniversary of Bob Marley's funeral. Anthony, I can't express how much Bob Marley's music has meant to me, and I'm sure the entire world. Some of those lyrics are so powerful. ANTHONY MASON: Yeah. VLADIMIR DUTHIERS: Words to live by every single day. This is such a wonderful thing. ANTHONY MASON: Yeah. It's really cool. We lost Bob Marley back in 1981, Vlad. That light show comes right as-- as they're reopening there in Miami. So, that's really cool. And-- and Emilio Estefan said-- he said he worked-- he collaborated with Bob Marley's daughter, son and grandson in this, right? VLADIMIR DUTHIERS: Yep. GAYLE KING: Wow. VLADIMIR DUTHIERS: That's right. That's right. Daughter and grandson and The Wailers. And he wanted to channel, you know, Bob Marley used to say, you know, one love. And so he says one love, one heart--that's the message of this song, and it's for our COVID-19 heroes. ANTHONY MASON: Yeah. The timing couldn't be better. Thanks, Vlad. Ahead, we'll reveal this year's National Teacher of the Year only on CBS THIS MORNING. (ANNOUNCEMENTS) *****************************************************************************(8:00 AM, EDT) GAYLE KING: It's Thursday, May 21, 2020. Welcome back to CBS THIS MORNING. I'm Gayle King with Tony Dokoupil and Anthony Mason. Arizona shooting. A gunman opens fire at a newly reopened shopping complex. What we're learning about how this attack unfolded. TONY DOKOUPIL: Massive flooding. Records reveal safety concerns at two failed dams in Michigan. We'll ask Governor Gretchen Whitmer about that and the state's response in her first interview since the disaster. ANTHONY MASON: And honoring our educators. We'll reveal this year's teacher of the year only on CBS THIS MORNING. GAYLE KING: Can't wait. But first, here's today's Eye Opener @8. A shooting attack on a shopping and entertainment district near Phoenix where at least three people were wounded. JAMIE YUCCAS: Authorities say they are aware of videos of the alleged shooter, and anyone with those videos should turn them in. TONY DOKOUPIL: A city in central Michigan faces what officials call a five hundred-year flood disaster. JANET SHAMLIAN: The river crested at just above thirty-five feet. And as you can see behind me, this bridge is impassable, and so are roads all over town this morning. GAYLE KING: As all fifty states slowly reopen, the focus now is on protecting Americans who have not gotten sick. TONY DOKOUPIL: If you're making personal or financial decisions based on a vaccine, would you bet on it? DR. ASHISH JHA: I think the idea of having a vaccine in 2020 would-- is-- obviously be wonderful, but it is highly, highly unlikely. STEPHEN COLBERT: I've got to say the low resolution of Zoom has taken years, years off you, my friend. STEVE CARELL: I'm not going back. I'm going to actually buy a worse computer to keep doing these. STEPHEN COLBERT: It's like all these interviews look like I'm interviewing people from the DuMont Network. ANTHONY MASON: I actually know what that is. GAYLE KING: Welcome back to CBS THIS MORNING. Tony, all I can say is we are all saying thank you for Zoom. However, you're getting on the air these days and the interviews that you do, we're just grateful that we can see some semblance of a face. TONY DOKOUPIL: Well, that's definitely true. But I also love the low-res of Zoom. You know, nothing ruins my day quite like catching a-- a picture of myself in a high-definition television. I try to avoid them. GAYLE KING: I understand. TONY DOKOUPIL: We're going to shift gears now. GAYLE KING: I get it. TONY DOKOUPIL: We're going to shift gears now to-- to show you some chilling video of a shooting in a popular shopping and dining complex near Phoenix. MAN (internet video): (EXPLETIVE DELETED). TONY DOKOUPIL: What you're hearing there are gunshots at the Westgate Entertainment District, that's in Glendale, Arizona. Police say the gunman shot and wounded three people last night. One of them is in critical condition. Now this is video allegedly posted to social media by the suspected gunman himself. It seems to show the lead up to the shooting and someone firing what appears to be a rifle. Police were able to safely arrest the suspect. They have not released a name, and they have not mentioned a motive as of yet. Anthony. ANTHONY MASON: All right. Thousands of people in central Michigan are out of their homes because of historic flooding. Homes were left submerged after a pair of dams failed near the city of Midland, Michigan. Governor Gretchen Whitmer says it's being called a five hundred-year event. Ten thousand people were ordered to evacuate. GAYLE KING: Floodwaters ripped apart roads after breaking through those dams which are nearly one hundred years old. Now the river there crested at a record thirty-five feet and is not expected to recede under flood stage until Sunday. Anthony, you look at these pictures, and we're waiting to talk to the governor. We're-- we're dialing her up. But you look at these pictures, and you have to say this is the last thing they need at this particular time. You know, it's gone from stay-at-home orders to evacuation orders. As you said, ten thousand people have been asked to leave their homes. And it's just everywhere you look. It's-- it's a crisis in the state of Michigan right now when you're looking at these pictures. ANTHONY MASON: Yeah. It was interesting in-- in Janet Shamlian's report earlier in our broadcast. She was talking to a woman who lived there. And she said how does it feel with this coming on the heels of-- of the coronavirus? And she said, you know, we were just going through this-- you know, we were just learning to-- what we really appreciated in life because of what we've been through. And-- and-- GAYLE KING: Yes. ANTHONY MASON: --now we're dealing with this. Gayle. END 
2020-05-21	WASHINGTON ??President Donald Trump called the number of COVID-19 cases in the USA ??the highest in the world ??a "badge of honor" Tuesday, arguing that the increasing number of cases is simply evidence the country is testing more people. "By the way, you know, when you say that we lead in cases, that's because we have more testing than anybody else," the president said at the White House. "When we have a lot of cases, I don't look at that as a bad thing. I look at that in a certain respect as being a good thing, because it means our testing is much better. "So if we were testing a million people instead of 14 million people, it would have far few cases, right? "So I view it as a badge of honor. Really, it's a badge of honor," Trump said. The USA has performed more than 12 million tests, according to the COVID Tracking Project. The country still faces testing shortages after months of hurdles in development and access. At a Senate hearing last week, Sen. Mitt Romney, R-Utah, said U.S. testing for coronavirus is "nothing to celebrate" because the country "treaded water" during the early stages of the pandemic while nations such as South Korea tested people aggressively to curb the outbreak. Romney said that by March 6, the USA had conducted only 2,000 tests while South Korea had completed 140,000. South Korea has had 263 COVID-19 deaths; the USA surpassed 92,000 as of Wednesday, according to data from Johns Hopkins University. It took the USA until mid-April to pass South Korea in testing and until April 25 to surpass Finland. The USA still trails many nations in per capita testing, including the United Kingdom, Italy and Germany. Despite the increase in national testing, health experts raised concerns that not enough is being done for states to safely reopen. Ashish Jha, director of the Harvard Global Health Institute, told a congressional panel monitoring the federal response to the COVID-19 pandemic last week, "The U.S. needs more than 900,000 tests every day to safely open up again. We are doing about a third of that." On May 6, Trump said, "If we did very little testing, [America] wouldn't have the most cases. So, in a way, by doing all of this testing, we make ourselves look bad." 
2020-05-18	The origins, utility and ownership of potential coronavirus treatments are an increasingly discussed subject, making the topic a target for conspiracy theories. The drug remdesivir has emerged as a centerpiece of many theories claiming that various groups and individuals stand to benefit from the drug's use as a treatment for COVID-19. "Isn't it just an interesting coincidence that Remdesivir is made by Gilead and is the 'CURE' for COVID-19 ??. And here's where it gets interesting China holds the patent on the drug through an agreement with Gilead's drug patent sharing subsidy branch called UNITAID who has an office near Wuhan," a graphic on Facebook shared more than 300 times reads. "And you'll never guess who are the main financial investors in UNITAID?쫚one other than George Soros, Bill & Melinda Gates, and WHO," the post continues. Remdesivir is an antiviral drug developed by the firm Gilead Sciences, which maintains the U.S. patent on the drug as a coronavirus treatment. No Chinese institution has a recognized patent for the drug. Remdesivir's patents Remdesivir has been researched by Gilead as far back as 2009 as a treatment for viruses ranging from hepatitis C and respiratory syncytial virus to Ebola and now COVID-19. Gilead first received a patent for the drug as a treatment for Ebola in 2017. In fall 2015, Gilead applied for two patents for remdesivir, one for combating coronaviruses and another for filoviruses, the family of pathogens that includes Ebola. Both were approved in spring 2019. In April, a National Institutes of Health study found the drug to speed the recovery time of COVID-19 patients by 31%. Gilead has since said that, with federal assistance, it will deploy remdesivir to hospitals. Gilead Sciences remains the only organization in the world entitled to intellectual property rights over remdesivir as a treatment for COVID-19. In January, Chinese researchers at the Wuhan Institute of Virology filed for a patent to use remdesivir as a treatment against COVID-19. At the time, no research had been published showing that remdesivir was effective. Even so, the drug was already being deployed for clinical trials in Wuhan and elsewhere. In early February, the Chinese company BrightGene Bio-Medical Technology also said that it had been approved to produce remdesivir by the Chinese government, though regulators eventually said the company had not received approval from the government nor Gilead Sciences. The Chinese government has not approved a patent for the drug, a move that would likely draw further criticism from the United States and others concerned about Chinese violations of international norms regarding intellectual property. Unitaid is not a subsidiary of Gilead Sciences but rather a global health research initiative backed by the United Nations and World Health Organization to fund research projects combating a range of viruses. Founded by the French government in 2006, the group is headquartered in Geneva and funded by the governments of Brazil, Chile, France, Norway, South Korea, Spain and the United Kingdom, as well as the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation. Unitaid has no financial ties to George Soros or the Open Society Foundations, which Soros founded and manages. Our ruling: False No Chinese firm has an approved claim to a patent for remdesivir. No international groups ??including the Gates Foundations, Unitaid, the Open Societies Foundation or WHO ??hold patents for the drug either. While there are efforts to pool patents for potential treatments, and alter the financial incentives of the parties to such arrangements, the United States and China are not obligating their firms to join these movements. 
2020-05-16	ANTHONY MASON: As we have since the start of the pandemic, we want to take a moment to tell you about some of the remarkable people we've lost to the coronavirus. While some were known to the world, others were known only to loved ones. But all made a big difference in their own ways. Here are just some of the many lives to remember. (Begin VT) ANTHONY MASON: Joseph Feingold was an architect and Holocaust survivor who gained late notoriety in the 2016 documentary Joe's Violin. Born in Warsaw, Feingold was sent to Siberia at seventeen and spent six years in labor camps. His mother and brother were killed by the Nazis. Feingold came to the U.S. in 1948 with the violin he got in a trade for a carton of cigarettes after the war. JOSEPH FEINGOLD (Joe's Violin): Hello. ANTHONY MASON: The documentary about his decision to donate the instrument to a school and the twelve-year-old girl who played it was nominated for an Oscar. The attention mystified Feingold. JOSEPH FEINGOLD (Joe's Violin): What did I do? BRIANNA PEREZ (Joe's Violin): You never gave up. That's what you did. ANTHONY MASON: Joseph Feingold was ninety-seven. Doctor Julie Butler was a veterinarian who ran Harlem's 145th Street Animal Hospital for three decades. Julie was a remarkable woman, said her husband, Claude, very strong, fierce, very determined. The only African-American graduate in her class at Cornell's College of Veterinary Medicine, she became president of the Veterinary Medicine Association of New York City, and after 9/11, led efforts to stabilize veterinary care. Said her colleague, Doctor George Korin, Julie had so much more to give, especially in times like now. Doctor Julie Butler was sixty-two. Johng Kuk Pyun lived the immigrant story of the American Dream. He worked as an interpreter for the American military in South Korea. In 1976, age thirty-nine, he immigrated to the States with his wife and four kids. He sacrificed so much to give us a better life, said his daughter, SuJean Sackin. He was just so tenacious. Arriving with five hundred dollars, Pyun built a thriving dry cleaning business in Los Angeles and mentored other South Korean immigrants. (Crowd singing) ANTHONY MASON: He and his wife, Yeon (ph), were married for fifty-three years. Johng Kuk Pyun was eighty-two. Doctor Ronald Verrier was a trauma surgeon for nearly two decades at St. Barnabas Hospital in the Bronx, New York. The son of a surgeon, Verrier was born and raised in Port-au-Prince, Haiti. He met his wife, Doctor Joanne Verrier, there and loved Haitian music. After the earthquake hit Haiti in 2010, he went back to help. DR. RONALD VERRIER: There was no way you can prepare yourself for-- for what you see when you go down there. ANTHONY MASON: He was the stalwart of the family. Our adviser, our pride, said his younger sister, Pascale Verrier, a registered nurse. Doctor Verrier survived a heart attack in 2014. That's why this is so devastating, said his wife, Joanne. Doctor Ronald Verrier was fifty-nine. Krist Guzman was a nurse in Chicago. She liked the excitement. She liked helping people, said her cousin, Jeschlyn Pilar. She worked at the Meadowbrook Senior Facility where she met her husband, Omar, a nursing assistant. They idolized each other, said her sister, Kayla Clayton, and their kids were her pride and joy. Their third child was just born in December. Omar tested positive, too, and could not participate in his wife's funeral. The family stopped the procession in front of their house to release balloons. WOMAN (internet video): One-- MAN #1 (internet video): One, two, three. WOMAN (internet video): --two, three. ANTHONY MASON: Krist Angielen Castro Guzman was thirty-five. Charles "Rob" Roberts was an officer with the Glen Ridge, New Jersey, Police Department. Said Governor Phil Murphy-- PHIL MURPHY: He was the department's most senior patrol officer and a beloved, literally beloved presence in the community. ANTHONY MASON: It was his lifelong dream to be a police officer, said his wife, Alice. He'd make a connection, make people feel like humans. Ten-year-old son, Gavin, led his mother and two sisters in the funeral procession wearing his father's hat. MAN #2: Sir Charles Edward Roberts, (INDISTINCT) Godspeed. We love you, our brother. ANTHONY MASON: Charles "Rob" Roberts was forty-five. (End VT) ANTHONY MASON: And Officer Roberts was posthumously promoted, Gayle. He was buried as Sergeant Roberts. GAYLE KING: Gosh, Anthony, every week you do this to us. You melt our hearts and you break our hearts. But I think these stories are so important to talk about the lives that we've lost. It's a reminder we can get this from human-to-human contact. That's why social distancing-- ANTHONY MASON: Yep. GAYLE KING: --and following the rules really makes a difference. You see stories like that, the lives that we've lost, it's just not right. And it's-- many times it can be prevented. Special shout out to your team, by the way, Rebecca Castagna and Cathy Landers, producer and editor on that piece. These are very hard to do, and they're always so beautifully done. Kudos to you all for bringing it to us. ANTHONY MASON: (INDISTINCT) work. All right. Every life lost is worth remembering. We continue to tell these stories on our broadcast and social media platforms. If you want us to share the story of someone close to you, please tell us. You can e-mail coronavirus@cbsnews.com. We'll be right back. (ANNOUNCEMENTS) TONY DOKOUPIL: Ahead, many of you are wondering if you can still go to the beach or on vacation this summer, and at the same time avoid the risk of the coronavirus. Well, coming up, our Doctor Jon LaPook will answer your questions about how to stay safe while getting a little bit of sun. Your local news coming at you next. (ANNOUNCEMENTS) (8:30 AM, EDT) TONY DOKOUPIL: Welcome back to CBS THIS MORNING. It is now time to bring you some of the stories that are Talk of the Table this morning. You know what that means. We're coming to you from home, so we're going to share a story with each other and all of you that is talk of our respective tables or countertops or whatever we're gathering around. And, Gayle King, you're going first. What do you have for us? GAYLE KING: I am so psyched about this, Tony. It is no secret I love me some John Krasinski. But everybody loves John Krasinski and his feel-good YouTube show, you've all seen it, it's called Some Good News. He launched it during the coronavirus pandemic. You've seen the episodes of Some Good News, featured online proms, reunions of The Office, and a Hamilton performance. Now, guess what, the show is heading to ViacomCBS. Yep, that's us. Krasinski said in a statement he could not be more excited and more proud to be partnering with CBS/Viacom to be able to bring Some Good News to so many more people. From the first episode, he says our goal was to create a news show that was-- a new show, rather, that was dedicated entirely to good news. Never did I expect to be joining the ranks of such an historic news organization as CBS. We are glad to have you, John Krasinski. More details to come. But we are so happy that he's going to be part of the ViacomCBS family and contributing to CBS News. Really like that part. Because, Tony, listen to the numbers, I think that John actually launched this as a goof. You know, I don't know if he was intending one and done, but he was just really trying to give us all a break. It has really turned into a bona fide hit. So the YouTube channel's collected 2.56-- fifty-six million subscribers, and the episodes ranging up to seventeen million views. So, Tony Dokoupil, we can say we work with John Krasinski. I like the sound of that. TONY DOKOUPIL: I like it. I'll go ahead now and volunteer to give him a tour of the broadcast center on 57th Street-- GAYLE KING: Yes. TONY DOKOUPIL: --once that place reopens. I love the show. It's really-- it's like a combination of a late night-- GAYLE KING: Yes. He's been to our table. TONY DOKOUPIL: --he's got some talk show elements. GAYLE KING: He's been to our tables. TONY DOKOUPIL: That's right. GAYLE KING: Yes. TONY DOKOUPIL: Well, I don't know if I was there for that. Was I? We'll check the tape. GAYLE KING: No, no, no, you weren't there for that. TONY DOKOUPIL: But-- no-- GAYLE KING: But-- no, you weren't there for that one. But you'll be here for the next one when he comes. TONY DOKOUPIL: All right. Very cool. And I will take him on that tour. He's not seen the-- the former dairy farm deep down in the basement, subbasement we have there at 57. There's a lot of history in that building. It's a historic organization, as he says. GAYLE KING: Yeah. TONY DOKOUPIL: All right. I'm talking about a CBS-- GAYLE KING: Yes. TONY DOKOUPIL: --product as well. This is turning into the ViacomCBS segment. But this is a coincidence. We pick our own segments. All right. So CBS All Access has this great new series, Star Trek: Picard. I love it. Katy and I've seen all the episodes and I talked with its star Captain Jean-Luc Picard, aka Sir Patrick Stewart. He's returned to his famous role. And he sat down to talk with me, with his wife, Sunny, about being bald at the start of his acting career. Take a listen. SIR PATRICK STEWART: I lost my hair at nineteen. And I graduated from acting school at nineteen. And I sold myself to regional theater directors. I would wear a hairpiece for auditions. And then I would take it off after the-- they always have you do two pieces. And then I'd do another piece without it. And I would literally offer myself to the directors as two actors for the price of one. TONY DOKOUPIL: That's one way to do it, you know. You got to turn a negative into a positive. If-- if-- if-- if you-- if you've got that particular predicament. He-- he was an amazing interview. We had him at the table not that long ago. And he mentioned a chaotic home life-- life. ANTHONY MASON: Yeah. GAYLE KING: Mm-Hm. TONY DOKOUPIL: It is much more chaotic than you could have imagined. He is a knight, he's got this amazing voice, and you might think that he was born on the manor, not so at all. And we go into all of that. And the wig stuff is really interesting, too. He's kept all the wigs over the years. His wife, Sunny, there says she's got a huge closet full of them. She's going to throw them out on the stoop one day. I look forward to that. And you can watch the rest of that interview with Sir Patrick Stewart on CBS SUNDAY MORNING, that's coming up this weekend. Anthony, he almost did Jean-Luc Picard in a wig but ultimately they decided to baldly go where no man has gone before. GAYLE KING: Nice. ANTHONY MASON: Well, I'm glad they did. GAYLE KING: Nice. ANTHONY MASON: He's a-- he's a very funny guy. I loved it when he was on the set. Really loved having him. All right. The newest social media star can't even talk. Take a look. That's one-year-old Chef Kobe. His family has made videos of him cooking meals including pizza, as you see there, and salmon, as he samples food along the way. He has more than a million followers-- GAYLE KING: Yes. ANTHONY MASON: --on Instagram. His TikTok page has more than five million likes. You can see why. He like has more-- he has more followers than most major chefs, I think. His-- his-- these are shot by his parents, Ashley and Kyle. What I love is when he samples the ingredients along the way. And if you've ever seen anybody have more enthusiasm, he's just the best. TONY DOKOUPIL: I love it. That is fantastic, Anthony. ANTHONY MASON: I just figured we could use that going into the weekend. Tony. TONY DOKOUPIL: Yeah. I don't know, they must be doing-- GAYLE KING: Yeah. Nothing-- Anthony-- TONY DOKOUPIL: --a lot of loads of laundry, as well, in that household. GAYLE KING: Yeah. Not only that-- ANTHONY MASON: Yeah, Gayle. GAYLE KING: --but Tony and Anthony, nothing wrong with a little baby drool in your food. That's-- that always adds to the flavor. That so cute. ANTHONY MASON: Special sauce. TONY DOKOUPIL: Nope. Take it for me. ANTHONY MASON: It's the special sauce. TONY DOKOUPIL: Oh. I agree. All right. Very good. END 
2020-05-15	For weeks, Dr. Deborah L. Birx was briefing Americans on a near-daily basis from the White House on the battle against the "invisible enemy." Now, as President Donald Trump shifts strategy from responding to the pandemic to reopening the country, Birx and other members of the White House coronavirus task force are no longer regulars at televised White House news conferences. While it's too early to draw conclusions about whether Birx's influence has diminished, she remains one of the major public faces of the administration's virus response. It is a role that's brought her praise ??for her command of public health minutia as well as criticism ??for appearing, at times, to fail to run sufficient interference on Trump's mixed, erratic and often incorrect messages about the outbreak. Birx, 64, who is the White House coronavirus response coordinator, has managed to maintain her composure ??and sometimes correct Trump's misinformation ??without triggering the wrath of the president or his supporters. Trump administration aides said the president has a good working relationship with Birx. Her colleagues, family and longtime acquaintances said if anyone has the chops to navigate a deadly virus outbreak and an unpredictable White House ??to tiptoe around Trump's coronavirus assertions in a way that leaves his ego intact ??it's Birx. "She's trying to speak the truth and preserve the confidence of the president," said Stephen Morrison, a public health expert who served in the Clinton administration and knows Birx from that time and in his role as director of the Global Health Policy Center at the Center for Strategic and International Studies, a Washington, D.C., think tank. "It's a difficult job. It carries hazards," he said. 'She's doing as well as anyone in her position could ever do' Trump likes and respects Birx despite some frustrations with her occasional public disagreements with him, according to two White House aides not authorized to speak publicly on the matter. The president's aides said that while Trump doesn't like to be corrected by anybody, he respects Birx's knowledge and takes her advice seriously. One illustration of the regard Trump has for Birx: Her name has surfaced as a potential replacement for Health and Human Services Secretary Alex Azar. Azar's standing within the White House has been a source of speculation after reports he tried to warn Trump about the dangers of the coronavirus in late January, only to be told he was being alarmist. Trump has dismissed suggestions Azar's job was in peril as "fake news." Even though Trump has ended regular televised briefings with the task force, Birx has continued to do TV appearances, sitting for an interview on "Fox News Sunday" and participating in a CNN town hall this month. When Trump said May 5 that he would start winding down the task force, there was speculation that he was sidelining her and other medical experts, including Dr. Anthony Fauci, the administration's leading infectious disease specialist. Trump reversed himself on the task force only a day later, saying it would continue. White House press secretary Kayleigh McEnany told reporters Tuesday that Birx remains a key adviser. "I don't know when in this capacity you will see her, but I talk to Dr. Birx regularly," McEnany said in response to a question about the doctor's whereabouts. She said Birx also had "signed off on" the phased reopening guidelines that Trump approved for states. Over the past few months, Birx has informed the public about where the U.S. is with testing, about different types of face masks, transmission rates, potential treatments and hospital capacity. She has calmly detailed the myriad painful but necessary disruptions to U.S. daily life from a disease that has killed more Americans than the Vietnam War and Sept. 11, 2001, terrorist attacks combined. In these appearances, Birx has oscillated between technical remarks about antibody testing and disarmingly personal anecdotes about how, because of social distancing measures, she was not able to treat her 10-month-old granddaughter, who one weekend had been running a high fever. Birx reassures the public one minute, then the next scolds millennials for going to the beach. When The Associated Press reported that a decision to shelve advice from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention ??the nation's top disease control experts ??for reopening communities during the coronavirus pandemic came from the highest levels of the White House, Birx had an explanation: The guidelines were still being edited. "When I watch the press briefing, Dr. Birx is one I want to hear from," said Katy Talento, a Trump health policy adviser who left the White House last year. Talento worked with Birx on implementing and then continuing President George W. Bush-era legislation known as PEPFAR (President's Emergency Plan for AIDS Relief). She said Birx has shown an ability to wield scientific expertise while sidestepping Trump's more outlandish coronavirus comments. "She's doing as well as anyone in her position could ever do," Talento said. Trump can live with Birx's disagreements, the two White House aides not authorized to speak publicly said, because she has couched them in a respectful manner during meetings and television appearances. Birx has done a good job of managing Trump, the aides said, showing him deference and briefing him in a way that makes him comfortable. Trump thinks Birx does well on television, an important gauge for him, the aides said. Birx is one of two Obama administration-appointed health officials working for Trump. The other is Francis Collins, director of the National Institutes of Health ??Fauci's boss. Most Americans have heard of Fauci, the director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases who delivered high-profile testimony to the Senate this week warning of avoidable "suffering and death" if the country reopens too quickly. Fauci, who has been America's top infectious disease expert for decades, was a mentor to Birx earlier in her career. Fauci has openly contradicted Trump, tamping down the president's talk of rapidly reopening the U.S. or a quick-fix coronavirus cure. The White House aides said Trump believes that Fauci is a little too eager to voice his disagreements with the president and that some of his comments are political in nature. Birx is not like that, in Trump's view, and their relationship is such that Trump can joke with her in public. When he spoke with an Iowa health official about appointing her to the coronavirus task force, he joked: "I'm only going to do it if I have Dr. Birx's permission." Trump's admiration for Birx is also informed by the fact that one of her biggest champions is Vice President Mike Pence, who brought her into the administration, the aides said. Fauci's lengthy track record may afford him a certain political insulation from the White House, according to Morrison, the Clinton-era public health official. While it's not ultimately clear if such protections extend to Birx, she has taken pains to defend Trump, saying in a Fox News interview that aired on April25 that Trump meant no harm by inquiring in a White House briefing about ultraviolet light and disinfectant as possible coronavirus treatments. Treatments involving ultraviolet light and disinfectant are unproven and dangerous. "When (he) gets new information, he likes to talk that through out loud and really have that dialogue," Birx said. "And so that's what dialogue he was having." Jen Kates, director of global health and HIV/AIDS policy at the Kaiser Family Foundation, a San Francisco-based nonprofit that focuses on U.S. national health issues, said Birx is trying to "stick to the science and data and public health prerogatives while working in a highly politicized environment." "That's the case more generally when you work with the White House, but in this particular case it's really striking just how difficult that is," she added. Kates has worked with Birx as part of the latter's job as U.S. Global AIDS coordinator and U.S. Special Representative for Global Health ??roles Birx took up in 2014 and has retained since being appointed to the White House coronavirus task force. The position is run out of the U.S. State Department, where Birx also oversees PEPFAR, the President George W. Bush-era legislation. PEPFAR has provided at least $90 billion in funding for HIV/AIDS treatment, prevention and research around the world since 2003, making it the largest financial commitment by any one nation to address a single disease in the world. PEPFAR is credited with saving millions of lives and effectively helping to alter the overall trajectory of the global HIV/AIDS epidemic. Before joining the State Department in 2014, Birx directed the Global HIV/AIDS division at the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. "Dr. Birx was a very prominent and well-known figure internationally within global public health circles, but now she is front and center with the American public on a daily basis. Suddenly everybody knows her and she's having to adjust to that," Kates said. 'Do not let them give me blood' In remarks at her 2014 swearing-in-ceremony as U.S. Global AIDS coordinator and U.S. Special Representative for Global Health ??titles that give Birx ranking ambassador-level status within diplomatic circles ??then-Secretary of State John Kerry told a story about the birth of Birx's eldest daughter, according to a transcript of his speech. It's not entirely clear what Kerry's story is intended to illustrate about Birx ??grit, determination, medical knowledge, foresight, presence of mind, maybe all of the above. At the time, Birx was about to embark on her career as a military-trained clinician focusing on the burgeoning field of HIV/AIDS vaccine research. It was the spring of 1983. Birx was in labor at the Walter Reed National Military Medical Center in Maryland, a place she would spend the next 25 years helping increase the efficiency of the U.S. military's HIV/AIDS response through collaborations across the Department of Defense. "She had lost a lot of blood during the delivery, and the obstetrician ordered a transfusion," Kerry said in his remarks in front of Birx's parents, her brother Donald and various members of the diplomatic corps. "But Debbie had read a report weeks earlier about a new disease no one knew much about, but the risks of a blood transfusion were very, very clear to her. And literally, just before she passed out from pain, Debbie screamed: 'Do not let them give me blood.'" Her husband at the time refused the transfusion. Birx probably saved her own life. "The hospital learned later that that the blood of her blood type ??that they would have used ??was contaminated with HIV," Kerry said. Birx's brother Donald, 67, describes a Pennsylvania childhood for his sister and another brother ??Danny, who died in a plane crash in 2000 ??as a semi-rural idyll. The family grew up outside Philadelphia but moved to Carlisle, about 30 miles outside Harrisburg, the state capital, when Birx was in high school. "We had to do a lot of things for ourselves because both of our parents worked. We would bike into school each day and we had to go over some really rough roads to get there," he said. "This meant we had a lot of time for exploration, experimentation and just roaming around and looking at things in different ways," he said. "My sister likes to say: 'We used to run wild.'" Donald Birx is now president of Plymouth State University in New Hampshire. Their mother, Adele, taught nursing. Their father, also Donald, was an electrical engineer. After high school, Birx majored in chemistry at Houghton College in western New York. She earned her medical degree from Penn State College of Medicine in Hershey. Birx has two adult daughters, Devynn and Danielle, from a previous marriage. Last year, she married Paige Reffe, a Clinton administration aide who has worked on various Democratic presidential campaigns, including Kerry's. Her brother said the woman people see next to the president is "outgoing, protective," supports group dynamics ??especially when they advance public health for women ??and "deeply cares for and develops the people she works with." Eric Goosby, her predecessor as U.S. Global AIDS coordinator, said Birx "came of age" as a doctor in the 1980s when "100% of the patients doctors engaged with succumbed" to the disease. He said it was a time when doctors became "overwhelmed" with death and dying. "Debbie was in the middle of all that," he said. Yet Goosby said that while Birx brings a "deep clinical background" to coronavirus policy discussion in the White House, she is equally "immersed" in how to set up complex health delivery systems for surveilling, storing and acting on key medical information. One of the HIV achievements Birx is credited with helping to highlight, according to Bruce Richman, founder of Prevention Access Campaign, is that people with undetectable viral loads cannot transmit the virus that causes AIDS. "She comes into meetings with 100 slides. It's like she has two calculus-computing brains," said Dr. Paul Zeitz, an epidemiologist and former Obama and Trump administration health official who worked for Birx at the State Department. "She's always ahead of everybody in understanding where things are going, and has a clear vision of how to get there," added Zeitz, referring to what he described as Birx's "reboot" of a U.S. global HIV/AIDS program that has required sensitive dealings with senior officials, world leaders, activists, administrators and patients all over the world. "She knows how to deal with intergovernmental squabbling, all the backstabbing that goes on, turf wars. In the White House, I can see her as a powerful leader in rooms full of conflicting egos, opinions, organizational battles. She can transcend all that," he said. 'President Trump has relied on, and consulted with, Dr. Birx' In a March 25 interview with CBN, a Christian TV network, Birx said she believes Trump, like her, has been attentive to the science and data around coronavirus. "I think his ability to analyze and integrate data that comes out of his long history in business has really been a real benefit during these discussions about medical issues because in the end, data is data," she said in the interview. Birx declined to be interviewed for this story. The Trump administration aides said that there is no doubt Birx is much more cautious than Trump about reopening the country. But they said Trump routinely solicits views from his advisers, including members of his coronavirus task force, and the resulting disputes are rarely personal. "None of these people are shy about their positions on these issues," an official said. "The media's ridiculous and repeated efforts to create distance and tension between the president and his top health experts, including Dr. Birx, is textbook fake news," said White House spokesman Judd Deere in a statement provided to USA TODAY. "President Trump has relied on, and consulted with, Dr. Birx and many others as he has confronted this unforeseen, unprecedented crisis," he said. In an exchange with reporters on May 8, Trump was asked about how often he meets with Birx, Fauci and the other medical experts on the coronavirus task force. "I listen to them very, very intently," Trump replied. "A lot." Many of the White House briefings where Birx and Fauci appeared were two-hour marathon sessions featuring combative exchanges between Trump and reporters ??along with slide presentations and discussions of data by the medical experts. There also were quieter moments of poignancy, such as when Birx told a story about her how grandmother lived with a lifetime of guilt after catching the flu at school in the 1918 influenza epidemic and brought it home to her own mother, who died from it. "She never forgot that she was the child that was in school that innocently bought that flu home," Birx said of her grandmother, Leah, on March 25. 'You ought to get your facts right' Ambassador, doctor, scientist, mom, grandmother, military veteran, public health expert ??at home, Birx often goes by the name of "colonel," according to her brother. This is not intended as a pure reflection of her military rank, but as a term of endearment that speaks to her character: disciplined, professional, direct, measured. It's also in recognition of the fact that Birx won the title at a time when women rarely achieved high-ranking positions within the military. On April 28, as Trump clashed with a reporter who challenged him on whether the U.S. has tested more people for coronavirus per capita than South Korea, another side to the "colonel" was on display. Deferring to Birx, Trump sat quietly as she explained how U.S. testing is focused on concentrated outbreaks across the country. Later in the meeting, she returned to the issue with updated numbers that supported Trump's claims. "Are you going to apologize, Yahoo?" Trump snapped, referring to the reporter's outlet. "You ought to get your facts right." As Trump continued to upbraid the reporter, Birx softly told the journalist, offering a sympathetic look before removing her glasses: "Just check it again." Contributing: Courtney Subramanian, Tom Vanden Brook 
2020-05-15	Barring a last minute change of heart by Chancellor Angela Merkel, Germany on Saturday will become the first country to reinstate big-time sports. True, baseball is up and running in South Korea and Taiwan, as are various games in places like Belarus. But Germany's soccer league, known as the Bundesliga, is the first restart of a sports enterprise with a global audience and player salaries that can stretch into eight figures. This is a big deal -- for Germany because it highlights its success so far in bringing down its COVID-19 cases. But it is a potential game changer for other nations as well. Soccer commentators elsewhere, who'd normally have their own leagues to worry about, have been fussing about the Bundesliga in recent days. The Sun, Rupert Murdoch's London tabloid, has even taken to running photo spreads of the wives and girlfriends of German players. Here at home, our leagues have shown more caution. On Monday, Major League Baseball floated the idea of a July resumption, while the National Basketball Association and the National Hockey League have been more circumspect. The PGA, which senses an opportunity since golf can be played while still observing social distancing guidelines, has announced it will resume its tour June 11. There are, of course, downsides to all of this. Even though games will be played without audiences, teams themselves can be conduits for the spread of the coronavirus. And each league that resumes puts pressure on others to do so as well. This week, England's top soccer league considered restarting in early June -- a move driven by fear that its fans could get too cozy with German soccer, not by the United Kingdom's progress in fighting the pandemic. Only game in town In this country, Major League Soccer and possibly the National Women's Soccer League could do a quick restart, and not for necessarily the right reasons. Though both leagues would face considerable hurdles, they are not unaware of the fact that being the only game in town for a few weeks could help promote their sport to audiences that generally prefer other sports like football and basketball. For all the downsides, however, there are also huge upsides to the resumption of sports. One is the psychological one. At a time of great stress and anxiety, sports is a comfort. The world needs sports. America needs sports! Another, more tangible, benefit is that most people watching games on television are doing so at home when they otherwise could be out and about, potentially acquiring or spreading the coronavirus. In normal times, we might grouse about the addictive power of televised sports and how it keeps people on their couches when they could be doing something more active. Now, the opposite is true. It is our duty as concerned Americans to watch more sports. So, let the games begin. If done right Consider the simple math. The numbers needed to put on a game without a live audience are in the dozens. If 1 million people watch it at home, well, that's a lot of people. Even if just 1% of them would otherwise be doing something silly, like piling into some public venue that is already saturated, or going out to get another tattoo, that's 10,000 people out of harm's way, at least for a few hours. Games played on weekend afternoons would be particularly helpful because that's when people most want to be out. And men's sports -- which constitutes the bulk of all sports -- would be the best, because they attract a largely male audience, which would appear to be the cohort of people most likely to flaunt social distancing guidelines. They certainly make up the bulk of the faces at protests. To be clear, the absence of sports is not the most important problem this nation faces. But, if done right, the resumption of sports -- some sports, at least -- could be part of the solution. At minimum, it would be a very pleasant distraction while we grapple with some very tough issues. Dan Carney is an editorial writer for USA TODAY. 
2020-05-14	TONY DOKOUPIL: Let's get to new evidence now of how a single so-called super-spreader can quickly infect dozens of other people with the coronavirus. A just-released study links one infected member of a Washington State choir to more than fifty others who caught the virus or showed symptoms. Two of those people died. Jonathan Vigliotti now reporting. (Begin VT) (Crowd singing) JONATHAN VIGLIOTTI (CBS News Correspondent): Carolynn Comstock and her husband Jim Owen were among the more than sixty members of this church choir who attended a rehearsal like this one in Washington State on March 10th. And they were among the fifty-two who later tested positive or showed symptoms for COVID-19. All from one infected choir member. CAROLYNN COMSTOCK: Maybe it's transmitted just by people talking. And, of course, then if you're singing, then there's more volume. JONATHAN VIGLIOTTI: The CDC reported that transmission increased because they were singing in close proximity to each other. And now another report says simply by talking loudly in an enclosed area for just one minute, an infected person can put a thousand highly-contagious droplets in the air for eight full minutes. UCLA professor of epidemiology Doctor Zuo-Feng Zhang. This could spread very quickly. DR. ZUO-FENG ZHANG: Yes, very quick, especially for people without symptoms. So, those are people we call super-transmitters. They can infect many people. JONATHAN VIGLIOTTI: One infected man in Chicago is linked to fifteen infections and three deaths after he attended a funeral, a dinner, and a birthday party. In Seoul, South Korea, one man who visited multiple clubs in the city's night-life district on May 2nd later tested positive. Now officials have linked more than one hundred COVID cases to clubs in that neighborhood. A man who lives nearby says he recorded this video that night. MAN: I was passing by, there was too many crowd here, who wasn't wearing masks, everyone outside. (End VT) JONATHAN VIGLIOTTI: And the risk to crowds is why clubs here on the world famous Sunset Strip have been closed down, a scene unfolding across the country. Here in L.A. County starting last night, anybody going out in public now needs to wear face masks. And to put in perspective just how hard it is to track down crowds once an infection starts, in Seoul, South Korea, authorities there working on tracking down as many as ten thousand people. Anthony. ANTHONY MASON: Jonathan, thank you. We have other breaking news overnight in Washington. CBS News has confirmed that a federal search warrant was issued to North Carolina Senator Richard Burr. It's part of a probe of financial moves before the coronavirus outbreak sent the markets plunging. Nancy Cordes is on Capitol Hill. Nancy, what more do we know? NANCY CORDES (CBS News Chief Congressional Correspondent): Well, Anthony, a U.S. official confirms to CBS News that the FBI did seize Senator Burr's cell phone in connection with those stock sales. Now, Burr is the chair of the powerful Senate Intelligence Committee. And back in January, he and other senators began to get regular briefings about the coronavirus crisis that was brewing in China. Then filings in mid-February showed that Burr sold up to roughly 1.7 million dollars in stock. Now, by that time, the public knew about the coronavirus threat. But several days before the sales, Burr had written an op-ed assuring Americans that the U.S. was prepared for a pandemic. Days after his sales, he gave a speech saying that the virus could have major consequences here. Now there's a law called the STOCK Act that prohibits members of Congress from using nonpublic information they obtained through their official positions for personal benefit. Back in 2012, Burr was one of three senators who voted against it. Now, Burr attended a hearing with the nation's leading health experts earlier this week. You see him there. He has said he relied solely on public news reports when he sold the stocks. According to a spokesperson for Burr, the senator filed a financial disclosure form about the transactions several weeks before the U.S. financial markets showed signs of volatility due to the coronavirus outbreak. He has since asked the Senate Ethics Committee to review his trades, and now it appears that the FBI is reviewing those trades, too. DOJ and the senator's office have declined to comment. We also reached out to Burr's attorney but have not heard back yet. It is important to note, Tony, that no charges have been filed at this point. TONY DOKOUPIL: And we will follow the investigation wherever it leads. Nancy, thank you very much. Ahead, troubling images of crowded planes and passengers not wearing face masks. We'll hear from airline CEOs about their struggle to keep travelers safe. But first, its seven eighteen now, time to check your local weather. (LOCAL WEATHER BREAK) (ANNOUNCEMENTS) GAYLE KING: Ahead, the response to the coronavirus outbreaks in meat packing plants. Employees tell us why they're concerned about the working conditions that put them at risk. You're watching CBS THIS MORNING. (ANNOUNCEMENTS) *****************************************************************************(7:30 AM, EDT) THERESA FRANCISCO (internet video): I'm walking out of here. I'm walking out of here. Yay. ANTHONY MASON: That's a happy patient. Welcome back to CBS THIS MORNING. Teresa Francisco has every reason in the world to be happy. She was a nurse at Mount Sinai hospital in New York City for thirty-eight years before retiring just months ago. Then in late March, she came down with the coronavirus and was treated in the same unit where she used to work. She has recovered from respiratory and kidney failure and is finally able to go home, saved by the people she worked with for decades. It's great, Tony, when your former colleagues come through for you like that. GAYLE KING: Nice. TONY DOKOUPIL: I love it. Yeah, from colleague to patient and now survivor. That's a good ending to that story. We appreciate it. END 
2020-05-14	TONY DOKOUPIL: Major League Baseball is reportedly sending players a detailed coronavirus protection plan with an eye toward resuming play in July. This comes as an overseas sports league is drawing attention in this country. The Korean Baseball Organization was one of the first leagues in the world to return during the pandemic, and it is now airing six games a week right here in the United States played in empty stadiums. This may offer a glimpse, though, into the future of American sports. CBS THIS MORNING: SATURDAY co-host Dana Jacobson shows us Korean baseball's growing popularity. (Begin VT) DANA JACOBSON: If you've missed live sports, right now this is your best bet, if you can stay awake. MAN (internet video): Missed baseball this much. I'm watching Korean baseball. Welcome back, baseball. DANA JACOBSON: Six nights a week after midnight on the East Coast, fans hungry for America's pastime are tuning in to watch athletes a half a world away play the game they love. DAN KURTZ: Never in my twenty years of fandom did I ever think that we would have so many new fans to the KBO outside the world, let alone here in the United States. DANA JACOBSON: Dan Kurtz runs a website dedicated to the KBO. Born in South Korea and adopted by a family in the U.S., his love affair with the sport began while studying in South Korea twenty years ago. DAN KURTZ: It's one of the greatest sporting events that I always go to any time I get back to Korea, and I enjoy it. DANA JACOBSON: And tell me a little bit more about that fan experience. DAN KURTZ: You're going not to just watch baseball. You have a cheer master leading synchronized cheers that all the fans from each team knows. (Crowd singing) DAN KURTZ: Yes, there's a baseball game going on the field, but it was like a rock concert going on in the-- in the stands. DANA JACOBSON: But in its current form, the KBO just might be a sign of things to come for the MLB--with empty stands, temperature checks for players, and many coaches and players wearing masks. DAN STRAILY: It was not normal, but as the kind of-- it's-- it was the new normal. DANA JACOBSON: Former Major League Baseball pitcher Dan Straily is spending his first season with the KBO. His first start was last week. DAN STRAILY: The team we were playing was sponsored by a technology phone company. And they had Zoom conferences going on with like three hundred-plus fans on this giant video board. Something so bizarre, but it worked. DANA JACOBSON: He says one of the most exciting developments for him and his teammates is seeing interest spike in the U.S., including by some of Major League Baseball's biggest stars like former MVP Mookie Betts. MOOKIE BETTS: Hwaiting. DAN STRAILY: To see how excited they were that Americans would be watching them now was-- it just absolutely made their day. One of my teammates was followed by Mookie Betts, and he thought it was like-- like the coolest thing in the world. He was so excited. And he-- DANA JACOBSON: The MVP. That's awesome. DAN STRAILY: Yeah. And he's-- he's like a superstar here in Korea. And he was so excited that Mookie Betts followed him. He, like, comes running over to me across the locker room just to show me that he followed him. He just could not believe it. DANA JACOBSON: For Straily and the rest of the Korean Baseball League, this is their time to shine, and they're loving every second of it. (Man speaking foreign language) DAN STRAILY: People get so bought into sports, myself included. For me, I feel a sense of routine. I feel a sense of purpose again. But just to see, like, the response from fans, people just feel like they have, like, their sense of purpose back as well, like, they have their team to root for again. DANA JACOBSON: For CBS THIS MORNING, I'm Dana Jacobson. (End VT) TONY DOKOUPIL: That's a great piece. And I tell you what, I don't recognize the teams. I don't recognize the players. I can't read the signs in the stadium. But I recognize the game, Anthony and Gayle. And I like to watch it. I just wish it weren't on overnight hours. We have to get up pretty early around here. But really rooting for Major League Baseball-- ANTHONY MASON: Yeah. TONY DOKOUPIL: --to come back in July. And I know you are, too, Anthony. ANTHONY MASON: Yeah. Kind of brutal hours for us. But I hope that they get crowds back there eventually, because I love that synchronized cheering. I would actually love to be part of that, Gayle. GAYLE KING: Yeah. I like that, too. Yeah. I thought that, too. I said now that looks fun. But, Tony, I'm surprised, because I would never think American fans would take to a team, as you mentioned, you don't know, you don't know the players, you didn't grow up watching them. Clearly, I was wrong. Does that surprise you that they've taken to it this way? Just me. TONY DOKOUPIL: It-- it-- it doesn't because baseball is a game you-- you watch and you just enjoy at its own pace--for the game itself, not for the players on the field. That's-- it's-- it's a unique sport in that way, Gayle. GAYLE KING: Okay. But I'm with Anthony, I like the cheering part. I can do that. Ahead, we'll talk to Jill Schlesinger about the latest weekly unemployment numbers and how quickly the economy will recover. What do the latest numbers show? We'll talk about that next. Your local news coming right up. (ANNOUNCEMENTS) (8:30 AM, EDT) (CBS NEWS SPECIAL REPORT) END 
2020-05-14	PHOENIX ??Don't take it personal, Uber and Lyft, but major league ballplayers will be strongly discouraged from riding in your cars this summer. Fans, you can cheer for all of your favorite players from your living room couch, but please don't try hanging outside team hotels because players will be advised not to sign autographs or pose for pictures. High-fives will be strictly forbidden. So will spitting. MLB, which has prepared an 80- to 100-page document addressing safety and health protocols, says it is committed to protecting its players during the pandemic. Providing they reach an agreement with the MLB Players Association over salaries, which is expected to take two to three weeks to consummate, baseball is expected to resume spring training in June, with opening day to be held the first week of July. These measures are being considered not only as a way to keep players safe during an 82-game regular season but more important ensuring their health until the last team is standing holding a World Series trophy. There is concern throughout MLB that a second wave of the coronavirus will send the country back into lockdown in the fall just as the playoffs are coming to a crescendo. "It would be absolutely horrible to get through this season, get into the World Series, and then have two teams racked with COVID infections, canceling everything," Glenn Copeland, medical adviser for the Blue Jays and QuestCap, told USA TODAY Sports. Officials had previously considered the possibility of extending the season into as late as December, but that idea has been scrapped and there is strong sentiment the World Series must conclude by the first week of November. "The story of the virus, infectious diseases and entomology is that there is usually a second wave," Copeland said. "The numbers drop lower and lower in the summer months, it's less contagious, and people out there get lulled into the second that social distancing isn't necessary and other precautions aren't being taken. And then whamo! You're hit with that second wave. And the problem is that no one knows when that second wave is coming." Besides squeezing in a minimum of 82 games in three months, an expanded version of the postseason ??featuring 14 teams instead of 10 ??could result in as many as 59 games. Not being able to see the playoffs to the end would be a major financial blow to teams. As it is, owners estimate they will lose $125 million a club if there is no season. If there's a regular season with no fans in attendance ??which account for about 50% of a team's gross revenue ??but no postseason without the lucrative national TV money, the team's losses would increase to about $150 million each. The teams hardest hit would be the mid-market clubs that generate the bulk of their revenue on gate receipts instead of local TV deals, such as the Cardinals and the Brewers. The only way for most clubs to salvage the season economically is by having a full postseason, no matter how many regular-season games are played. The owners say this is why they're seeking a 50% revenue-sharing agreement with the players for this year, asking them to share the risk of COVID-19 shutting down the sport at any time. The players will tell you they already are taking on the risk since they are the ones being exposed to the environment. "We really want to play," Cardinals veteran pitcher Andrew Miller said. "But we have to make sure the conditions are right." MLB has to convince the union and its players they will be protected before economic proposals are even discussed. And as much as MLB can promise to do everything to ensure their health, it's impossible without a vaccine to guarantee players won't become infected. "Do we know enough now, are we confident enough that we can keep players safe?" Copeland said. "The answer is unequivocally: I think so. "I wish we could guarantee it. We cannot." MLB is encouraged that games are being played safely in South Korea, with no player testing positive for COVID-19, with no fans permitted inside ballparks. If it can work in South Korea, why not North America? "We're probably in the safest place in the world," Kia Tigers coach Mark Weidemaier said. "We get body scanned when we leave the parking garage and walk into the stadium. The front office workers wear masks. And you get tested. It's been great." Coleman, whose company has consulted with at least 20 teams in the MLB, NHL and NBA, says they advise that every player should be tested every day upon entering ballparks or arenas. He recommends a daily nasal swab, blood tests, taking temperatures and answering a few questions. Even if a player has so much as a sore throat, he would be quarantined for 24 hours. MLB is not recommending daily blood tests, but temperatures will be taken each day for every person who enters the ballpark. "Baseball is doing it absolutely the right way," Coleman said. "They're doing it smart, slow and methodical. They're not going to be pushed into doing stuff because of an urgency. There is no urgency whether we start July 4 or Aug. 15. More important than urgency is that we do this right. "The players just want to be safe, they really want to play, and we want to make sure everything is done to protect their safety. "I think the risk in this is small, but the reward is quite large for everybody." 
2020-05-13	GAYLE KING: The coronavirus, of course, is a global problem, a global challenge. And fears of a second wave of infections has led some countries to rethink their reopening plans. Russia now has the second highest number of reported cases behind the U.S., and the Chinese city where the pandemic began plans to test every single person to guard against a recurrence. Asia correspondent Ramy Inocencio has that story. (Begin VT) RAMY INOCENCIO: Wuhan on alert again. In the next ten days, China's coronavirus epicenter is testing its entire population of eleven million people. Wuhan reported six new coronavirus cases over the weekend, the first since the city celebrated the lifting of its seventy-six-day lockdown in April. In South Korea, Seoul has ordered more than two thousand clubs and bars closed, and now contact tracing nearly eleven thousand people. A new cluster of more than one hundred COVID-19 cases were found linked to the capital's entertain district of Itaewon. Doctor Jerome Kim is a leading epidemiologist in South Korea. DR. JEROME KIM: If the government of Korea hadn't done this, then there would be a hundred nineteen people out there infecting other people. And so that actually, really, gets to the point of-- of-- of tracing people. RAMY INOCENCIO: And in Russia, tragedy on top of infections. A fire at a hospital in St. Petersburg killed at least four coronavirus patients. And the pandemic hit close to President Vladimir Putin. His spokesperson Dmitry Peskov is just the latest high-ranking official to fall ill. But in Japan, some good news--Prime Minister Shinzo Abe says the country is now on a steady path to ending its epidemic. The national state of emergency could be lifted across much of the country, Thursday. For CBS THIS MORNING, Ramy Inocencio, Tokyo. (End VT) ANTHONY MASON: The Justice Department's plan to drop criminal charges against President Trump's first national security adviser is on hold this morning. Retired General Michael Flynn pleaded guilty to lying to the FBI during its Russia investigation, then tried to withdraw his plea. The judge who was asked to dismiss the case says he wants to hear opinions from other interested parties first. Attorney General William Barr told CBS News, Flynn did not commit a crime because the FBI had insufficient reason to question him. END 
2020-05-13	Even as health experts say more testing for the coronavirus is needed for states to safely begin lifting the restrictions put in place to slow the outbreak, President Donald Trump has repeatedly claimed the U.S. not only has sufficient testing capacity, but is outpacing the world in the effort. "In the span of just a few short months, we've developed a testing capacity unmatched and unrivaled anywhere in the world, and it's not even close," Trump told reporters at a White House news briefing Monday. "This is a core element of our plan to safely and gradually reopen America." Since the outbreak began, the president has tried to paint as positive a picture as possible of the pandemic and his administration's response. Trump has said he was trying to give the public reasons for hope and optimism, but critics have accused him of dangerously downplaying the threat because he was more concerned about the economic impact than the danger to public health. Despite Trump's efforts to instill optimism, a majority of Americans believe "the worst is yet to come," according to a CNN poll released Tuesday. And only 36% of Americans say they trust the information coming from the president on the coronavirus, compared with 74% who say they trust the CDC and 55% who say they trust CNN. During a March 6 visit to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention in Atlanta, when the outbreak was just beginning in the U.S., the president said, "Anybody that wants a test can get a test." After Trump repeated that claim at Monday's briefing, Adm. Brett Giroir, the assistant secretary for health at the Department of Health and Human Services, made a slight tweak to the president's wording. "Everybody who needs a test can get a test," he said. "Right now in America, anybody who needs a test can get a test in America with the numbers we have," he said. "If you are symptomatic with a respiratory illness, that is an indication for a test and you can get a test." Trump agreed that only those with "sniffles" or a sore throat should be tested. But studies have shown that many infected people never present symptoms and public health experts have called for enough testing to reveal the asymptomatic carriers of the disease. "We're testing more people per capita than South Korea, the United Kingdom, France, Japan, Sweden, Finland and many other countries," Trump said Monday. He is correct, according to Our World in Data. The U.S. trailed all those countries except Japan and the U.K. in per capita testing through March. It took the U.S. until mid-April to pass South Korea, which confirmed its first COVID-19 case on the same day, and until April 25 to surpass Finland. At a Health, Education, Labor and Pensions Committee hearing Tuesday, Sen. Mitt Romney, R-Utah, said surpassing South Korea was "nothing to celebrate" because that country has only lost 256 people to COVID-19, compared to the more than 80,000 deaths in the U.S. The U.S. still trails many nations in per capita testing, including Australia, Italy, Russia, Canada, Denmark, Austria, Switzerland, Belgium and Iceland. Trump also said the U.S. has conducted more than 9 million tests, which he correctly says is the most completed by any nation. That represents a single test for less than 3% of the population. On occasion, the president has said the U.S. has conducted more tests than all other nations combined. That boast is demonstrably untrue and easily refuted by a glance at the data. The sum of the tests completed in the next three countries with the highest totals ??Russian, Germany and Italy ??surpasses the tests performed in the U.S. 
2020-05-12	A high-profile infectious disease researcher warns COVID-19 is in the early stages of attacking the world, which makes it difficult to relax stay-at-home orders without putting most Americans at risk. Dr. Michael Osterholm, director of the Center for Infectious Disease Research and Policy at the University of Minnesota, said the initial wave of outbreaks in cities such as New York, where 1 in 5 people have been infected, represent a fraction of the illness and death yet to come. "This damn virus is going to keep going until it infects everybody it possibly can," Osterholm said Monday during a meeting with the USA TODAY Editorial Board. "It surely won't slow down until it hits 60 to 70%" of the population, the number that would create herd immunity and halt the spread of the virus. Even if new cases begin to fade this summer, it might be an indicator that the new coronavirus is following a seasonal pattern similar to the flu. During the 1918 flu pandemic that sicked one-third of the world's population, New York City and Chicago were hit hard in the first wave of illness that largely bypassed other cities such as Boston, Detroit, Minneapolis and Philadelphia. The second wave of illness was much more severe nationwide. If COVID-19 retreats only to return in the fall, the number of cases could peak and overwhelm hospitals that must deal with cases of flu and respiratory viruses. Furthermore, Asian nations such as South Korea and Singapore, lauded for strict controls and rapid testing to avoid damage during the first wave, might be vulnerable to a second wave of infections, he said. "It's the big peak that's really going to do us in," he said. "As much pain, suffering, death and economic disruption we've had, there's been 5 to 20% of the people infected. That's a long ways to get to 60 to 70%." Still, there are key differences between COVID-19 and the flu. The average incubation period for the new virus is five days, compared with just two days for the flu, according to a Center for Infectious Disease Research and Policy report comparing the pandemics. The longer incubation period and a higher transmission rate suggest the COVID-19 virus spreads more easily than the flu. There were nearly 80,000 deaths and more than 1.3 million confirmed novel coronavirus cases in the U.S. at noon Monday, according to the John Hopkins University data tracker. New York state has been hit the hardest with more than 26,000 deaths, and preliminary antibody testing suggests about 20% of New York City-area residents have been infected. Worldwide, more than 283,000 people have died and 4.1 million have been infected. Osterholm said only an effective vaccine can slow the virus before a large enough segment of the population becomes infected and develops some level of immunity. Even if a vaccine works, Osterholm said, it's unknown whether it would be durable enough to confer long-lasting protection from SARS CoV-2, the virus that causes COVID-19. Most states are easing stay-at-home orders though patchwork measures that vary from one to the next. Georgia began opening in late April amid national criticism, allowing tattoo parlors, bowling alleys and hair and nail salons to reopen with restrictions. California has taken a slower, phased approach, allowing some retailers and manufacturers considered low-risk to resume operations. Governors worry about the economic harm social distancing measures have caused with shuttered businesses and the growing ranks of jobless Americans. Unemployment has reaching 15% nationwide, and a Trump administration economic adviser warned unemployment could soon reach 20%. Osterholm acknowledges that the nation "can't lock down for 18 months" and said political and business leaders need to find a way to resume activities while adapting to a virus that won't soon disappear. He doesn't believe there has been enough of a frank assessment on the economic harm the virus will cause over coming months and its disruption to international supply chains. "We all have to confront the fact there's not a magic bullet, short of a vaccine, that's going to make this go away," he said. "We're going to be living with it. And we're not having that discussion at all." 
2020-05-12	Some politicians and pundits have set up a dichotomy: Either lock down the economy and prevent coronavirus deaths, or loosen restrictions and prevent economic devastation. This is false. As an emergency physician working in an urban, low-income neighborhood of Philadelphia, I have treated several patients who lost jobs due to the coronavirus outbreak. For example, I treated a young cook who came in with palpitations and overwhelming anxiety not knowing how he will pay his rent, and a middle-age janitor who ran out of money to buy alcohol and came in by ambulance shaking in withdrawal, tearfully ashamed of his situation. While the angry protesters carrying rifles in the news do not look like my patients, they have cause to be upset. The April unemployment rate shot up to 14.7% on Friday with 20.5 million jobs lost. While most are temporary layoffs, 42% may be permanent. Furthermore, as a researcher who works on preventing deaths from substance use and trauma, I am concerned about the effect this widespread income loss will have on these outcomes. Historically, in counties where factories shut down, there are approximately nine additional deaths due to opioid overdoses per 100,000 residents. It is estimated that individual-level poverty is associated with over 133,000 deaths per year in the United States. More job loss will lead to loss of health insurance and contribute to worsening of these numbers. No need to pick a poison So, do we really have to pick our poison -- to choose between saving lives from coronavirus and ruining the economy, or opening the economy and losing more lives to coronavirus? The answer is no: First, history tells us that U.S. cities that were more aggressive with public health measures to get the 1918 flu pandemic under control grew faster economically after the pandemic was over and had fewer deaths. Today, check out South Korea: Despite being China's neighbor, it has had only 256 deaths and has begun reopening its economy after aggressive testing, tracing and isolating cases. Second, reopening retail businesses only addresses the supply of services. For robust sales to occur, there will also need to be robust demand. Polls show that given current risks, most Americans are not ready to resume normal activities. Reducing the risk of coronavirus is vital for stimulating shopping, dining, leisure and travel. Third, employers will have challenges bringing their employees back to work if they cannot keep them safe. This includes the same challenges health care employers have faced: maintaining physical distancing and providing personal protective equipment. The U.S. Occupational Safety and Health Administration has received thousands of complaints and is conducting hundreds of coronavirus-related inspections to determine whether employers failed to adequately protect their workers. Fourth, once workplaces open, it will be impossible to stay open without the ability to rapidly test employees, trace contacts of those infected, and isolate them. I have taken care of bus drivers and airport workers who likely got infected on the job, but this is particularly critical where employees are in tight proximity. For example, among 130,000 U.S. workers in 115 meat processing facilities in 19 states, there were 4,913 cases of COVID-19 and 20 deaths this April. That's over twice the monthly death rate of the most dangerous U.S. occupation, the fishing industry. What protesters should demand Testing challenges persist. Our well-resourced academic hospital just developed the capacity to get same-day COVID-19 results for patients who can be discharged from the emergency department. Before that, it took five to eight days to get results, which is standard. Positive cases could infect hundreds of employees before getting their results and self-isolating. Here are the four things protesters really should be demanding to reopen the economy: widely available, reliable, rapid COVID-19 tests; a public health work force and tech solutions to rapidly trace contacts of new cases; business safeguards that include personal protective equipment, physical distancing, cleaning and disinfection; and personal adherence to physical distancing to reduce spread until testing ramps up and cases decrease. (Sadly, cases are increasing beyond New York, and packed protests without masks could spark more outbreaks.) In the end, we don't have to pick between the poisons of deaths from coronavirus, or income loss and resulting deaths of despair. More aggressive public health measures and buy-in will prevent both and get us back to normalcy faster. Dr. M. Kit Delgado is an assistant professor of Emergency Medicine & Epidemiology in the Perelman School of Medicine and a senior fellow in the Leonard Davis Institute of Health Economics at the University of Pennsylvania. He is an attending physician in the Penn Presbyterian Medical Center Emergency Departmen t. 
2020-05-11	It doesn't appear people who have had a confirmed case of COVID-19 can quickly become reinfected with the disease, a helpful finding for those worried that even once recovered they may not be safe. It remains unknown whether there's any real long-term or even short-term protection for those who've been sick. Concern was raised following reports out of South Korea that some people were becoming reinfected with SARS-CoV-2, the virus that causes COVID-19. The country's Centers for Disease Control and Prevention reported more than 300 such cases. South Korea has one of the world's most extensive COVID-19 testing programs, so its data is considered strong. South Korean researchers now think they were seeing false positives, where the tests detected old particles of virus in patients no longer causing disease, Reuters reported. "The South Koreans tried to grow the viruses (from those particles) and they didn't grow," said Dr. Ania Wajnberg, an internist at Mount Sinai Hospital in New York City who is medical director of its Serum Antibody Donor Identification program. It's still not known whether having had COVID-19 gives long-term immunity to the virus, but immediate reinfection is now less of a worry. Wajnberg's group tested 624 patients who were positive for COVID-19 and recovered. They found all but three were producing antibodies. What those antibodies mean in terms of long-term protection remains an unanswered question. But Wajnberg's seen at least one hopeful sign. "So far, we don't see any evidence of people being reinfected," she said. Confirmation in a large study that almost everyone with a symptomatic infection develops antibodies is promising, said Marc Jenkins, director of the Center for Immunology at the University of Minnesota Medical School. "But it is still not clear that antibodies are protective and if so, what amount of antibodies are needed for protection," he said. The differences between diseases can be enormous. Some illnesses, such as measles, give lifelong immunity. For others, such as the common cold, immunity wanes after only a few months. We can't let our guard down, said Dr. Michael Mina, a professor of epidemiology at Harvard's Chan School of Public Health. "It could be two years, so you could get it now and then you could get it in two years and it's a pretty severe infection," he said in a call with reporters Friday. With the SARS-CoV-2 virus having been active among humans for only the past six months, it's too soon to know. "It's just going to take time," Mina said. "We have to follow people over time to see how likely people who've been infected are to get a second infection." 
2020-05-05	ANTHONY MASON: CBS News has confirmed more than twenty thousand people who live or work in nursing homes and other long-term care facilities have died from the coronavirus. The nursing home industry is now seeking immunity from lawsuits tied to the outbreak. At least fifteen states have passed some law-- passed laws offering some legal protection. Jonathan Vigliotti looks at efforts in California to hold those facilities accountable for their care. (Begin VT) SCOTT AKRIE: He was kind and he was gentle and he was brilliant. JONATHAN VIGLIOTTI (CBS News Correspondent): Scott Akrie describes his father, eighty-eight-year-old Costello Akrie, as a devoted family man and a leader in his community. He died alone last month in a Northern California nursing home after contracting coronavirus. SCOTT AKRIE: He was the first person in our family to graduate from college. He died six months short of being able to see his grandson graduate from college. Six months. JONATHAN VIGLIOTTI: Akrie was admitted to the Gateway Care & Rehabilitation Center for a short recovery stay after a diabetic episode. He was one of at least thirteen people at Gateway who died. At least sixty-nine patients and thirty-three employees have tested positive. At one point during the outbreak, Akrie says he was told that staff members were not being tested and were handling up to thirty-five patients at a time. MIKE DARK: There's no question that while the virus is an act of God, the crisis in California's nursing home facilities is an act of man. JONATHAN VIGLIOTTI: At least seven hundred thirty-three long-term care residents and fifteen health care workers have died in California. Mike Dark is a lawyer of the California Advocates for Nursing Home Reform. MIKE DARK: The nursing homes that are suffering the worst problems with the virus are the same homes that have had terrible track records with infection control and with staffing. JONATHAN VIGLIOTTI: CBS News dug into the federal records and found that nearly sixty-two percent of California nursing homes, including Gateway, were cited for infection prevention and control lapses last year. Out of the ten California facilities with the highest number of resident COVID cases, seven received only one or two stars on a federal rating scale which looks in part at staffing and health inspections. MIKE DARK: Nursing home operators cut staffing to maximize profit. And when you don't have enough staff, it's simply not possible to have good infection control. JONATHAN VIGLIOTTI: Dark says lawsuits are one way of forcing change and holding facilities accountable. MARK REAGAN: It is very possible that a wave of lawsuits could ultimately wipe out a significant portion of the long-term care profession. JONATHAN VIGLIOTTI: Mark Reagan is general counsel for the California Association of Health Facilities, one of six health care groups asking California's governor to issue an executive order granting immunity. MARK REAGAN: We have caregivers who are doing their absolute best every day, against impossible odds. And to allow the second guessing of those caregivers would be really unfortunate. JONATHAN VIGLIOTTI: Akrie who has now hired an attorney himself hopes his devastating outbreak can bring meaningful change in senior care. SCOTT AKRIE: I don't want this to happen to anybody again. My-- my mom, my family, we don't want this to happen to anybody else because this was just wrong. (End VT) JONATHAN VIGLIOTTI: And we can now report the Alameda County District Attorney's Office is conducting a criminal investigation into Gateway. The owners of the facility reportedly owned at least seven other nursing homes. They have not returned our calls for comment. Nursing home advocacy groups say state inspectors and nursing homes should take infection control violations more seriously and they say immunity would undermine that effort. Anthony. ANTHONY MASON: Yeah. Truly devastating situation there in California. Jonathan, thank you. Ahead, Vlad Duthiers looks at the stories you'll be talking about today. But first, it is seven forty-three, time to check your local weather. (LOCAL WEATHER BREAK) (ANNOUNCEMENTS) TONY DOKOUPIL: Seven forty-seven, time now for the best virtual event you can do from your couch, it's called What to Watch led by Mister Vlad Duthiers. Vlad, good morning. What have you got for us? VLADIMIR DUTHIERS: Good morning, guys. Good to see all of you. Glad to see you doing well. We are all thankfully safe and healthy here, working from home. But while we're doing that, we're also checking out some of the stories we think you'll be talking about today, including this--we're honoring the life of Greg Zanis. The sixty-nine-year-old lost his battle with cancer yesterday. And you may not recognize his name, but you will certainly sadly know his handiwork. Zanis captured hearts across America by building crosses, paying tribute to mass shooting victims in the United States from Columbine to Newtown and Las Vegas. He made more than twenty-seven thousands of these memorials. We saw Zanis one last time on Friday. Folks in his hometown held a huge drive-by parade to say thank you to a man who dedicated much of his life to honor complete strangers. And, Gayle, as you know, he didn't just make crosses, he made Star of Davids after the shootings in Parkland-- GAYLE KING: Yes. VLADIMIR DUTHIERS: --Florida, and after eleven worshippers were massacred at the Tree of Life Synagogue in Pittsburgh. GAYLE KING: And then there are great stories, Vlad, of survivors of-- of the victims who would reach out and say, would you please make a cross for me? He was described as a man of action who simply wanted to honor the lives of others. And he certainly did that, and now we're honoring his life. Very sad to hear that news. But you've got some more encouraging news for baseball fans who have been saying, I want to play-- I want to see baseball. Let's play ball. What have you got? VLADIMIR DUTHIERS: All right. So get this, you can now watch baseball from South Korea on ESPN. The sport's network carried the league's Opening Day match-up overnight. Take a look. MAN: (INDISTINCT) leads so well. Na Sung-bum thought perhaps he had one. It's down the line in a drifts foul. Didn't see the back flip there, though, my friend. Yes, we-- we did have a home run. That is a home run. VLADIMIR DUTHIERS: So the NC Dinos beat the Samsung Lions, 4-0 in a very empty stadium. You could see there. ESPN plans to carry six Korean League games a week. Its reporters and commentators provide play-by-play in English remotely from their homes. Anthony, you know what's really funny about this clip is? The commentators can't tell if it's a home run or not because that's how you realize the crowds are so important in baseball game. TONY DOKOUPIL: Yeah. ANTHONY MASON: I know. But sign me up anyway, Vlad. I'm so starve for baseball. I'm ready to watch baseball from seven thousand miles away. But here's the thing, you know, what I worry about is that we're going to miss-- VLADIMIR DUTHIERS: At 1 AM. At 1 AM. ANTHONY MASON: --at four and five in the morning. Can we have something in like-- VLADIMIR DUTHIERS: Exactly. GAYLE KING: Yeah. ANTHONY MASON: --primetime or the afternoon? Please. Okay. Vlad, there's a really interesting development-- VLADIMIR DUTHIERS: DVR. ANTHONY MASON: --of the Netflix docuseries Tiger King. What's going on? VLADIMIR DUTHIERS: Yeah. Get excited, all you cool cats and kittens. A new TV series centered on Joe Exotic is reportedly in the works. (Excerpt from Tiger King; Netflix) VLADIMIR DUTHIERS: There's a lot of purring over, who would play the zany former zookeeper in the spinoff movie or TV show? Now, according to Variety, Nicholas Cage has been tasked to take on the role of Joe Exotic. The scripted series will be eight episodes long. Right now, it doesn't have a name, a network or premier date. But the show is being produced in part by CBS Television Studios. Tony, I know you're excited. Look at that. I mean, there are a lot of other contenders. But that's pretty perfect. TONY DOKOUPIL: All right. It's-- it's pretty great. You know, Nick Cage will do a wonderful job. And I'm-- but every time I see clips of-- of the G.W. zoological park there in Oklahoma, I am taken back to when I actually visited five years ago, trying to develop a story of my own there. And-- and having not seen the Netflix series, Gayle, I will say it appears to be that Joe Exotic really is a-- a competing definition of love. A lot of people say those cats need to be free. He says he loves them so much, he is going to bring them all in, all a hundred and eighty-seven of them. That's how I saw it anyway. Have you seen it, Gayle? GAYLE KING: Well, I've seen enough of it to-- to wonder what the hell I'm watching when I look at it. But I'm looking-- I'm thinking about, Vlad, all you cool cats and kittens. I think Nick Cage is excellent casting. He plays crazy, eccentric very well. TONY DOKOUPIL: Yeah. GAYLE KING: Very well. VLADIMIR DUTHIERS: So good. TONY DOKOUPIL: Yes. GAYLE KING: I can't wait to see this. VLADIMIR DUTHIERS: So good. TONY DOKOUPIL: All right. GAYLE KING: I will watch that. TONY DOKOUPIL: Thank you, Vlad. Ahead, first on CBS THIS MORNING, NYPD Deputy Commissioner John Miller. Stay with us. (ANNOUNCEMENTS) *****************************************************************************(8:00 AM, EDT) GAYLE KING: It's Tuesday, May 5, 2020. Welcome back to CBS THIS MORNING. I am Gayle King with Tony Dokoupil and Anthony Mason. Stark scenarios. New warnings of a potential surge in coronavirus deaths if America reopens too quickly. We'll talk to the NYPD's John Miller about his personal story of recovery from the virus. TONY DOKOUPIL: Covering up. A new study shows how even homemade face masks can help sharply reduce the number of deaths. ANTHONY MASON: And healthy habits. Why keeping up good routines can help us all get through this crisis. GAYLE KING: But first, here's today's Eye Opener @ 8. Warm spring weather and eased restrictions in a lot of states have led more Americans to gather in public spaces. ANTHONY MASON: One model once frequently cited by the White House is warning about the risks of rushing the recovery. TONY DOKOUPIL: A draft federal government model based on preliminary data and it warns of dire consequences if reopening is not done with proper care. PAULA REID: In an interview last night with the New York Post, the President said he's never seen this document. ANTHONY MASON: Supermarket chains like Costco and Kroger are now limiting how much meat shoppers can buy. DEAN REYNOLDS: Supermarkets are trying to avoid what they call panic buying. TONY DOKOUPIL: Although we have seen some severe cases children generally have more mild symptoms. Do we know why? DR. TARA NARULA: It's really fascinating, Tony. And the experts say we don't. STEPHEN COLBERT: Now this global pandemic is depressing. But there is some happier news from the smile file because murder hornets have arrived in the U.S. TREVOR NOAH: Murder hornets? Murder hornets? I want to go back to the days when the craziest animal thing was Keyboard Cat. How did they do that, by the way? Because it was playing, and it was actually pretty good. GAYLE KING: Welcome back to CBS THIS MORNING. Anthony-- I'm with you Trevor Noah because I'm thinking we have a coronavirus pandemic. We're shut down at home, stay-at-home, and now we have murder hornets. I'm thinking somebody is really mad at us, Anthony Mason. ANTHONY MASON: That's a sign of the apocalypse, I think, Gayle. GAYLE KING: Too much. ANTHONY MASON: Mur-- when the murder hornets come-- GAYLE KING: Too much. ANTHONY MASON: --you know you're in trouble. It's-- it is-- it's too much. GAYLE KING: Yes. ANTHONY MASON: All right. We begin here this hour, at least forty-three states have now partially reopened in various forms but as social distancing is eased, two new projections show potentially dire consequences if restrictions are eased too quickly. A University of Washington model often cited by the White House has raised its projected death toll to more than one hundred thirty-four thousand by August. That's nearly double the estimate from less than a week ago. Largely, because more Americans are leaving their homes. MAN: Quite a wide range of forecasts from the model as the evolution in each state will depend a lot on, you know, just how much mobility bounces back as some social mandates are lifted. TONY DOKOUPIL: Meanwhile, a draft model provided to FEMA says three thousand dead per day could be possible by June. For context, the current rate is about eighteen hundred. CBS News has learned that that data is based on a model developed by Johns Hopkins researchers. President Trump told the New York Post that he's never seen that document, claiming that it is, quote, "fake news." GAYLE KING: The New York Police Department has been hit very hard by this pandemic. More than five thousand NYPD members have tested positive and at least thirty-eight officers have died. John Miller, the department's deputy commissioner of intelligence and counterterrorism, was one of those hospitalized with the coronavirus. Miller, we should let you know, is a information senior correspondent for this very broadcast. So first on CBS THIS MORNING, he joins from us NYPD headquarters where he's back on the job. John Miller, let me just say this, you are a sight for sore eyes and I speak for CBS News, which I have no authority to do, by the way, to say you are beloved in the building and we are so glad you're okay. I can't stretch how much-- I'm so delighted to see you this morning. So everybody has a different experience with coronavirus. Briefly tell us what was yours? What happened? Because we all heard it got very serious for you. JOHN MILLER (NYPD Deputy Commissioner of Intelligence and Counterterrorism): Well, you know, I'm one of those don't go the doctor, don't get help, you know, whatever it is, it will go away by itself, guys. And I was tangling with the very wrong disease. But, Emily, my wife, kind of told on me. I think it was ten o'clock, you know, on a week night and she called the doctor at home and said temperature is going up to a hundred and three, oxygen levels are going down-- GAYLE KING: Wow. JOHN MILLER: --and, you know, I'm worried and he-- he got me on the phone and he said I'm calling an ambulance and you're going to the hospital and I said I am not going to the hospital in ambulance. I said I got a police car outside, I'll take myself to the hospital. And he said, well, I'm calling an ambulance. And I said, well, I'm going to beat it, you know, right there. So don't bother. So I surrendered, the Lenox Hill Hospital. And, you know, I got to say, I was-- I-- I'm glad I did because within a couple of days I realized without all the oxygen that I was on twenty-four/seven, I wasn't going to be-- I wasn't going to be at the oxygen levels, the heart rate, the-- the ability to breathe-- GAYLE KING: Yeah. JOHN MILLER: --and the team there. You know, my Doctor Stuart Orsher, the nurses there, Marissa (ph), Madeleine (ph), Kaitlin (ph), Sam (ph), Isaac, amazing, Gayle, because remember, they are in crisis, too. GAYLE KING: Yeah. That's what we keep hearing. Yeah. We-- yeah. JOHN MILLER: And, you know, the-- GAYLE KING: We-- we hear all the time. JOHN MILLER: --the-- the professionalism was-- the professionalism was amazing and the kindness, too. And, you know, the second part is optional. GAYLE KING: Yeah. JOHN MILLER: They have to be professional, but they were-- they were incredible there. GAYLE KING: Yeah. We can't thank them enough. The more stories you hear, the more you hear how they always go above and beyond the call of duty. We've-- we've got pictures of you, John, in the hospital including one that I think is a funny shot. It looks like you on a TV screen where they are reporting about you and you're sitting there in the hospital bed. That had to be a little disconcerting. JOHN MILLER: Yeah. So-- yeah, Doctor Mina (ph) had just left. He said, you know, you're doing fine. There was a lady in there taking blood from me. And she looked up at the screen and looked down and I said, yeah, that's me. And she said, that's you? And I said, it says I'm in serious condition. She said you're fine. Stop it. So, yeah, it was a little bit of an out-of-body experience. GAYLE KING: Yeah. Listen, thousands of officers are now returning to work after being diagnosed with COVID. What's being done to protect the force? JOHN MILLER: Well, this has been, you know, a daily-- a daily battle to stay ahead of that curve, you know. The NYPD was hit hard with this because, you know, when nothing else works people call the police and that's the part that has to work. So, you know, the-- the department has been going twenty-four/seven. But, you know, when you-- when you have five thousand people out sick who are going out at a rate of three hundred a day, you know, thank God, that's down to about eighteen hundred now. Our normal sick rate on an average day without a pandemic is 2.73 percent. You know, we were-- we were approaching much bigger percentages than we'd ever seen before. So how do you buy a million masks, a million sets of gloves, how do you buy them right now yesterday? That involved the deputy commissioner for management and budget, the city controller, the administrative services for the city. But they got that together. If you go to a police station or police headquarters now it doesn't matter if you're a police officer, the commanding officer, the deputy commissioner or a prisoner in handcuffs, you're being scanned for your temperature before you go in. If the temperature is high or you answer the questions about contacts you've had, you know, that goes into a higher level of screening. It's about-- GAYLE KING: Yeah. JOHN MILLER: --the social distance-- distancing, the protective equipment and making sure that you-- you catch-- GAYLE KING: Yeah. JOHN MILLER: --these things every way you can so you get people help. GAYLE KING: We've all gotten the orders now. We just have to follow them. But, John, we have to talk about a story on the NYPD is making national news and not in a good way. I know you've seen it, the optics are not good. A man was arrested in-- in connection--(AUDIO CUT)-- ANTHONY MASON: All right. All right. John. GAYLE KING: --the-- the guy's family. JOHN MILLER: Yep. Anthony. GAYLE KING: What can you tell us about that? ANTHONY MASON: Yeah. John, we're-- we're going to-- we're having-- are we all right now? GAYLE KING: Oh, he's frozen? ANTHONY MASON: We're having trouble with Gayle's shot. GAYLE KING: John. JOHN MILLER: Yeah. I'm-- I'm-- ANTHONY MASON: We were having trouble. JOHN MILLER: Okay. So I got Gayle's audio. ANTHONY MASON: Yeah, go-- go ahead. Sorry. We're having-- GAYLE KING: Okay, John. Go ahead, John. JOHN MILLER: So, yeah. Well, a couple of things. One, anybody who tells you that's not a disturbing videotape hasn't seen the videotape. Two, as you learn when you go into the investigations, the videotape tends to tell the end of the event, it doesn't always depict the beginning, the beginning of the event. So, you know, that officer is now on modified assignment. That means he's operating without a badge, without a gun on desk duty pending the investigation. We'll look into every aspect of this. What do the witnesses say, are there other videos, what does the officer say, what do his partner say, you know, preliminarily, what it says is that the individual he has contact with was interfering with the arrest and then took a fighting stance. Of course, you know, you take-- you take that version. You take the version on the video. You take what all the witnesses say. And that's what makes up an investigation. So we're very early in that process. But we have a good history of investigating those things and taking action where appropriate. We're just at the very beginning. GAYLE KING: Well, okay. You know, it's being reported he is an eight-year veteran, that he's been sued, this officer, seven times over the last six years. So a lot of people have a lot of questions about the case. We'll be following it. But, of course, I just want to end with this, John Miller. I'm glad you're healthy. JOHN MILLER: Well, and-- and they should. But, I mean, we also-- oh, thanks, Gayle. I appreciate it. GAYLE KING: Go ahead. JOHN MILLER: And, Gayle, thank you for-- thanks for the messages from everybody at CBS when I was in the hospital. Thanks for your message. Thanks for-- for sending that video for my daughter's birthday because, you know, when you're a seventeen-year-old, you know, Kaya (ph) couldn't have a birthday party, but we've got thirty-three guests via video and-- and you were one of them. So I appreciate all that personally. GAYLE KING: Well, we're glad-- we're-- we're glad Kaya had a great birthday. We're glad someone said you have coronavirus here who shall remain nameless, John Tower (ph). But we're just glad that you are safe and back on the job. Thank you. Ahead, stitching the nation together one mask at a time. How everybody from school kids to big companies are creating those face coverings that we're all wearing these days. But first, it's eight ten, time to check your local weather. (LOCAL WEATHER BREAK) (ANNOUNCEMENTS) TONY DOKOUPIL: Now you may have developed some less than healthy eating or screen time routines during this pandemic. Ahead, the key to breaking those bad habits. Plus, how volunteers in Venice, Italy, are using gondoliers to bring food and medicine to people most at risk of contracting the virus. You're watching CBS THIS MORNING. (ANNOUNCEMENTS) END 
2020-05-05	It might be taking place halfway around the world, but live regular-season baseball is about to begin. After a five-week delay due to the coronavirus pandemic, the Korea Baseball Organization (KBO) was finally ready for opening day on Tuesday. Meanwhile, envious North Americans will be able to watch the games live ??as long as they're willing to rise before the sun does. ESPN reached a deal with the KBO to air six live games per week, with the network getting the game feed from South Korea and using ESPN announcers to call the action remotely. What is the KBO? Professional baseball in South Korea is made up of 10 teams in eight cities, almost all of them owned by, and named after, a major corporation. Despite the late start to the regular season, the KBO hopes to complete a full 144-game schedule. Its success or failure could be an indication of how MLB might look to proceed when it's ready to begin play, possibly by late June. Baseball fans can expect plenty of offense, and yes bat flips are encouraged. Are there any current Korean-born MLB players? Three. Rangers OF Shin-Soo Choo has played 15 seasons in the majors, collecting 1,645 hits and earning All-Star honors for the first time in 2018. Blue Jays LHP Hyun-Jin Ryu spent six seasons with the Dodgers before signing with the Jays as a free agent this offseason. He had a career year in 2019, going 14-5, leading the National League with a 2.32 ERA and finishing second to Jacob deGrom in the NL Cy Young voting. Rays 1B-DH Ji-Man Choi has played for four teams in four seasons but seemed to find a home with Tampa Bay last year, posting career-high totals in home runs (19) and RBI (63). In addition, the Cardinals signed left-hander Kwang-Hyun Kim this winter after 12 years in the KBO. He's expected to compete for a spot in the team's starting rotation. Are there any KBO players MLB fans will recognize? Perhaps the most recognizable figure isn't a player but a manager. Five-time MLB All-Star and former Nationals skipper Matt Williams was hired this offseason to lead the KBO's most storied franchise, the Kia Tigers. As for the players, every KBO team is allowed a maximum of three foreigners. Who else is worth watching? OF Baek-Ho Kang, KT Wiz. A budding star at 20, he hit .336/.416/.495 and boasts one of the highest leg kicks of any batter in the league. 
2020-05-01	WASHINGTON ??More than 200 countries and territories have reported coronavirus cases within their borders. One unlikely exception: North Korea, which claims to have had zero infections despite its 880-mile border with China, where the virus first emerged before spreading across the globe. "It's a near impossibility for them not to have cases," said Jung H. Pak, a former CIA analyst and North Korea expert with the Brookings Institution, a Washington think tank. China is North Korea's biggest trading partner, accounting for as much as 95% of the country's reported imports, according to 38 North, a website that tracks developments inside the so-called Hermit Kingdom. "It is puzzling to see how a country that shares such close trading ties (albeit surreptitiously) with China, where the virus had its origin, has remained immune to such a pandemic," two Asia experts, Jagannath Panda and Jina Kim, wrote in an analysis Tuesday for 38 North. Indeed, Pak and other experts say there's evidence of at least a small-scale COVID-19 outbreak in North Korea, a country where much of the population is already in poor health, the economy is crippled and the health system is abysmal. North Korea's assertion that it is coronavirus-free comes amid growing speculation about the health of North Korea's leader Kim Jong Un, fueled by his absence from a major national celebration in April. South Korean officials have disputed reports that Kim is ill, and on Tuesday, one government minister said Kim may be isolating himself to avoid coronavirus infection. The true picture of how widespread COVID-19 is inside North Korea will probably never be clear. North Korea is one of the world's most secretive, repressive and authoritarian countries in the world, and the regime's propaganda machine controls the flow of information. One Japanese newspaper reported on March 29 that more than 100 North Korean soldiers have died of suspected COVID-19 infection since February. In an April 22 story, NK News, which reports on North Korea, described "panic buying" in grocery stores, with a rush to snap up staples like flour and sugar. An April 18 Radio Free Asia story said North Korean officials had informed local citizens of coronavirus cases in the capital city of Pyongyang, as well as in two provinces in the northeast and southwest parts of the country. "It's hard to believe there weren't cases in between" those three locations, said Bruce Klingner, an ex-CIA deputy division chief for Korea who is now with the Heritage Foundation, another Washington think tank. Klingner said the scope of infections may be limited ??a conclusion he based in part on the lack of grisly indicators, such as satellite images of mass graves. 
2020-04-30	WASHINGTON ??Dr. Anthony Fauci is cited most often as the official Americans rely on for information regarding the coronavirus pandemic, according to a new study. The study released Wednesday found Fauci, the director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, was chosen by 45% of those surveyed, while participants' "own state's governor" was cited by 35%, and President Donald Trump by 20%. The study was conducted by the Center for the Digital Future at the USC Annenberg School for Communication and Journalism and the Interactive Advertising Bureau. Fauci, a member of the White House's Coronavirus Task Force, has a long government career that spans to the Lyndon Johnson administration. The 79-year-old doctor has been one of the most high-profile members of Trump's response to the coronavirus, earning praise and widespread recognition. Jeffrey Cole, director of the Center for the Digital Future, said Americans trust in Fauci may come from this experience, as well as his "clear manner." "If ever there was a crisis where we look to an expert, it is this one where literally our lives can be saved or lost by the need for good information," Cole said. "This is a situation where we need a medical expert, particularly one who has been a leader in infectious diseases for 40 years." The actions by local and state governments were rated higher at 54% than the federal response, which 39% of respondents rated as poor. The White House has been criticized for its slow response to the pandemic, shortages in personal protective gear, and lack of widespread testing. The administration and governors have often clashed over the response to COVID-19. Maryland Gov. Larry Hogan, a Republican, has implored the federal government to help states increase their capacity to test for the virus. His fellow governors have insisted they lack the kits and equipment needed to conduct the tests. He also announced Maryland had purchased 500,000 coronavirus tests from South Korea. Govs. Andrew Cuomo of New York and Gretchen Whitmer of Michigan, both Democrats, have seen high approval ratings as their states have been particularly hard hit by the disease. Under a blueprint unveiledMonday designed to help states expand testing and rapid response programs as governors weigh gradually lifting stay-at-home orders, the Trump administration said it would send each state enough tests to screen at least 2% of their residents. Critics say that is too low. A new USA TODAY/Suffolk University Poll similarly found that Americans by double-digit margins said the federal government is doing too little to deal with the health and economic repercussions of coronavirus. Additionally, Trump's frequent briefings have often overshadowed the administration's daily coronavirus message. There have also been reports that the White House is looking to scale back the news conferences. "It is clear to everyone, including leaders of the Republican Party, that after the first week or so, the president's press conferences have been counterproductive to his approval," said Cole, adding that what Americans "wanted was an engaged president demonstrating decisive leadership on the coronavirus. After a week or so, people saw that was not coming out of the briefings." "Historians will look at the briefings with huge interest and a public stuck at home and hungry for information, as one of the greatest lost opportunities in the history of the Presidency," Cole said. Poll respondents who identified politically as "very conservative" depended on Trump the most, by 53%, while less than a majority of those who identified as different political affiliations relied on the president. Cole described how Trump could gain the trust of more American citizens, including allowing medical experts more camera time at the White House briefings, putting aside partisan rhetoric, and looking at the tone as some of his predecessors during crises. "What is different with regard to the pandemic is the low number for trust for the president. In times of crisis, we have historically looked to the President, any President, as the leader to guide us through. Trump's number's are remarkably low," Cole continued. The findings from this study are based on an online survey conducted during the week of April 6, using a sample of 1,000 respondents ages 18 and older from all 50 states and the District of Colombia from an online panel. The margin of error is plus or minus 3 percentage points. Contributing: Michael Collins, Courtney Subramanian, David Jackson 
2020-04-28	There are nights New York Mets bench coach Hensley "Bam Bam" Meulens can barely stay awake at the dinner table. There are mornings his body aches when getting out of bed. His hands are raw, his feet are calloused, but Monday was a new day, a new challenge, inspiring new hope. Meulens the first native of Curacao to reach the major leagues, spending eight years in the New York Yankees organization and hitting 330 homers in the U.S., Japan, South Korea and Mexico, now is embarking on the greatest challenge of his life. He is trying to protect and preserve his homeland, the proud island where he was born 52 years ago, raised and never left. "We have never had a disaster or catastrophe that has wiped out the economy like this has,'' Meulens tells USA TODAY. "This is a pretty lovely place to be, but now it's so hard because you're seeing so much suffering. We rely on tourism, and with no tourists, people are not getting paid. So they have no place to go, and with no money, they have no food on their own tables. "It's so difficult to watch. People who were proud and providing for their families now need our help. They are embarrassed it has come to this, but they have no choice because they have to eat." Meulens is not permitted to leave his home on Sundays because of government regulations brought on by the COVID-19 pandemic, and can drive his car only on Mondays and Thursdays. But that hasn't deterred him from working at the Voedselbank Curacao, a food bank where he prepares meals for unemployed tourism workers. He wakes up by 7 every morning, helps his wife home-school their three children, ages 6 to 10, and heads to the food bank, where he works with volunteers to stuff groceries and necessities into bags before delivering them to families. They are preparing 1,500 meals a day, with hopes of reaching 10,000, and on Monday started delivering pre-cooked meals to families without gas and electricity. "We can't cater to all of them,'' says Meulens, who was knighted by his native land in 2012 for meritorious service, "but we're helping out the best we can. The food bank is doing a great job. We just have to make sure people take care of their health.'' Curacao, the Dutch island of about 160,000 residents just north of the Venezuelan coast, has imposed harsh restrictions to control the spread of the coronavirus. Officials started by prohibiting people from leaving their homes with the exception of 6 a.m. to 9 a.m., and 5 p.m., to 7 p.m., before recently relaxing those rules. The strict curfew has worked. There have been only 16 positive COVID-19 cases, with one fatality. "People are going crazy, but we just have to be careful," Meulens says. "Even now, you can't even be on the streets after 9 at night. Roadblocks are everywhere. Cops and military are watching. If you're on the streets, you will be arrested.'' Twice a day there are updates, first from Prime Minister Eugene Rhuggenaath at 11:30 a.m., and then from medical experts at 8 p.m. And every day they pray normalcy is around the corner. "I think we're out of the woods with the virus,'' Meulens says, "but people are scared. They need businesses to open. We need tourism to come back. I think it's going to take a while before the let the tourists to come back in.'' The most beautiful sight of all, Meulens says, will be the day cruise ships are again sailing, stopping in Willemstad, Curacao to unload thousands of tourists. The shops, restaurants and hotels will be bustling with people again. There will be music. The beautiful island of Curacao will be alive. But for now, there is only darkness, and the vacant looks of despair among its citizens, with only grocery stores, pharmacies and gas stations staying open. The baseball fields, which have produced the likes of current Major League Baseball stars Didi Gregorius of the Philadelphia Phillies, Kenley Jansen of the Los Angeles Dodgers, Jonathan Schoop of the Detroit Tigers, Andrelton Simmons of the Los Angeles Angels and Ozzie Albies of the Atlanta Braves, are vacant. "It's just like baseball,'' Meulens says, "everybody is itching to get back. But no one knows when we will play again. We stay in touch with Zoom calls with the front office and coaching staff once a week. We keep in touch with the players, making sure we care about their well-being, and that they're staying active. "But the unknown is so tough on everyone.'' In the meantime, Meulens puts on his mask each day, goes to the food bank, stuffs hundreds of bags with food and supplies and makes door-to-door deliveries before heading home to see his family. "Just like baseball,'' Meulens says, "we are going to get through this. I know we will. We just have to do everything we can to help each other so that when we do come back, this will make us stronger than ever before. "But it's so quiet on the streets right now. The restaurants. The beaches. The baseball fields. Everything. We have to have faith we can hear and feel joy again, loud than ever.'' Voedselbank Curacao, the food bank where Meulens works, is accepting donations through Maduro & Curiel's Bank. They can also be contacted at curacaovoedselbank@gmail.com. 
2020-04-27	GAYLE KING: The World Health Organization warns there is no evidence that people who've-- people who have recovered, rather, from the coronavirus are protected from a second infection. South Korea's CDC says that two hundred and sixty-eight patients have retested positive after it was thought they had recovered. So now, that's raising some very troubling questions about whether this virus can be reactivated. Senior medical correspondent, that's Doctor Tara Narula, shows us why the answer could be critically important. (Begin VT) LISA MERCK: It just felt like at times somebody was like stabbing me with an ice pick. DR. TARA NARULA (CBS News Senior Medical Correspondent): Colorado nurse practitioner Lisa Merck has been documenting her coronavirus journey since she first tested positive in March. LISA MERCK (internet video): There's a stigma I feel. DR. TARA NARULA: As a health care worker, Merck gets repeat tests. WOMAN #1: Do you want to tip your head up? DR. TARA NARULA: So she knows when she can safely return to work. On day twenty-one of isolation, she got good news. WOMAN #2 (internet video): Your test was negative. DR. TARA NARULA: But just seven days later, she got a retest and was shocked at the results. LISA MERCK (internet video): This is really scary to me. DR. TARA NARULA: Merck was once again positive for COVID-19. LISA MERCK: It's really confusing. It's very frustrating. DR. TARA NARULA: Do you feel like you got infected twice with coronavirus? Or do you feel like that test that came back negative was a false negative? LISA MERCK: I feel like the test that came back was a false negative. I mean, there's no way to tell. DR. TARA NARULA: Viral PCR tests based on nose and throat swabs like these are reliable about sixty to ninety percent of the time depending on the test. Can people get COVID twice? DR. STANLEY PERLMAN: So, I don't think we know the answer to that yet. DR. TARA NARULA: Doctor Stanley Perlman, a professor at the University of Iowa, has been studying coronaviruses like SARS and MERS for nearly forty years. DR. STANLEY PERLMAN: Fifty percent of people or so who had a SARS infection actually still have antibodies now, which is seventeen years later. And so that would tell you maybe most of them are protected against SARS again. For MERS, the amount of antibody seems to have declined fairly rapidly. If you have mild disease, you have severe disease, it lasts much longer. DR. TARA NARULA: Just like with MERS, Doctor Perlman believes more severe COVID-19 symptoms may mean longer lasting immunity. DR. STANLEY PERLMAN: So, this disease we think that you will be protected at least for some amount of time, especially if you had pneumonia. If you have only the upper airway infection, you may get infected again. DR. TARA NARULA: Perlman says the good news is that COVID-19 is not mutating quickly. DR. STANLEY PERLMAN: So this means that making a vaccine is more feasible because the virus isn't changing. DR. TARA NARULA: What do you make of the Korean CDC saying that coronavirus may, in fact, be reactivating in people who they initially thought were cured? DR. STANLEY PERLMAN: Yeah. The question is whether there really is reactivation or its low-level infection that was not detected for a period of time and now is detected. DR. TARA NARULA: Martin Hirsch of Massachusetts General Hospital agrees. He says genetics and several other factors affect immune response. MARTIN HIRSCH: Younger people, healthy people without any underlying conditions are the most likely to develop prolonged antibodies. DR. TARA NARULA: With COVID-19, the World Health Organization says we need more evidence about how effective the antibodies are and how long immunity will last. When we're talking about this idea of potentially getting infected for a second time, what time frame would sound reasonable to you for that to make sense? MARTIN HIRSCH: I think those people who test positive, then negative, and then positive within a few days or a few weeks are almost certainly not reinfected. I think if you go beyond that, a few months, a few years, then you can start talking about reinfection. DR. TARA NARULA: What is your biggest fear? (End VT) GAYLE KING: Lisa is right, Tara. Tara joins us now. Lisa is right when she says it is confusing. Help us understand, how could it be that you can have the antibodies and not be immune to the coronavirus? DR. TARA NARULA: It's definitely confusing, and a lot of people equate the two terms. But antibody is not synonymous with immunity. Antibody just tells you that you've been infected before. Immunity is really this more complex idea. It's a continuum. And it depends on several things. It depends on the number of antibodies you produce, the type of antibodies you produce. So there are neutralizing antibodies, those are the ones we know that really work most effectively at neutralizing the virus. You want more of those. It also depends on other parts of the immune system. We have T-cells that work with the cells that make the antibodies that help. And then we have memory cells, as well, that produce antibody down the road when you see the virus again. GAYLE KING: We are all still learning so much. Thank you, Tara, very much. Ahead, how the growing use of drones by authorities to help fight the coronavirus is now raising privacy concerns. And a reminder, you can always get the morning's news by subscribing to the CBS THIS MORNING podcast. What do you get? Today's top stories in less than twenty minutes. We say around here, that's a deal. Don't we all like a deal? Yeah, we do. We'll be right back. (ANNOUNCEMENTS) END 
2020-04-27	GAYLE KING: The pandemic is dramatically changing our lives every single day. This week, in our series on The New Normal, we'll look at how those changes will affect the way we work, the way we socialize, the way we learn and the way we vote. This morning, the financial impact on businesses and workers, many companies are being forced to adapt. On 60 MINUTES last night, Norah O'Donnell asked General Motors CEO, that's Mary Barra, whether the disease is a threat to GM's long-term future. (Begin VT) MARY BARRA (60 MINUTES): Between the strength of our balance sheet with the steps we've taken in the past, we will get through this, and we will learn a lot of lessons that will apply. NORAH O'DONNELL (60 MINUTES): I mean, what's the long-term prognosis for-- for General Motors if you're not making cars? MARY BARRA: No one knows-- when things are going to get back to what I refer to as a new normal. I've heard others refer to it as the new abnormal. (End VT) GAYLE KING: CBS News business analyst Jill Schlesinger joins us to discuss this. I like that, Jill, the new abnormal. I think that's a good way to hear-- to describe it. So, what are you hearing from business leaders about the ways various industries are going to be impacted by this pandemic? JILL SCHLESINGER (CBS News Business Analyst): There's basically three distinct phases. I'm calling it T3. So triage, what we just have gone through, everyone throughout the old playbook. There was no playbook. How we adapting. It was really done on the fly. The net triage really is important because now many business owners are entering the second phase--trans-- transition. So triage to transition. This is where many companies are saying despite what governors say or mayors say or the President says, they are putting worker safety first, only critical people back in the building. And the third T, transformation. What will a workplace look like? Will there have to be different kind of work spaces out there? How will we reconfiguring how we work? Can more people be home, working remotely? Are we going to suspend business travel or at least alter it? Are we going to change the way we do our conferences? More teleconferencing. So think of it that way. Triage, transition, which is where we are right now, transformation. GAYLE KING: Boy, Jill. I think that applies to all of us, regardless of whether you're in business or not. So what-- JILL SCHLESINGER: Yeah. GAYLE KING: --businesses-- sticking with the business theme, what businesses will be impacted most do you think? And how will they get through? JILL SCHLESINGER: Well, you know, you just heard Mary Barra say something that was really important from the automotive sector which is, look, we've been through terrible times. So you think about big businesses like the airlines, the automotive industries, they have been through terrible times, they will probably survive. Maybe come out different. But we also know that hospitality could change. Will Airbnb be as popular on the other side of this? We don't know. We also understand now that there's going to be a big impact on the oil sector here in the United States. You know, crude oil's down by seventy percent in price this year. So, all these industries I think are going to be very much looking like different types of themselves coming out. ANTHONY MASON: Jill, retail was already struggling before the pandemic hit. So how much dire a situation-- more dire a situation do you think they are going to be in as we all go back to work? JILL SCHLESINGER: I think that the pandemic really accelerates trends that were already in place. And as you said, retail had a terrible year last year. Ninety-three hundred stores were closed, twenty-three retail bankruptcies. We are hearing that potentially this week we will get two big chains filing for bankruptcy. That would be Neiman Marcus and JCPenney. We know that Macy's and the GAP, they are reorganizing right now. What we come out with on the other side, we know there will be a larger alliance on online sales, obviously, Amazon and Walmart and Target, doing a bumper business. Dollar General, as well. I think what's going to be interesting is how we open. The nation's largest retailers are writing together to the governments of all-- governors of all of the states trying to say we need a uniform way to come back into business because we've got operations everywhere. It's very difficult for a retailer to have a patchwork set of rules and procedures coming in this transition process and in that transformation process. GAYLE KING: Jill, the last time I left the house was March 31st. It was to go to CVS to pick up a prescription. If you would have told me that it would have made sense to me to stand six feet away, to lean through a plastic screen, to throw in a credit card and-- and grab my stuff and get out of there, I would have thought that's impossible. But here we are. So what can consumers expect? What changes can we expect as consumers moving forward? JILL SCHLESINGER: You know, someone said something really interesting to me who owns a store. And he said, you know, look, just because I open doesn't mean people will come. I think we don't know what the lasting impact of this virus will be on consumers. In some places, you're seeing people going out and getting haircuts. In other places, we don't know. What I do know is that there will be an impact, it is evolving, we'll be on top of these trends. But most importantly, to stay safe is probably best for the economy, as well. GAYLE KING: Yeah. Stay safe, stay sane. Thank you very much, Jill. Tomorrow, in our look at The New Normal, what grocery stores and other businesses are now doing to monitor people's temperatures as they walk in the door. Plus, how other technology could help as people start to venture out in public. Ahead, TV's Andy Cohen tells us how he wants to help fight off the coronavirus. But government regulations won't let him do that. You're watching CBS THIS MORNING. We thank you for that. We'll be right back. (ANNOUNCEMENTS) GAYLE KING: A Michigan couple quarantined with the coronavirus had to wait nearly three weeks to meet their newborn twins. Jennifer and Andrew Laubach met their sons for the very first time last Thursday. This is nice. Little Mitchell and Maksim were born eight weeks early. In the weeks leading up to their births, both Jennifer and Andrea (sic) experienced symptoms of the virus. The night Jennifer went into labor, doctor called to say Andrea (sic) tested positive and could not go with her to the hospital. So Jennifer was forced to drive a half hour to the hospital by herself, yikes, leaving her husband behind. JENNIFER LAUBACH: It was heartbreaking because I didn't know if I was like-- I was fearful for his life. I did not know if I was going to see him again. ANDREW LAUBACH: Enjoy each moment that you have because you don't know what the future will hold. GAYLE KING: You sure don't. The couple and both babies are doing okay. So, Anthony, the circle of life continues. That's great. ANTHONY MASON: Yeah. And so-- and so hard for those parents, but so glad they got to see their-- (ANNOUNCEMENTS) *****************************************************************************(8:30 AM, EDT) TONY DOKOUPIL: Welcome back to CBS THIS MORNING. It is that time to bring you some of the stories that are Talk of the Table this morning. Since we're coming to you from home, we're going to share a story that each of us are talking about in our homes, and we'd like to talk about now with each other and with all of you at home. And Anthony is going first. ANTHONY MASON: I am. I'm starting off. And I'm starting off about the Metropolitan Opera. The Metropolitan Opera House in New York City has been closed since last month because of the pandemic, of course. On Saturday, the famous opera company livestreamed an at-home gala. Take a look at this. (Crowd performing) (Renee Fleming singing) ANTHONY MASON: Absolutely beautiful. Some of the biggest names in the opera performed from their homes around the world. It was also I think the biggest Zoom call I've ever seen. I-- you know, I walk by-- the Metropolitan Opera is at Lincoln Center, which I love walking by. I used to walk home past it when we were in the office still. I went by there yesterday morning early on my way to picking up some cinnamon buns, actually. And this is the picture I took. It looks very forlorn. They have this little sign that says, "We'll be back after a short intermission." I posted it on Instagram yesterday because it kind of-- it made me hopeful and sad at the same time which is so often the feeling I get walking around the city right now. Gayle. GAYLE KING: I know. I'm going to stick with the hopeful part. I had never seen that before, Anthony. That was beautiful. Mine is about Saturday Night Live. These guys stay hopeful. They also had a new at-home episode on Saturday, a Hollywood superstar. This is big, opened the show, portraying a very familiar doctor. Guess, who it is? Take a look. BRAD PITT: Good evening. I'm Doctor Anthony Fauci. First, I'd like to thank all the older women in America who have sent me supportive, inspiring, and sometimes graphic e-mails. And to the real Doctor Fauci, thank you for your calm and your clarity in this unnerving time. And thank you to the medical workers, first responders and their families for being on the front line. And now-- GAYLE KING: Brad was so good. That, of course, is Brad Pitt. Doctor Anthony Fauci recently joked that he wanted Brad Pitt to play him on SNL. Lorne Michaels and team heard that and they came up with something that was very creative, very clever. This was their second quarantine show. But, Tony, I really love the line from Doctor Fauci saying, "to the women who have sent me some-- the older women who sometimes sent me some graphic e-mails." You can only picture what that could mean. I just think that's hilarious, even though it's a joke. TONY DOKOUPIL: Well, yeah. You know, I have a feeling my mother is-- is among the e-mailers, but I haven't inquired. I'm going to leave it at that. GAYLE KING: Yes. TONY DOKOUPIL: All right. So, as we know-- as we know, sports are on hold. They are on a hiatus or postponed. We're all looking for something to watch. Sportscasters are also looking for things to watch. And there's one in particular, a Scottish sportscaster who's been doing play-by-play of things around his house. He did one way back with his two dogs, Olive and Mabel. And you may have missed the follow-up. I found it recently, and I enjoyed it so much. I want to play it for all of you. Take a look. ANDREW COTTER: Well, how fitting that it should come down to these two. Olive in her familiar black, five-times the champion, Mabel the rising star, winner last year. You can see how excited they are, but also feel the tension. And now they go. Olive away first, but a problem with Mabel's bowl. That might cost her now, having to play catch up. Both settling quickly into a rhythm. You can see the contrast in styles: Mabel, heavy tail use-- TONY DOKOUPIL: Now Andrew Cotter works for the BBC, and he usually does golf and rowing. I think sailing also. None of those things are going on right now, Andrew. You've done two installments of the dog Olympics. Please, I love them, we all love them. Bring us more. Where is the doubleheader match-up we all need right now? Please. Anthony. ANTHONY MASON: Yeah. GAYLE KING: Yes. Keep it coming. ANTHONY MASON: Yeah. I can't get enough of those, Tony. They are really-- they are fabulous. And-- and considering we can't-- there-- there are no games to watch, it's the best thing we got. All right. North-- turning to some other news now. North Korean Leader Kim Jong-un skipped another holiday over the weekend, adding to rumors he is sick or even dead. The thirty-six-year-old was last seen in public April 11th. South Korea says there are no signs anything is wrong. Jung Pak is a top expert on Kim Jong-un. She worked for the CIA and the National Intelligence Council. Now, she's at the Brookings Institution, a think tank. Her book is called 'Becoming Kim Jong Un: A Former CIA Officer's Insights into North Korea's Enigmatic Young Dictator." Good morning. Thanks for being with us. Let me start off, there-- there have been rumors before about Kim Jong-un. So how seriously do you think we should take these? JUNG PAK (Author, "Becoming Kim Jong Un"): Thank you, Anthony. I would say that there-- yes, Kim has disappeared in the past for a week or two weeks. And in 2014, he disappeared for six weeks. But I think what was interesting about this-- this current disappearance or absence is that he missed one of the most important holidays, and that was April 15th, his father-- his grandfather's birthday. And given that he rests his legacy and his legitimacy on his grandfather, that was certainly a red flag. And we've seen some recent reporting about his absence and-- and so I think that is something to be looking for in the future. ANTHONY MASON: He is-- he is young, he is only thirty-six. But-- but you describe him as an old thirty-six. What do we know about his health exactly? JUNG PAK: Well, we know that he is thirty-- he know-- we know that he is thirty-six. He is obese, and you can see from regime-- just from the regime media itself that he has gained weight over the years, very much so. And the summits of the past two years with President Trump and-- and other regional leaders had the unintended effect of actually showing how out of shape he is. We can hear him wheezing, we can see him sweating, we can see him straining. And without the soft regime filters of state media, we can see that directly for ourselves, how exactly poor his condition is. And, of course, he also has a history of heart disease and diabetes. His grandfather died of a heart attack at the age of eighty-two. His father had a stroke and died three years later-- three years later. And so we have this string of Kim's who have had these types of problems. But at this point, we don't know if he had heart problems or heart surgery or anything of that sort. ANTHONY MASON: The-- the one way the U.S. tries to figure out what's going on in North Korea is by satellite imagery. A satellite image surfaced over the weekend of a train spotted at a coastal resort in North Korea. What would that tell us exactly? JUNG PAK: As with all of the fragmentary information that we-- we've been seeing, the train doesn't tell us whether he is there or whether he is sick or what kind of condition he is in. But as that report suggested, the fact that his train is there lends more weight to the fact that he is-- that he is on the coast. This is one of his favored villas, that's where he can rest and relax. And so you know, that is one other piece of information that he might be in that-- in that region. ANTHONY MASON: You write in your book that that Kim is rational, not suicidal. If there does end up being a transition here, is that likely to shake things up in North Korea? JUNG PAK: You know, some-- Kim's health and any leader's health for that matter is something that the intelligence community and the U.S. government looks at very closely, and especially in a society like North Korea where there's such a personal list of dictatorship in the singular person. And I think that given-- given the fact that he holds the reins in terms of the nuclear weapons, the military and the security apparatuses, this is why this is so important and the-- and the world is looking so closely at where Kim might be. And, yes, Kim is very rational. He is-- he is not out to set a nuclear weapon against the United States. And if I were-- if I were him, given the fact that he also went through a compressed grooming process after his father's stroke, that I would have been thinking about a succession process from the very beginning. So given that he is-- that he is rational, I think that the-- we shouldn't anticipate some-- some big conflict to break out. But I think the fact that he has all-- all the reins of power, we have to be very watchful for where he might be and if there's a prolonged leadership struggle or vacuum in North Korea. ANTHONY MASON: Jung Pak, thank you very much. Her book, "Becoming Kim Jong Un," goes on sale tomorrow. TV host Andy Cohen is speaking out against an FDA rule that blocks him from donating blood plasma because of his sexuality. Ahead, we'll talk to the coronavirus survivor about his fight for change. But first, a check of your local weather. (LOCAL WEATHER BREAK) (ANNOUNCEMENTS) GAYLE KING: TV host Andy Cohen is a coronavirus survivor. Now, he is in a new fight over a policy preventing him from helping other patients just because he is gay. FDA guidelines prevent men from donating blood plasma if they've had sex with another man in the past three months. But plasma from survivors may contain antibodies which could help fight the virus. Cohen, as you know, is host of Watch What Happens Live with Andy Cohen, that's how you say it. And he joins us from his home in New York City. Good morning to you, Andy Cohen. Really good to see you. ANDY COHEN (Host and Executive Producer, Watch What Happens Live with Andy Cohen): Hi, my friend. How are you? GAYLE KING: Andy, there was a lot of chatter over the weekend-- hi. I'm really glad to see you're back up and running. There was a lot of chatter over the weekend about this. Many people outraged that you were treated this way. Yet still others say, well, wait a second, there could be a health risk here. What was your response to the government's thanks but no thanks to you? ANDY COHEN: Well, you know, I was disappointed. I-- I've known in the past about-- about the fact that gay men cannot donate blood. But I think we're in an unusual situation right now. This is-- we're in a war against a disease that we don't know a lot about and there's an urgent need for the antibody that is in people like me, who have survived by-- who have survived coronavirus. So I just felt like, you know, blood donations are down over a hundred and fifty thousand-- there are a hundred and fifty thousand less people donating blood right now. So there is an urgent need and a special urgent need for the blood that I have. So I was disappointed. I want to help. I think that the rules should be looked at, again, by the FDA. There are-- there have been great strides in testing for HIV since these rules were enacted. You can get an HIV test in twenty minutes. They, I know, screen the blood again a second time after you donate it to make sure there's not HIV in the blood. So I just think this needs another examination. We're in an unusual moment in time right now. There is a war going on, and we're all being asked to adapt. And I think the FDA should, too. GAYLE KING: No. And that's an important point you make, that the blood is tested. And you get the results back within twenty minutes. Listen, this original ban was enacted, my understanding, in 1983 to prevent potential HIV transmission. And now we're sitting here in 2020. And so it sounds like you're saying we need to re-evaluate these-- ANDY COHEN: Right. GAYLE KING: --it-- it seems archaic at this point for a lot of people. ANDY COHEN: It does. You know, we're all being asked to adapt in so many ways to new things in life. And we're doing it for the greater good as a community. And I think this is something that the FDA should take a look at and say, how can we move forward? This is an FDA thing, by the way. It's not a Red Cross thing, it's not the hospital that I applied to give my blood to. It all comes to the FDA. GAYLE KING: Well, the FDA has told us in a statement, quote, "They're working on a pilot study with two thousand men to determine whether an individual risk assessment questionnaire would be as effective as a current policy." Does that make sense to you? ANDY COHEN: Listen, if they are working on something that makes me happy. I don't know how long that's going to take. I just want to give my blood. You know what I mean? I want to help. GAYLE KING: Yeah. ANDY COHEN: And so that's-- that's what I'm looking to do. And that's why I'm talking about this, by the way. GAYLE KING: The people you want to help. ANDY COHEN: Blood donations are down. GAYLE KING: And I think-- ANDY COHEN: By the way, if you're someone who's watching and you survived coronavirus, go give blood. It-- it is needed and appreciated. GAYLE KING: And that's why you're speaking up, Andy. But I just want to say you look good. Do you feel as good as you look? Because I'm wondering what the experience was like for you. You scared a lot of people, and there are so many different experiences about this. ANDY COHEN: There are. I had a great friend who had coronavirus, and he was about four days ahead of me in terms of the virus working its way through his system. So I was talking to him every day and finding out where he was. I had a less severe case than he did, but I feel good. I feel strong. And now, I'm just trying to help and pitch in and do what I can just as a citizen. GAYLE KING: Well, I know I would think part of the hardest part would be being separated from your favorite son, Benjamin, who, by the way, was voted cutest baby of all time in People magazine. Did you see that? So, how did you navigate that? Because you two were in the same house. ANDY COHEN: I sure did. Cutest Baby Alive, Gayle. Cutest Baby Alive. GAYLE KING: Yeah. I heard. I heard. How did you navigate with him in the same house? How did you work that out? ANDY COHEN: It stunk, man. He was down the hall. I was in my room basically shut out from civilization for thirteen days. And, you know, it was a killer. I could hear him, I was watching him on the nanny cam. Thank God, I have an incredible caretaker for him who really did yeoman's work. But it was not-- it was not great, man. Gayle, is that the room that I would stay in if I crashed at your house? GAYLE KING: No. You would stay in the guest room. I actually have a guest room with a separate bathroom. You would be well taken care of, Andy. ANDY COHEN: Whoo. GAYLE KING: Before we go, how are you finding happiness during these times, Andy Cohen? How is it working? How are you doing that? ANDY COHEN: I am finding happiness actually by-- by-- by leaning into hosting Watch What Happens Live from home every night. We're having a great time, and it's making me happy that my staff is employed and engaged, and we are getting to take people's minds off of the serious issues of the day and, like, lean into some fun and cocktails at the end of the night every night on Bravo. GAYLE KING: Andy Cohen, don't ever change. We're glad you're back. We're glad you're healthy. Always good to see you. Thank you very much. We'll be right back. ANDY COHEN: Thank you, Gayle. (ANNOUNCEMENTS) GAYLE KING: Anthony, following up on your nine out of ten how to rate my room, they said nice artwork, good substitute for the obligatory book case. Go you, Anthony Mason. Nine out of ten on Rate My Room. That will do it for-- cMMXX CBS Broadcasting Inc.All Rights Reserved. END 
2020-04-24	WASHINGTON ??President Donald Trump said Tuesday that the United States' coronavirus mortality rate is "one of the lowest of any country in the world." Dr. Deborah Birx, who leads the White House coronavirus task force, echoed the claim at a news briefing, saying the United States had "one of the lowest mortality rates in the entire world." Neither Trump nor Birx cited a specific statistic or study to support their claims, but both used the mortality rate metric as evidence America is making progress in fighting coronavirus. Here's where the U.S. ranks, according to data from John Hopkins University: The U.S. has the 33rd-highest mortality rate, measured as deaths divided by total cases, out of the 134 countries tracked by Johns Hopkins. That means more than 100 countries have lower mortality rates than the U.S., although many of those countries reported comparatively few cases. When compared only to the 10 countries with the most cases, the U.S. ranks as the second-lowest mortality rate as a percentage of total cases. That means eight of those countries hit hardest by the coronavirus have higher mortality rates than the U.S. The U.S. ranks 12th-highest in the world when it comes to deaths per 100,000 people. When mortality is measured per 100,000 people among the 10 countries with the most cases, the U.S. ranks seventh, with Iran, Germany, and China reporting lower numbers of deaths per 100,000 people. Experts said Trump's comments glossed over the fact that under several metrics, the U.S. mortality rate is worse than those of many other countries. However, they cautioned that the lack of testing in the United States could lead to an undercounting of overall COVID-19 cases. If the total number of cases is actually higher, that would mean the current data might be overstating the death rate. As of Wednesday, the United States had a 5.4% mortality rate based on a percentage of overall cases, according to the Johns Hopkins data. With the 33rd-highest rate in the world, the U.S. rate exceeds countries like Canada (4.8%), Portugal (3.6%), and Germany (3.4%). Among those countries with higher death rates are Belgium (14.6%), Italy (13.4%) and the United Kingdom (13.4%). Among those 10 countries hit hardest by the coronavirus, eight countries have a higher mortality rate based on a percentage of overall cases ??with countries like Belgium (14.6%), Italy (13.4%), and France (13.1%) reporting higher mortality rates than the U.S., according to the Johns Hopkins data. Only Germany (3.4%) has a lower mortality rate among those 10 countries. The Department of Health and Human Services did not respond to a request for comment from USA TODAY asking for clarification on the president's comments. Trump made that point in Saturday's coronavirus task force briefing, when he said that "on a per capita basis, our mortality rate is far lower than other nations of Western Europe, with the lone exception of possibly Germany. This includes the UK, Switzerland, Belgium, the Netherlands, Italy, France." The United States has about 13.71 deaths per 100,000 people, or the 12th-highest rate among the 134 in the Hopkins data, meaning only 11 countries have higher mortality measured on a per capita basis. Why death rates in some countries like Germany and South Korea have been lower is still a matter of debate, said Michael Gunn, a professor in immunology at Duke University School of Medicine. Countries like Germany had a "very aggressive testing program," which allowed them to detect coronavirus and institute therapies for patients "before things got bad," Gunn noted. In the United States, "we may just be catching people much later in the disease course," he said. As a result, "no one can say" that the United States has one of the lowest rates in the world, he said. University of California-Irvine Division of Infectious Diseases Chief Donald Forthal told USA TODAY that Trump's statement would be wrong based on current data, but the data was "raw and inaccurate" because of issues with the availability of testing. 
2020-04-23	WASHINGTON ??President Donald Trump said there are plenty of coronavirus tests available, but many governors said they're running short even as states begin to lift their stay-at-home orders. "This is probably the number one problem in America, and has been from the beginning of this crisis, the lack of testing," Maryland Gov. Larry Hogan, a Republican and the chairman of the National Governors Association, said on CNN Sunday. Trump insisted Monday that there was "tremendous capacity" for coronavirus testing at U.S. labs. He said governors such as Hogan needed "to get a little knowledge" about the testing situation. The country's largest private labs said they have plenty of capacity to test samples sent from medical offices and hospitals, but governors said health care providers can't conduct the tests because of a lack of supplies such as swabs and a chemical known as a "reagent" crucial to the process. Public health experts and private and public labs contacted by USA TODAY agreed that a major problem was a shortage of supplies at the testing sites where mucus samples are taken. Wyoming Gov. Mark Gordon, a Republican, said states compete with each other to get more testing supplies, a process he described as "a slog." Concerns over testing escalated as the Trump administration issued guidelines meant to help states ease the temporary social distancing restrictions put in place to slow spread of the coronavirus and reopen their economies. The guidelines call for a three-phase approach: testing, tracing contacts of those infected and, in time, treatment solutions. "It's a perilous set of circumstances trying to figure out how to make this work," Gordon said last week, "and until we've got the testing up to speed ??which has got to be part of the federal government stepping in and helping ??we're just not going to be there." Swab shortages At a briefing, Trump discussed the swab issue, holding one up alongside a Q-Tip he pulled from his jacket pocket. Trump said swabs and reagents are "so easy to get," arguing it was far harder to ramp up production of ventilators. In a tacit acknowledgment of the urgency of producing more swabs, he announced that he would activate wartime powers under the Defense Production Act "to increase swab production in one U.S. facility by over 20 million additional swabs per month." Like other aspects of testing, the shortages are not consistent across the country. Thomas Denny, chief operating officer of the Duke Human Vaccine Institute and a former consultant to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, said his lab has no problems getting the supplies. Ashish Jha, the director of the Harvard Global Health Initiative, blames the federal government for failing to address that unevenness. "Everybody has different sets of problems, and the solution is greater coordination," he said. "So if one state has too many swabs but not enough reagents, and the other state doesn't have enough swabs but plenty of reagents, you can imagine swapping." Instead, Jha said, states got into "bidding wars" for materials, like those that erupted around ventilators and protective equipment. "What's happening is some states that are missing swabs, they're trying to call swab manufacturers," he said. "And then those manufacturers are getting calls from 20 different states." Hospitals go it alone From the beginning, America's stumbling rollout of testing significantly slowed the nation's response. Flawed tests were shipped in February to state and county public health labs nationwide. The nation's vast network of hospital and private commercial labs did not get the Food and Drug Administration's regulatory green light until the end of February. Dr. Dan Hanfling, who advised the Hospital Preparedness Program in the Obama and Trump administrations, noted there were "technical challenges" to developing accurate tests so quickly for a new virus. One challenge, Hanfling said, is that testing was rolled out without an "ironclad guarantee that these tests are reliable" ??a formula for setting expectations too high. "People expect a certain level of testing, and we're just not technologically there yet," he said. By the end of March into April, testing accelerated. The majority of tests were processed by six large commercial lab companies: ARUP, BioReference Laboratories, LabCorp, the Mayo Clinic, Quest Diagnostics and Sonic Healthcare. Soon, those labs faced growing backlogs. On March 25, Quest Diagnostics had 160,000 test orders waiting to be processed, according to documents obtained by CNN. Wendy Bost, senior director of corporate communication at Quest, acknowledged that initially, "the demand outstripped capacity." In frustration, hospitals and state public health labs started going it alone, developing their own tests and processes. Robert Hart, executive vice president and chief medical officer of Ochsner Health in Louisiana, said his state lab was the only place conducting testing, and it got results back within a few days. Then the state was overrun. "The next move was to send them to the Mayo Clinic," Hart said. "Mayo quickly became overrun." Tests waiting to be completed were shuffled around to the University of Washington, then to Quest, which hit the backlog. "We literally were waiting 12, 14, 16 days for test results," Hart said. Hart said Ochsner started doing testing in its own laboratory and has results within a day. The private labs said things have changed. They have room to spare and turn results around quickly. "Our current capacity is greater than the volume we are currently receiving, and we have no backlog," said Mike Geller, spokesperson for LabCorp. "Based on current testing volumes, we are now able to deliver test results on average between one to two days from the date of specimen pick up." Louise Serio, a spokesperson for the American Clinical Laboratory Association, said the group's members, which include Quest and LabCorp, reached out to hospitals and other health care providers to communicate the excess capacity. She said member labs have enough testing supplies to meet demand, but if they are hit with double or triple the demand for testing, that would be an issue for them as well. "What we're focused on for expanding our capacity," Serio said, "is making sure we have all of the supplies necessary and predictable access to those supplies." Shipment from South Korea The dispute between Trump and the states over testing came to a head this week when Hogan, the Maryland governor, announced he had secured 500,000 coronavirus tests from South Korea. Later that day, Trump held up a list at his daily briefing of what he said were 5,000 labs nationwide that are prepared to accept the tests. Asked by USA TODAY Tuesday for a copy of the list, the White House declined to provide it. Hogan tweeted that he was "grateful" to Trump for the list of labs. Both Democratic and Republican governors urged the Trump administration to do more to help increase the availability of testing supplies. "We have a worldwide shortage of some of the materials that go into this. We really need help," Ohio Gov. Mike DeWine, a Republican, told "Meet the Press" on Sunday. "I could probably double ??maybe even triple ??testing in Ohio virtually overnight if the FDA would prioritize companies that are putting a slightly different formula together for the extraction reagent kit." Michigan Gov. Gretchen Whitmer, a Democrat, said her state could handle two or three times the amount of testing but lacks the swabs and reagents needed to process the tests. "We could, if we had all the supplies we needed, do 11,300 tests a day working with our current capacity," she said Monday. "The reality is that we're about half of that." In a phone call between Vice President Mike Pence and governors Monday, Whitmer said the plea for the federal administration to use the Defense Production Act to compel production of the supplies was loud and clear. "We talked quite a bit about the lack of the critical supplies for testing," she said, adding that testing needs to be much broader for states to feel confident in lifting their stay-at-home orders. "We're all needing swabs. We're all needing reagents," Whitmer said. Contributing: John Fritze, Kathleen Gray, Todd Spangler, Ken Alltucker, USA TODAY Network; The Associated Press 
2020-04-23	A dozen Iranian speed boats brazenly swarm U.S. warships in the Persian Gulf. A Russian fighter jet buzzes a U.S. Navy surveillance plane flying over the Mediterranean Sea. North Korea fires a barrage of missiles launched from the air and ground. All the incidents took place in mid-April. All were mounted by some of America's top adversaries. As coronavirus stalks the globe, sapping attention, budgets and government personnel at home and abroad, U.S. adversaries from Moscow to Pyongyang are flexing their muscles and testing U.S. resolve. U.S. defense and national security officials said that although America remains on guard for potential threats as it works to overcome the coronavirus, they have not detected extraordinary reasons to sound the alarm. President Donald Trump sent out a warning Wednesday on Twitter: "I have instructed the United States Navy to shoot down and destroy any and all Iranian gunboats if they harass our ships at sea." He offered no additional context. Defense Secretary Mark Esper told NBC's "Today" last week that "it's hard to say" whether the Iranian and Russian episodes reflected efforts to probe for U.S. vulnerability amid the COVID-19 pandemic that has sickened more than 826,000 Americans. No Americans were killed or injured as a result of the Iranian, Russian and North Korean actions. National security analysts said that the timing of these incidents may not be coincidental but that there is little evidence that America's global opponents are capitalizing on conditions created by the pandemic. America's enemies "aren't necessarily doing anything different or unusual because of coronavirus," said Joseph Cirincione, president of Ploughshares Fund, a Washington-based global security foundation. "And this thing cuts both ways: All militaries are concerned about others' perception of them during a time of crisis. "Is the timing suspicious? Maybe. Internal dynamics can also explain these incidents." On April 15, when Iranian Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps Navy boats darted past U.S. warships conducting exercises in international waters in the northern Persian Gulf it was the latest example of routine Iranian harassment toward U.S. vessels that has intensified since the Trump administration exited a nuclear deal with Tehran. That same day, a Russian SU-35 fighter jet came within 25 feet of a U.S. Navy P-8A Poseidon surveillance plane flying in international airspace, putting the pilots and crew at risk, according to the U.S. Navy. Air Force Gen. Tod Wolters, NATO's supreme allied commander in Europe, characterized the Russian pilot's maneuver, including a pass in which he flew upside down, as unprofessional as opposed to incitement. That, too, was just the most recent incident in a string of encounters between Russian and U.S. jets that raised concerns over the risk of midair collisions over European airspace. A report in 2014 from the European Leadership Network, a London-based think tank, found at least 40 examples that year of dangerous incidents involving Russian and Western militaries in "violations of national airspace, emergency scrambles, narrowly avoided mid-air collisions and close encounters at sea." North Korea's salvo of suspected cruise missiles toward the Sea of Japan on April 14 was among the most high-profile missile tests Pyongyang has conducted since nuclear negotiations with the Trump administration stalled. The tests came on the eve of a North Korean state anniversary and parliamentary elections in neighboring South Korea. Shea Cotton, a nuclear security expert at the James Martin Center for Nonproliferation Studies at the Middlebury Institute of International Studies, warned a week earlier in a column for Defense News that North Korea is "signaling this will be its busiest year of missile testing yet." Cotton noted that Kim Jong Un's regime conducted nine missile tests in March, the most in a single month recorded in his research institute's database. Cirincione said he did not think the U.S. military was more at risk as the Pentagon responds domestically and overseas to the COVID-19 health crisis despite the idling of the USS Theodore Roosevelt, a nuclear-powered aircraft carrier docked in Guam, that has been sidelined because hundreds of its sailors tested positive for the disease. "We have such an overcapacity of military," he said. "Bases all over the world and an alliance system like no other. Is anybody pressing us at the minute? China or the Russians or even the Islamic State terror group? I just don't see it." About 3,500 active-duty U.S. military personnel, out of approximately 1.3 million, have tested positive for coronavirus, according to the Defense Department. A U.S. State Department report published this month said China might be secretly pushing ahead with low-level underground nuclear tests despite its claims that it strictly adheres to an international moratorium on all nuclear tests. Although Cirincione said unproven allegations that Beijing carries out low-intensity nuclear tests have been "percolating" for many years and nothing indicates China is exploiting a period of U.S. weakness. China, after all, is still grappling with COVID-19 ??albeit at a later stage. Trita Parsi, executive vice president of the Quincy Institute for Responsible Statecraft, a think tank in Washington, said that before coronavirus fully took hold in the USA, the Trump administration, not Iran, appeared to view the outbreak as an opportunity to gain advantage by "amplifying" its maximum pressure strategy. "Iran has all of these sanctions on it, and on top of it, you have an epidemic that makes it more likely Iran's regime will collapse. As a result, any sanctions relief would be counterproductive," Parsi said, summarizing how he said U.S. officials such as Secretary of State Mike Pompeo approached the Iran issue when Tehran was seeing hundreds of COVID-19 deaths a day and the USA had relatively few. "The politics of the outbreak are churning against the backdrop of wider U.S.-Iran animosity that has grown steadily since Tehran decided in May 2019 to counter U.S. 'maximum pressure' with 'maximum resistance,' " the International Crisis Group, a Washington-based think tank, wrote in a research paper in early April. On the same day that Moscow's fighter jet buzzed a U.S. Navy surveillance plane in the Mediterranean Sea, Russia's military tested a series of missiles that U.S. Space Command Gen. Jay Raymond said were capable of "destroying" U.S. satellites in low orbit. On April 22, Iran launched what it described as its first military satellite into orbit, a move that could support its long-range ballistic missile program. Tehran's missiles underpin part of the Trump administration's tensions with Iran because Washington is concerned they could carry nuclear weapons.  The COVID-19 pandemic has forced the Pentagon to shift its footing to remain ready to fight, and troop rotations and some routine logistical operations have been paused. On April 14, Army Gen. Mark Milley, the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, said sailors aboard the USS Harry Truman saw their deployment extended to account for the USS Theodore Roosevelt's unscheduled sick time in Guam. The U.S. Air Force flexed its muscles with an "Elephant Walk" in which B-52 bombers and other jets taxied on the runway at Guam's Andersen Air Force base. The "Elephant Walk" on April 13 was conducted with joint assets across Guam to showcase U.S. military readiness and "the ability to generate combat airpower at a moment's notice to ensure regional stability throughout the Indo-Pacific," Air Force Lt. Col. Megan Schafer, a spokeswoman for Pacific Air Forces, said in an email. For various reasons, America's adversaries are also more potentially imperiled. In North Korea, there are unconfirmed reports Kim Jong Un may be gravely ill after heart surgery. The North Korean leader's health has long been a focus of speculation. He's a heavy smoker and suffers from obesity. South Korea's government downplayed the reports. If Kim did die, it could put the nuclear-armed and isolated country in a fraught security posture with the United States as it dealt with a succession battle and perhaps COVID-19. North Korea has denied any infections. More than 10% of Iran's lawmakers have fallen ill with coronavirus, far more than anywhere else. The disease has not spared top officials, including its senior vice president, Cabinet ministers, Revolutionary Guard members and Health Ministry officials. Several Iran lawmakers died from COVID-19. One area where the COVID-19 field may be more level is terrorism, according to Colin Clarke, a security expert at the Soufan Center, a New York-based think tank. Clarke said coronavirus led the United States, France and other countries to withdraw elite forces, mainly trainers, helping combat militant groups around the world, especially in West Africa. But "the militants themselves are also vulnerable. It's not like they can just continue life as usual while the security forces are hampered," he said. "They may use this period to be more reckless, but they are also going to get sick." 
2020-04-22	South Korea's government said Tuesday it had no information to corroborate a media report suggesting that Washington is monitoring intelligence indicating North Korea's leader was gravely ill after he reportedly underwent heart surgery this month. Seoul has not detected any unusual activity or signs coming from Pyongyang about Kim Jong Un's health, according to Kang Min-seok, a spokesman for the Blue House, the office and residence of South Korea President Moon Jae-in. South Korea's statement comes after a CNN report, citing an unnamed U.S. official "with direct knowledge" of the matter, said the U.S. is keeping an eye on intelligence suggesting that the North Korean leader's health was in "grave danger." A second official cited by CNN said the intelligence about Kim's health was credible. The official acknowledged it was hard to assess how seriously ill he may be. The North Korean leader's health has long been a focus of speculation. He's a heavy smoker and is obese. However, North Korea is one of the world's most secretive nations and information about its leader is extremely difficult to verify. Even his age is a matter of dispute, although most analysts think he's probably 36. CNN's report late Monday followed a story in a Seoul-based website named Daily NK run by North Korean defectors. It reported that the North Korean leader had undergone heart surgery on April 12 and is recuperating at a villa outside the capital, Pyongyang. Daily NK's story is based on a single source inside North Korea. Media reports about North Korea and its leadership have previously turned out to be inaccurate. Speculation about Kim Jong Un's health has increased in recent days partly because he skipped a recent commemoration connected to the nation's founding. North Korean state media has not addressed Kim's health. The state-run Korean Central News Agency released a photo of him, dated April 11, which it said shows Kim attending a politburo meeting of the ruling Workers' Party of Korea in Pyongyang. However, neither the content nor the date of the photo could be independently verified. North Korea is one of only a handful of nations to refuse to report data about coronavirus infections. Negotiations between Washington and Pyongyang aimed at dismantling North Korea's nuclear and ballistic missile programs have stalled amid the Trump administration's refusal to ease crippling sanctions on North Korea. In March, Kim Jong Un's regime conducted nine missile tests, the most in a single month recorded in a database run by the James Martin Center for Nonproliferation Studies at the Middlebury Institute of International Studies. This month, North Korea launched back-to-back missiles, fired from the ground and fighter jets that splashed down into waters off the coast of Japan. The missiles were fired on the eve of the state anniversary celebrations that Kim Jong Un did not attend in person. 
2020-04-21	ANTHONY MASON: The coronavirus is forcing meat companies that feed our country to close processing plants. Nearly seven hundred and fifty employees are infected from the now shuttered Smithfield plant in South Dakota. And yesterday, a pork processing plant in Minnesota shutdown. It's tied to at least thirty-three cases there. These facilities are contributing to a spike in cases across several Midwestern states. And our Adriana Diaz shows us how this is affecting the whole industry. (Begin VT) ADRIANA DIAZ (CBS News Correspondent): Coronavirus cases in Iowa's Black Hawk County have doubled in recent days to three hundred and fifty-six. And public health officials say ninety percent traced back to employees at this Tyson meat-packing plant. TONY THOMPSON: The hundred and thirty-two thousand citizens of Black Hawk County are now the victims of apathy of the absences of protocol, of the lethargy in response from corporate Tyson. ADRIANA DIAZ: Sheriff Tony Thompson toured the plant earlier this month. He says the facility should close for deep cleaning and better screen its employees. TONY THOMPSON: The line moves so quickly that they work elbow to elbow. They have about a thirty-six-inch workspace and they are just stacked on top of each other. ADRIANA DIAZ: Tyson says it since made changes companywide requiring employees to wear face coverings and installing dividers on production lines. HECTOR GONZALES: We've worked diligently to protect our team members by taking worker temperatures at the start of each shift and identifying symptomatic team members. ADRIANA DIAZ: Their outbreak is not an isolated case. CBS News has confirmed COVID cases in at least seventeen meat processing plants in ten states. Thirteen of which have temporarily closed or operating at reduced capacity. But the closures come too late for some families. Seventy-eight-year-old Saul Sanchez, who worked at the now closed JBS meat-packing plant in Colorado, died from coronavirus. Augustin Rodriguez, an employee at the Smithfield Foods pork processing plant in South Dakota, also succumbed to the virus. Another Smithfield worker who is infected and asked not to be named told us he wasn't given a facemask until three weeks after the plant's first case. He now fears for his pregnant wife. MAN: Yeah. I'm really kind of-- I just worry about my wife and my baby. ADRIANA DIAZ: Despite the outbreaks, the governor of Iowa says shutting down plants would hurt farmers and the national food supply chain. KIM REYNOLDS: We are the larger hog producer in the country. And it would be devastating, not only for the food supply but for the cost of food going forward. ADRIANA DIAZ: Ben Lilliston, who helps run the Institute for Agriculture and Trade Policy, says companies can reduce production to make the plant safer for employees. BEN LILLISTON: Regularly in the U.S., we produce way more than we can consume. Nearly a third of U.S. pork production is for export. So we can slow down our production, protect our workers, make sure there's enough meat for U.S. consumers. (End VT) ADRIANA DIAZ: We reached out to Smithfield Foods to find out when exactly they started providing masks to their employees, but we haven't heard back. Now both Iowa and South Dakota have not issued state sanction stay-at-home orders, even though the efforts at these facilities are already impacting communities. We also want to note that the CDC says that there's currently no evidence that coronavirus can spread through food. Tony. TONY DOKOUPIL: As so many of us work from home, a reminder, that many jobs cannot be done from your home. Adriana, thank you very much. Ahead, Vlad Duthiers looks at the stories you'll be talking about today. But first, it is seven forty-two, time to check your local weather. (LOCAL WEATHER BREAK) (ANNOUNCEMENTS) TONY DOKOUPIL: Officials in Spain have announced that the running of the bulls is canceled this year, too dangerous it turns out in the era of coronavirus. Let that sink in for a moment. But our bull, Mister Vladimir Duthiers, he is still running every morning and that run begins right now with What to Watch. VLADIMIR DUTHIERS: Busy signals. ANTHONY MASON: Oh, we're having audio problems. TONY DOKOUPIL: What do you got? We seem to be having some audio problems. I'm talking. All right. I think-- I don't think Vlad's audio is working. So, here's a few-- VLADIMIR DUTHIERS: Hey, there we go. TONY DOKOUPIL: Here's a few stories that we'll be talking about today. GAYLE KING: There he goes. You got it. TONY DOKOUPIL: Wait. No, Vlad. You hear us now. GAYLE KING: He got it. He got it. He got it. VLADIMIR DUTHIERS: I didn't have audio. GAYLE KING: You got it. VLADIMIR DUTHIERS: Couldn't see you guys. TONY DOKOUPIL: Go, take it away, Vlad. GAYLE KING: There you go. VLADIMIR DUTHIERS: The magic of working from home like millions of other Americans, we're working from home, too. And sometimes we have a little hiccup or two. But we are still tracking some of the stories that we think you'll be talking about today, including this--more than three hundred Amazon employees are staging a nationwide protest starting today. They say the company has not fulfilled its commitment to keep them safe during the pandemic. Amazon recently pledged to increase cleaning at its facilities. It also gave warehouse and delivery workers a temporary raise, but one worker says that is not enough. MAN (internet video): People are dying. People are literally out-- out here dying, like, everybody is not (INDISTINCT). What if I'm one of the unlucky person that just sometime-- to my circumference-- circumstances and (INDISTINCT) from me all because I want to go there and make a paycheck, an extra two dollars an hour. That's not a hazard pay at all. VLADIMIR DUTHIERS: Employees say they will stay out of work until Amazon makes changes to keep them safe. Tony, Amazon has not responded to our request for comment but they have said that they have adjusted practices to ensure social distancing and implemented daily temperature screenings. But according to one advocacy group, more than one hundred and thirty Amazon facilities have had at least one employee test positive for COVID-19. TONY DOKOUPIL: I mean, it's really interesting stuff. That it reminds me of what we were talking about in the last segment with Adriana. There are some jobs that you just can't do from home, you've got to go in. And yesterday, Governor Cuomo said something interesting at his briefing. He said these front line workers are our heroes in this crisis and he meant beyond the medical community and he called for a fifty percent bonus on their annual salary from a federal stimulus. He said pay them what they deserve. When you hear stories like this, you realize how important they are. Anyway, Vlad, moving on, I understand you've got an all-star tribute for Prince tonight? What's that about? VLADIMIR DUTHIERS: Tony, I pay tribute to Prince every night, since it was a Prince song that was playing when I had my first kiss. But, yes, tonight only on CBS, some of music's top stars will honor the life of legendary singer Prince. (Crowd performing) VLADIMIR DUTHIERS: We're talking Usher, John Legend, Chris Martin from Coldplay all are part of the all-star lineup to perform some of the music icon's hit songs. Comedian Maya Rudolph will host the concert marking the four-year anniversary of Prince's death. You can catch the salute to Prince tonight at nine, eight Central right here on CBS. Anthony, I know you'll be watching. ANTHONY MASON: Yeah. I know, I'm excited because not just all those huge stars but a lot of the folks from Prince's world. The Revolution and his bands are going to be there, Sheila E., Morris Day and The Time, and-- and this is a real concert. Remember those? This was actually recorded back in January right around the Grammys. So there's an audience. So it's like people there. VLADIMIR DUTHIERS: I do-- I do remember that. And I love-- I love, Anthony, that The Time is going to be there because everybody was doing that o-e-o-e-o. Remember that? ANTHONY MASON: Yes. GAYLE KING: Yes. ANTHONY MASON: Yes, yes. It was-- I saw them doing it out there during the Grammy. They sound incredible still. All right. Vlad, Buckingham Palace is-- VLADIMIR DUTHIERS: I love it. ANTHONY MASON: --marking the Queen's birthday differently this year. What's happening? VLADIMIR DUTHIERS: All right. So Queen Elizabeth-- Queen Elizabeth II turns ninety-four today and the occasion, though, was marked with very little fanfare. The palace tweeted out this clip of a private family film. It shows Her Majesty is the child playing with the late Princess Margaret, her sister, her little sister. Royal birthdays are traditionally marked by ceremonial gun salutes across London but the Queen felt it would not be appropriate given the pandemic, Gayle, and that's a good move. GAYLE KING: I know, Vlad, I'm still stuck about the Prince song for your first kiss. I want to know the song and how old were you. Thirty what? VLADIMIR DUTHIERS: I was an old man by the time I had that first kiss. It's on the controversy album. GAYLE KING: Okay. Let's-- VLADIMIR DUTHIERS: I like you try to figure it out. GAYLE KING: Yes. Let's-- let's salute the Queen. We're very happy for her ninety-four-- ninety-fourth birthday. Birthdays are a big deal, I don't care who you are, especially when you're celebrating a milestone, Vlad. You got a story about that. VLADIMIR DUTHIERS: That's right. This World War II veteran got a surprise one hundred birthday bash. Friends and family gathered outside Jim Frick's assisted living facility in Pennsylvania. They sang "Happy Birthday" to him. They even held put up signs. Party could not be held due to the pandemic, of course. His family says he is the most positive man that they know and I'm down with that optimism, attitude, hopefulness. Those are chooses we make every day. Choose wisely. ANTHONY MASON: Yep. GAYLE KING: Yes. ANTHONY MASON: He's-- he's-- he wants to live to two hundreds. GAYLE KING: Bye, Vlad. ANTHONY MASON: Stay with us. Coming up, Stacey Abrams. We'll be right back on CBS THIS MORNING. (ANNOUNCEMENTS) *****************************************************************************(8:00 AM, EDT) GAYLE KING: It's Tuesday, April 21, 2020. Welcome back to CBS THIS MORNING. I am Gayle King with Tony Dokoupil and Anthony Mason. Open for business? More states including Georgia plan to reopen despite the potential risk to people's lives. First on CBS THIS MORNING, we'll talk with a former candidate for governor in Georgia, Stacey Abrams. TONY DOKOUPIL: Unequal impact. We take to you New Orleans to show you how racial inequality in some communities is making the pandemic more severe. ANTHONY MASON: And distance dating. How some folks are getting creative looking for love during social distancing. GAYLE KING: Can't wait for that. But first, here's today's Eye Opener @ 8. We start with President Trump's announcement that he plans to temporarily suspend immigration into the U.S. WEIJIA JIANG: President Trump tweeted without any context or further explanation leaving the public guessing overnight. DAVID BEGNAUD: So you've got the mayor of New York City and the governor of New York not ready to ease up on restrictions yet. But you're starting to hear other governors like Tennessee and Georgia and South Carolina who say, you know what, we're ready to start returning some things to normal. GAVIN NEWSOM: This is not the new normalcy in perpetuity. And once we get herd immunity and once we get a vaccine, then we could come back and flourish and thrive. TONY DOKOUPIL: When it comes to being open and honest with the American people, the governor of California seems to be trying to do so. ANTHONY MASON: The health of North Korea's dictator is in serious question this morning. RAMY INOCENCIO: The world doesn't know whether Kim Jong-un is alive, sick or death after those initial reports. STEPHEN COLBERT: The burger chain Shake Shack has agreed to return its ten-million-dollar government loan, saying ".the money it received could be reallocated to the independent restaurants who need it most, and haven't gotten any assistance." But then gave the independent restaurants a large plastic buzzer and said when that vibrates, just come to the counter and get your cash. GAYLE KING: I know that, vibrate. We're always waiting for it to go off so we can go up to the counter. I know it well. I know it well. Welcome back to CBS THIS MORNING. Tony, you've been there a couple of times too waiting for the thing to go off. TONY DOKOUPIL: Once or twice. If-- if they-- if they weren't getting the money they needed, I think I got some room in my freezer. I'll take everything they got and we'll eat it later. GAYLE KING: Yeah. Me, too. Like many of you watching us at home, we are following the guidelines to stay home as much as possible and we are actually hoping, hoping, hoping-- TONY DOKOUPIL: That is right. GAYLE KING: --fingers crossed, you are doing the same. Tony. TONY DOKOUPIL: Yeah. But some states are trying to open and there are questions this morning over whether some of those states are moving too quickly in their effort to reopen. The Republican governor of South Carolina, for example, Henry McMaster, announced beaches and some retail stores can open today. That is, if social distancing is still observed. ANTHONY MASON: Georgia Governor Brian Kemp, also a Republican, says many businesses there can begin opening Friday, including gyms and hair salons. He says, quote, "favorable data" led to the decision, but cases continue to rise in Georgia even if the pace has begun to slow. The state has more than nineteen thousand reported cases so far. It comes as a new Washington Post-University of Maryland poll finds a majority of Americans do not think it will be safe for gatherings of ten or more people before the end of June. GAYLE KING: First on CBS THIS MORNING, Stacey Abrams joins us from Atlanta to announce a new initiative that she is working on. It's helping people hit the hardest by the coronavirus. Abrams is the founder of Fair Fight 2020 and as you know was a 2018 Democratic candidate for governor of Georgia. Good morning to you, Stacey Abrams. Always good to see you. I want to talk about your initiative-- STACEY ABRAMS (Founder of Fair Fight): Good morning. GAYLE KING: --in just a second. But first, I want to start with your governor's decision to reopen. I want to get your reaction to that. You have called it dangerously incompetent. What concerns you? STACEY ABRAMS: Georgia is a state that has one of the highest infection rates. We're recently ranked number fourteen. The city of Albany itself was number four in the world for coronavirus infection rates and we have the seventh slowest testing rate, which means that we don't know what is happening in Georgia. We do know that we have more deaths than almost any other state in the southeast. And that we are not ready to return to normal. What's even more concerning is that the businesses that are opening are ones like nail salons and restaurants, places where low-income workers are going to be compelled to go back to work in order to keep their jobs and they're going to be the most at risk for contracting the disease and we have one of the weakest health infrastructures in the country without Medicaid expansion and one of the highest rates of-- of hospital closures in rural communities. GAYLE KING: I was also wondering, Stacey, how do you social distance in a barber shop, a nail salon, or a tattoo shop? But your governor has said this-- STACEY ABRAMS: I've-- GAYLE KING: --he knows that some of the cases will go up. He-- hold on for two secs. He said he knows the cases will go up, he said, but the-- the state is better prepared to handle it and that he doesn't give a damn about politics at this particular time. Do you think that's true? STACEY ABRAMS: This isn't about politics. This is about people's lives. We have people who are the most vulnerable and the least resilient being put on the front lines of contracting a disease that they cannot get treatment for. We have swaths of Georgia where we have no hospitals, no doctors and no relief. But we're also one of the states that has the weakest public infrastructure. We have a hard time getting unemployment benefits. We have a hard time getting access to-- to medical care. There is no legitimate reason for reopening the state except for politics and I think it's deeply disingenuous that he would pretend otherwise. GAYLE KING: So, what do you think it's going to take to get the testing right in Georgia? STACEY ABRAMS: It's going to require funding, but it's also going to require recognizing that over the last twenty years, Republican leadership has weakened the public health infrastructure of our state. And the governor's refusal to expand Medicaid means we haven't gotten the new infusions of cash that could have help prepare us for this pandemic. But the reality is we are where we are. And we need to meet the cause and the challenge where we are. This is an issue of competence, this is not an issue of politics. GAYLE KING: Yeah. STACEY ABRAMS: And it is a question of people's lives and putting the most vulnerable on the front lines to meet some political goal is deeply problematic. GAYLE KING: Let's talk about your new initiative, if we can move on. It says you will give a thousand dollars to one hundred thousand households. How are you selecting the people that will get the money, and where is the money coming from? STACEY ABRAMS: So Project 100 is a joint project between GiveDirectly, Propel's Fresh EBT, Stand for Children. These are three organizations that work with the most vulnerable Americans. And the money is coming from some incredible donors but it's also coming from everyday people who are willing to contribute at-- at Project100.us. The people who receive the money are SNAP recipients who use the Propel's Fresh EBT app. And that's one of the social-- I'm sorry, it's an app that was designed to help low-income people better manage their SNAP benefits. We have two million users who are receiving this-- who use this app and they will be the front line recipients of these contributions. GAYLE KING: Let's talk about the VP slot. Joe Biden's looking for a VP. I know you've heard. There's an article out this morning that says Stacey Abrams would be the right pick for him. I'm assuming you agree with that. Why do you think that you'd be a good choice for Joe Biden? STACEY ABRAMS: Part of my response to not becoming governor in 2018 was not to hide my head but to really work on addressing the core issues facing our country. I've set up a-- a national eighteen state infrastructure to protect our elections. I've set up a seven-state organization that is working on the census. And through the Southern Economic Advancement Project, I've been able to work with Propel, Fresh EBT and get connected with GiveDirectly to address the economic needs of our most economically vulnerable and least resilient communities. I believe I have the capacity, the competence, the skills and the willingness to serve. But I will say this, my first responsibility is to make sure that the work I'm doing across this country working with federal, state and local leaders helps serve the people who need it most. That's why I'm so excited about what we're doing with Project100.us, which is getting resources directly to those who need it at a time when our government is moving too slowly to serve the most vulnerable. SNAP recipients are the least likely to be banked-- GAYLE KING: Stacey, that's-- that's a good-- STACEY ABRAMS: They do not-- GAYLE KING: I just want to say this, that's a great nuts and bolts answer because everybody knows you're extremely qualified. I'm looking for something about Stacey Abrams the person. Why she is a good-- why she is a good choice-- STACEY ABRAMS: Sure. GAYLE KING: --and have you had any talks at all with the Biden team? STACEY ABRAMS: I've been very privileged to work very closely with the Biden team in recent weeks having conversations particularly about how we get Congress to respond to the needs on our voting infrastructure. What we saw happen in Wisconsin is unconscionable. I was born there. I have family still living there. And the fact that they had to risk their lives to participate in an election is a travesty. The work we've done through Fair Fight 2020 has helped mitigate that harm in eighteen states, but we have more to do. But the reality is I want to serve our country whether I do so in elected office or through the work I'm doing at the nonprofit level or as a small business owner. My responsibility is to make America stronger and I'm excited to be a part of this conversation. GAYLE KING: All right. Stacey Abrams, I'm hoping this is not our last conversation. Something tells me it isn't. Always good to see you. Thank you, Ma'am. STACEY ABRAMS: Thank you, Gayle. GAYLE KING: It is now eight-oh-nine, time to check your local weather. (LOCAL WEATHER BREAK) (ANNOUNCEMENTS) TONY DOKOUPIL: Ahead, why the fight against the coronavirus in New Orleans is also a battle to save the city's iconic black culture. Plus, we'll talk with Ibram X. Kendi about his project to collect and analyze racial data on the pandemic. (ANNOUNCEMENTS) END 
2020-04-21	ANTHONY MASON: The health of North Korea's dictator and the control of that country's nuclear weapons is in serious question this morning. Kim Jong-un did not appear at a major public celebration last week. Now, there is a report unconfirmed by CBS News that he had heart surgery and may be fighting for his life. Ramy Inocencio joins us from Tokyo-- Tokyo. Ramy, what do we know for sure at this point? RAMY INOCENCIO (CBS News Foreign Correspondent): Good question. Good morning there. Yeah. Frankly, the world doesn't know whether Kim Jong-un is alive, sick or death after those initial reports. But one thing is for certain looking ahead that any kind of news that comes out of North Korea needs to be taken with a massive dose of salt. One North Korean expert told me that it could be days, maybe even longer to know any kind of truth out of the country. (Begin VT) RAMY INOCENCIO: This was the last time Kim Jong-un was seen in public, April 11th, a meeting with his top advisors and just a day before he reportedly underwent heart surgery, that's according to one South Korean report. On April 15th, Kim then missed for the first time an annual birthday event honoring his late grandfather, Kim Il-sung, North Korea's founder. North Korea expert Robert Carlin says if Kim died, his successor, possibly his younger sister, would need to secure a power base before taking control of the country. ROBERT CARLIN: You'll have fairly inexperienced North Koreans at the top. A lot of them don't know a lot about the outside world. There are going to be factions trying to scramble to the top. RAMY INOCENCIO: But the biggest worry if Kim Jong-un died is North Korea's estimated thirty to forty nuclear weapons. ROBERT CARLIN: People will breathe a big sigh of relief if they discover Kim showing up in a few days. (End VT) RAMY INOCENCIO: And China and South Korea have now refuted those initial reports. And North Korea observers are saying that when it comes to the health of the leader of North Korea, you're going to have to take everything with a very good strong dose of skepticism. Gayle. GAYLE KING: All right. Thank you, Ramy Inocencio reporting from Tokyo. The coronio-- the corona, rather, virus lockdown and other factors caused a historic moment in the oil futures market yesterday. For just a few hours, the benchmark price for oil produced in the country entered negative territory. So that means traders were willing to pay buyers to take oil shipments due to be delivered starting today because there isn't enough room to start-- to store it. Ahead, how the price drop is devastating communities in West Texas, a region that depends on oil. Oil very cheap these days. But first, it is seven eighteen, time to check your local weather. (LOCAL WEATHER BREAK) (ANNOUNCEMENTS) TONY DOKOUPIL: We have much more news ahead. Former Georgia candidate for governor, Stacey Abrams, tells us about a new project to give money directly to people most affected by the coronavirus. That's first on CBS THIS MORNING. (ANNOUNCEMENTS) ANTHONY MASON: The coronavirus is threatening America's meat supply and workers in the processing industry. Ahead, the conflict between officials who demand that companies protect their employees and others who reject shutting down production. Your local news is next. (ANNOUNCEMENTS) *****************************************************************************(7:30 AM, EDT) GAYLE KING: Welcome back to CBS THIS MORNING. Are you ready for a good story? Here's one we want to share with you. It's a story of a man who beat the coronavirus after fighting for his life for more than two weeks. Here he is, going home. (Crowd cheering; Facebook/St. James Hospital; internet video) GAYLE KING: Those are the doctors and the nurses at St. James Parish Hospital, that's in Louisiana, saying goodbye to eighty-four-year-old Kernell But-- Butler (ph) is his name. Kernell Butler is his name. He's on his way home to be reunited with his family. Yesterday, his sign reads: "Eighty-four years young and seventeen days in the hospital, I survived!" I love this story, Anthony, because it's such a good reminder to us that most people, most people survive coronavirus. You get so caught up in the numbers of the-- and the vast numbers of the people dying. It's always nice to see people have survived. ANTHONY MASON: Yeah. I love his-- I love Mister Butler's sign. And congratulations to him. It's a-- it's a really rough fight-- GAYLE KING: Yes. ANTHONY MASON: --for a lot of people, but it's great to see people going home. GAYLE KING: Yes. ANTHONY MASON: With people staying home and not traveling during the pandemic, demand for oil has plummeted. A key benchmark determining crude oil prices fell below zero for the first time ever yesterday. It has since rebounded but low oil prices can be disastrous for regions that rely on drilling and fracking for jobs and tax revenue. In our coronavirus series, Financial Fallout, Janet Shamlian traveled to West Texas to see how the collapse is affecting people there. JANET SHAMLIAN (CBS News Correspondent): Good morning. While the economy is reeling from coronavirus, this part of West Texas, the heart of the energy industry in America is dealing with a double blow. Not long ago, Midland was a boom town, now preparing for a bust. (Begin VT) KRIS DOKEY: We'll get through this. JANET SHAMLIAN: Kris Dokey is trying to convince himself as much as he is trying to comfort his four young daughters. He is a fourth-generation Midland oil field worker. And like so many Americans, he was laid off last week. Unlike others, coronavirus isn't the main culprit. KRIS DOKEY: We got hit with a double whammy whenever it come to this, between the Saudi and Russia price war that started right about the same time the coronavirus hit. Kind of unprecedented times for us out here. JANET SHAMLIAN: Out here is the Permian Basin, which Midland is part of. The region produces roughly a third of U.S. oil. It had been booming. New construction everywhere. Then, the price war and coronavirus sent prices spiraling Monday to the lowest level in history. The city of about one hundred forty thousand now tops the list of those that would be hardest hit by a recession, according to the public policy group, The Brookings Institution. PATRICK PAYTON: It's like someone hit the switch. And all of a sudden, layoffs already start. All of a sudden, the city starts to slow down, and you can literally feel it. JANET SHAMLIAN: Mayor Patrick Payton says once coronavirus hit, it grounded planes and kept drivers off the roads, dealing a devastating blow to demand for oil and bringing Midland to its knees. Now one of the city's best restaurants is a food pantry, free lunch for first responders and anyone who cannot afford to buy groceries. WOMAN: Thank you. JANET SHAMLIAN: The outlook isn't good. The mayor says because so many jobs here are oil-related, the region will recover behind the rest of the country. PATRICK PAYTON: It's probably at least a two-year lift for us to get this economy moving again. This boom we were in was about a five-year run. It took us a week to lose it. KRIS DOKEY: Enjoying this outside town, huh? JANET SHAMLIAN: For the Dokey family, two years is an eternity. Their savings won't last that long. How are you going to make your mortgage? KRIS DOKEY: With a lot of-- a lot of prayers and just trying to stay on top of things. And my main goal is to feed my family, but shortly thereafter that is to continue to provide them shelter for them to lay their heads down at night. (End VT) JANET SHAMLIAN: Rig workers, engineers and the thousands of others in the industry previously had little trouble finding other work in downturns. But in the world of coronavirus, no one is hiring. ANTHONY MASON: That was Janet Shamlian reporting on some real tough times in the oil industry. The coronavirus is forcing several meat processing plants to shut down. Ahead, what this means for our food supply. And a reminder, you can always get the morning news by subscribing to the CBS THIS MORNING podcast. Hear today's top stories in less than twenty minutes. We'll be right back. (ANNOUNCEMENTS) END 
2020-04-20	ANTHONY MASON: Success in the fight against the coronavirus may depend in part on two things, learning who has the disease and who could get it. Health officials use a method called contact tracing to find out who infected patients may have met. Our national correspondent Jericka Duncan is in New York. Jericka, how is this effort being stepped up? JERICKA DUNCAN (CBS THIS MORNING National Correspondent): Well, good morning to you, Anthony. What's happening right now is that we're seeing city, county and state health departments that are coordinating this effort. But what we're also seeing is that these health departments are actually expanding their rosters of tracers. This happening at the same time that some of the world's biggest tech companies are helping. (Begin VT) WOMAN #1: What date did you start to feel like you had some kind of symptoms? JERICKA DUNCAN: In Salt Lake County, which has more than half of Utah's three thousand-plus COVID cases, they are aggressively stepping up contact tracing. GARY EDWARDS: We know it's important to not just know who the positive case is, but who-- in-- in an infectious disease, who they have been in contact with. JERICKA DUNCAN: Gary Edwards is executive director of Salt Lake County Health Department. Are you testing the people in that house, as well, when you identify someone who has tested positive for COVID-19? GARY EDWARDS: If it is a household, we do want those family members tested, yes, because that has been especially close contact. JERICKA DUNCAN: In contact tracing, a person who tests positive tells the health department who they've been in contact with. The health department then alerts those people and asks them to monitor their symptoms and to quarantine, if needed. And it's happening across the country. GINA RAIMONDO: I asked you all to start keeping a daily log. JERICKA DUNCAN: Rhode Island's governor asked everyone in the state to keep a personal log of whom they've encountered. Massachusetts is investing forty-four million dollars to hire and train more tracers. WOMAN #2: So here I have the list of my contacts. JERICKA DUNCAN: And in San Francisco, with more than one thousand cases and at least twenty deaths, health care officials use text messaging to communicate with people who have tested positive and their close contacts most at risk. DR. MIKE REID: For every new case, there are three to five close contacts. JERICKA DUNCAN: Doctor Mike Reid is with the San Francisco Department of Public Health. They are calling on everyone from medical students to librarians to help them with contact tracing. DR. MIKE REID: The reason for training people now is so that we're ready in three, four, five weeks' time, whenever the decision is made that we'll end the shelter in place. JERICKA DUNCAN: Tech companies are also preparing. Apple and Google recently announced a joint plan to create software for iPhones and Androids that will allow them to keep a record of every other phone they've come in close contact with. The tracking is voluntary. DAN ACKERMAN: Your phone will know what other phones you have been near for a period of time. Then if you, let's say, test positive and you alert the system, it will go and find all of the phones that you have been near over the last fourteen days. JERICKA DUNCAN: Dan Ackerman is senior managing editor for CNET. DAN ACKERMAN: Of course, there are a lot of issues with that. Just because your phone is it within Bluetooth range with another phone doesn't mean that you're necessarily in communicable disease range of somebody. JERICKA DUNCAN: Americans love their apps, but they also love their privacy. DAN ACKERMAN: When we think about tracking and tracing, all the news over the last several years has been negative. And now they are trying to shift it into doing something for a greater public good. It may be a hard sell. (End VT) JERICKA DUNCAN: Now using a smartphone to trace this virus is already happening in places like South Korea and Singapore. But there, it is mandatory. And something else worth mentioning, Anthony, is that these contact tracers will not ask for information regarding your Social Security number, your financial information and they will not ask about your immigration status. ANTHONY MASON: Yeah. It's a valuable tool, Jericka. And we're going to need a-- health experts say we're going to need a small army of contact tracers in-- in the weeks ahead. Jericka Duncan, thanks. Ahead, Vlad Duthiers looks at the stories you'll be talking about today. But first, it is seven forty-three, time to check your local weather. (LOCAL WEATHER BREAK) (ANNOUNCEMENTS) TONY DOKOUPIL: Well, your weekend at home is over. Your weekday at home has begun. But that means one principal difference, What to Watch is on. It is now seven forty-seven. Vlad Duthiers is here. GAYLE KING: Yeah. TONY DOKOUPIL: And there's a lot going on. Vlad, what do you have for us? VLADIMIR DUTHIERS: What is happening, guys? Good to see you. Principal as in P-A-L, principal, because I'm your pal. Good to see you all. We're working from home like millions of other Americans. We hope you're doing well. We're all safe and healthy here. But while we're working from home, we're checking out some of the stories we think you'll be talking about including this--Neiman Marcus is reportedly set to file for bankruptcy as soon as this week. It would be the first major U.S. department store chain to fall victim to the economic fallout from the coronavirus. Meantime, after some backlash against large publicly traded chain restaurants, Shake Shack is returning a ten-million-dollar loan it got from the federal government's Paycheck Protection Program. That's because, Tony, it is meant to help small businesses. The company earned nearly six hundred million dollars in 2019. CEO Danny Meyer says it's returning the cash to help restaurants that need it the most. TONY DOKOUPIL: So what's really interesting about this, Vlad, is the definition of a small business is five hundred or fewer employees. Most people in America work for one of those. Shake Shack qualified because it has under five hundred per location. And a lot of big chains were able to qualify that way. And a lot of people were outraged. So it's great that Shake Shack is doing this. It remains to be seen as some other big chain organizations are going to do this. But ultimately, you know, I just hope that this money goes to companies that are able to save people's jobs as a result of getting the funding. I mean, at the end of the day, that's what we all need right now is jobs being saved, jobs being kept. GAYLE KING: Yeah. VLADIMIR DUTHIERS: Yeah. Behind those numbers, Tony, behind the numbers that we talk about are the people that are being hard hit economically over the coronavirus pandemic. Those numbers, there are names, there are families, there are children, there are folks who are really in need of a lifeline. So it's really great that Danny Meyer and Shake Shack are doing this. TONY DOKOUPIL: Yeah. Bravo to them. And you know, we all need a little bit of entertainment. We can't watch streaming and television all day long. And, I guess, some athletes are getting quite creative in how to entertain us under quarantine? VLADIMIR DUTHIERS: You know, when the story of all this is written, there will be some new innovations in how we live our lives, Tony. Check this out. A couple of tennis players in Italy are taking their game to a new height. This is fourteen-year-old Vittoria Oliveri and eleven-year-old Carola Pessina playing on their rooftops. Gayle, they came up with this idea since, of course, Italy has been under lockdown since early March. This video has been racking up tons of views on social media. It's very, very cool. GAYLE KING: And they are both so good, Vlad. And I look at one of them--looks like she's playing with some kind of piping sticking up in the middle of the-- in the middle of the court there. They're both-- this volley went on for quite some time. Bravo to them. VLADIMIR DUTHIERS: I mean, it's literally across rooftops. This is pretty wild. And their dad gets the balls for them-- GAYLE KING: Yeah, yeah. Very good. VLADIMIR DUTHIERS: --when they fall down to the ground. GAYLE KING: I like it. Let's see. We have another bravo to one of our favorite actors who-- this guy, just when you think you couldn't love him more, he does something else. VLADIMIR DUTHIERS: Indeed. Check this out. So we love John Krasinski here at CBS THIS MORNING. This time, he is hosting-- he hosted, I should say, an epic virtual prom for the Class of 2020. High school seniors across the nation shared their homemade prom celebrations along this livestream which included surprise celebrity guests. Take a look at who turned up. (Jonas Brothers performing) VLADIMIR DUTHIERS: "I'm a sucker for you," Gayle. That's the Jonas Brothers along with Billie Eilish and Chance the Rapper. They also dropped in. Krasinski held the event for students whose proms were scrapped due to the pandemic, telling them that he knew they were missing out on a lot of things and he couldn't let the prom be one of them. So now, of course, guys, the Class of 2020 can look forward to the day in the future when they cringe at their prom looks. You guys wanted hair, What to Watch fans wanted hair. There you go, Anthony. What do you say? GAYLE KING: Yes. ANTHONY MASON: Awesome, Vlad. GAYLE KING: Yay. ANTHONY MASON: That's really great. I love that everybody got dressed up for the prom. Vlad, thanks so much. Coming up, best-selling author Mitch Albom. Stay with us. We'll be right back. (ANNOUNCEMENTS) *****************************************************************************(8:00 AM, EDT) GAYLE KING: It's Monday, April 20, 2020. Welcome back to CBS THIS MORNING. I am Gayle King with Tony Dokoupil and Anthony Mason. Second bailout. Hundreds of billions of dollars of new money may soon be headed to small businesses after the first package ran out of money. TONY DOKOUPIL: Survival story. What recovery from the coronavirus looks like for patients including our own Seth Doane. ANTHONY MASON: And novel approach. Author Mitch Albom tells us how he is turning words into money to help stop the spread. GAYLE KING It's clever. But first, here's today's Eye Opener @ 8. The White House and many state governors are clashing on two fronts over the coronavirus testing and when to ease the lockdowns. ANTHONY MASON: The economic strain is driving some Americans to protest stay-at-home orders. MANUEL BOJORQUEZ: Some Florida beaches are starting to reopen as the state considers how it will get businesses back up and running. WEIJIA JIANG: The administration continues to face backlash for not having a national testing strategy. GAYLE KING: Realistically, Jon, do you think we can go back to life as normal without an effective treatment or a vaccine? DR. JON LAPOOK: I think that it's going to be a new normal, unless-- until we get a vaccine that we know is effective. That's the ultimate backstop. JOHN OLIVER: Judi Dench is apparently doing TikTok dances with her grandson over FaceTime. (Excerpt from TikTok; internet video) JOHN OLIVER: Hard, yes, on that. I think we all just learned a lot there. One, Judi Dench can hit the role like a pro. Two, her grandson might be Ed Sheeran. And three, life is getting pretty weird on Earth right now. GAYLE KING: Nicely done, Dame Judi Dench and her grandson. Listen, I love, Tony, when I see anybody do anything creative and fun. My weekend went from walking from the kitchen to the living room, waving at a bird flying by, hello, my name is Gayle. I'll be here tomorrow. TONY DOKOUPIL: Yeah. I know. GAYLE KING: So, I love it when people can do stuff like that. TONY DOKOUPIL: I-- I agree. That's basically my weekend, as well. Although, Gayle, I think things will really be strange here on Earth if you start using your kitchen a bit more to cook. GAYLE KING: Yeah, yes. Well, that ain't happening. That ain't happening. Welcome back to CBS THIS MORNING. Like many of you, we are following the guidelines to stay home as much as possible and really hope that you are doing the same. This is where we begin--we're talking about the Senate today that could reach another funding deal today to help people struggling financially from this pandemic. The Paycheck Protection Program is what it's called. It helps small businesses with payroll, could get another three hundred billion dollars. That program, as you have heard, ran out of three hundred and forty-nine billion dollars in just two weeks. The deal could also provide seventy-five billion dollars to hospitals and twenty-five billion for testing. Tony. TONY DOKOUPIL: Testing-- testing, of course, is key to being able to reopen the country, but it's also a source-- source of tension. Vice President Pence is holding a call with state governors today. The White House is claiming that states have the capacity to do more testing, but some governors say they don't have the necessary equipment. CROWD (in unison): USA. USA. TONY DOKOUPIL: Meanwhile, protests were held all across the country over the weekend demanding states open swiftly. Supporters of President Trump were at this one in Washington State. More protests are expected today. And several states including Florida and Texas have already begun loosening some restrictions. Anthony. END 
2020-04-20	ANTHONY MASON: Success in the fight against the coronavirus may depend in part on two things, learning who has the disease and who could get it. Health officials use a method called contact tracing to find out who infected patients may have met. Our national correspondent Jericka Duncan is in New York. Jericka, how is this effort being stepped up? JERICKA DUNCAN (CBS THIS MORNING National Correspondent): Well, good morning to you, Anthony. What's happening right now is that we're seeing city, county and state health departments that are coordinating this effort. But what we're also seeing is that these health departments are actually expanding their rosters of tracers. This happening at the same time that some of the world's biggest tech companies are helping. (Begin VT) WOMAN #1: What date did you start to feel like you had some kind of symptoms? JERICKA DUNCAN: In Salt Lake County, which has more than half of Utah's three thousand-plus COVID cases, they are aggressively stepping up contact tracing. GARY EDWARDS: We know it's important to not just know who the positive case is, but who-- in-- in an infectious disease, who they have been in contact with. JERICKA DUNCAN: Gary Edwards is executive director of Salt Lake County Health Department. Are you testing the people in that house, as well, when you identify someone who has tested positive for COVID-19? GARY EDWARDS: If it is a household, we do want those family members tested, yes, because that has been especially close contact. JERICKA DUNCAN: In contact tracing, a person who tests positive tells the health department who they've been in contact with. The health department then alerts those people and asks them to monitor their symptoms and to quarantine, if needed. And it's happening across the country. GINA RAIMONDO: I asked you all to start keeping a daily log. JERICKA DUNCAN: Rhode Island's governor asked everyone in the state to keep a personal log of whom they've encountered. Massachusetts is investing forty-four million dollars to hire and train more tracers. WOMAN #2: So here I have the list of my contacts. JERICKA DUNCAN: And in San Francisco, with more than one thousand cases and at least twenty deaths, health care officials use text messaging to communicate with people who have tested positive and their close contacts most at risk. DR. MIKE REID: For every new case, there are three to five close contacts. JERICKA DUNCAN: Doctor Mike Reid is with the San Francisco Department of Public Health. They are calling on everyone from medical students to librarians to help them with contact tracing. DR. MIKE REID: The reason for training people now is so that we're ready in three, four, five weeks' time, whenever the decision is made that we'll end the shelter in place. JERICKA DUNCAN: Tech companies are also preparing. Apple and Google recently announced a joint plan to create software for iPhones and Androids that will allow them to keep a record of every other phone they've come in close contact with. The tracking is voluntary. DAN ACKERMAN: Your phone will know what other phones you have been near for a period of time. Then if you, let's say, test positive and you alert the system, it will go and find all of the phones that you have been near over the last fourteen days. JERICKA DUNCAN: Dan Ackerman is senior managing editor for CNET. DAN ACKERMAN: Of course, there are a lot of issues with that. Just because your phone is it within Bluetooth range with another phone doesn't mean that you're necessarily in communicable disease range of somebody. JERICKA DUNCAN: Americans love their apps, but they also love their privacy. DAN ACKERMAN: When we think about tracking and tracing, all the news over the last several years has been negative. And now they are trying to shift it into doing something for a greater public good. It may be a hard sell. (End VT) JERICKA DUNCAN: Now using a smartphone to trace this virus is already happening in places like South Korea and Singapore. But there, it is mandatory. And something else worth mentioning, Anthony, is that these contact tracers will not ask for information regarding your Social Security number, your financial information and they will not ask about your immigration status. ANTHONY MASON: Yeah. It's a valuable tool, Jericka. And we're going to need a-- health experts say we're going to need a small army of contact tracers in-- in the weeks ahead. Jericka Duncan, thanks. Ahead, Vlad Duthiers looks at the stories you'll be talking about today. But first, it is seven forty-three, time to check your local weather. (LOCAL WEATHER BREAK) (ANNOUNCEMENTS) TONY DOKOUPIL: Well, your weekend at home is over. Your weekday at home has begun. But that means one principal difference, What to Watch is on. It is now seven forty-seven. Vlad Duthiers is here. GAYLE KING: Yeah. TONY DOKOUPIL: And there's a lot going on. Vlad, what do you have for us? VLADIMIR DUTHIERS: What is happening, guys? Good to see you. Principal as in P-A-L, principal, because I'm your pal. Good to see you all. We're working from home like millions of other Americans. We hope you're doing well. We're all safe and healthy here. But while we're working from home, we're checking out some of the stories we think you'll be talking about including this--Neiman Marcus is reportedly set to file for bankruptcy as soon as this week. It would be the first major U.S. department store chain to fall victim to the economic fallout from the coronavirus. Meantime, after some backlash against large publicly traded chain restaurants, Shake Shack is returning a ten-million-dollar loan it got from the federal government's Paycheck Protection Program. That's because, Tony, it is meant to help small businesses. The company earned nearly six hundred million dollars in 2019. CEO Danny Meyer says it's returning the cash to help restaurants that need it the most. TONY DOKOUPIL: So what's really interesting about this, Vlad, is the definition of a small business is five hundred or fewer employees. Most people in America work for one of those. Shake Shack qualified because it has under five hundred per location. And a lot of big chains were able to qualify that way. And a lot of people were outraged. So it's great that Shake Shack is doing this. It remains to be seen as some other big chain organizations are going to do this. But ultimately, you know, I just hope that this money goes to companies that are able to save people's jobs as a result of getting the funding. I mean, at the end of the day, that's what we all need right now is jobs being saved, jobs being kept. GAYLE KING: Yeah. VLADIMIR DUTHIERS: Yeah. Behind those numbers, Tony, behind the numbers that we talk about are the people that are being hard hit economically over the coronavirus pandemic. Those numbers, there are names, there are families, there are children, there are folks who are really in need of a lifeline. So it's really great that Danny Meyer and Shake Shack are doing this. TONY DOKOUPIL: Yeah. Bravo to them. And you know, we all need a little bit of entertainment. We can't watch streaming and television all day long. And, I guess, some athletes are getting quite creative in how to entertain us under quarantine? VLADIMIR DUTHIERS: You know, when the story of all this is written, there will be some new innovations in how we live our lives, Tony. Check this out. A couple of tennis players in Italy are taking their game to a new height. This is fourteen-year-old Vittoria Oliveri and eleven-year-old Carola Pessina playing on their rooftops. Gayle, they came up with this idea since, of course, Italy has been under lockdown since early March. This video has been racking up tons of views on social media. It's very, very cool. GAYLE KING: And they are both so good, Vlad. And I look at one of them--looks like she's playing with some kind of piping sticking up in the middle of the-- in the middle of the court there. They're both-- this volley went on for quite some time. Bravo to them. VLADIMIR DUTHIERS: I mean, it's literally across rooftops. This is pretty wild. And their dad gets the balls for them-- GAYLE KING: Yeah, yeah. Very good. VLADIMIR DUTHIERS: --when they fall down to the ground. GAYLE KING: I like it. Let's see. We have another bravo to one of our favorite actors who-- this guy, just when you think you couldn't love him more, he does something else. VLADIMIR DUTHIERS: Indeed. Check this out. So we love John Krasinski here at CBS THIS MORNING. This time, he is hosting-- he hosted, I should say, an epic virtual prom for the Class of 2020. High school seniors across the nation shared their homemade prom celebrations along this livestream which included surprise celebrity guests. Take a look at who turned up. (Jonas Brothers performing) VLADIMIR DUTHIERS: "I'm a sucker for you," Gayle. That's the Jonas Brothers along with Billie Eilish and Chance the Rapper. They also dropped in. Krasinski held the event for students whose proms were scrapped due to the pandemic, telling them that he knew they were missing out on a lot of things and he couldn't let the prom be one of them. So now, of course, guys, the Class of 2020 can look forward to the day in the future when they cringe at their prom looks. You guys wanted hair, What to Watch fans wanted hair. There you go, Anthony. What do you say? GAYLE KING: Yes. ANTHONY MASON: Awesome, Vlad. GAYLE KING: Yay. ANTHONY MASON: That's really great. I love that everybody got dressed up for the prom. Vlad, thanks so much. Coming up, best-selling author Mitch Albom. Stay with us. We'll be right back. (ANNOUNCEMENTS) *****************************************************************************(8:00 AM, EDT) GAYLE KING: It's Monday, April 20, 2020. Welcome back to CBS THIS MORNING. I am Gayle King with Tony Dokoupil and Anthony Mason. Second bailout. Hundreds of billions of dollars of new money may soon be headed to small businesses after the first package ran out of money. TONY DOKOUPIL: Survival story. What recovery from the coronavirus looks like for patients including our own Seth Doane. ANTHONY MASON: And novel approach. Author Mitch Albom tells us how he is turning words into money to help stop the spread. GAYLE KING It's clever. But first, here's today's Eye Opener @ 8. The White House and many state governors are clashing on two fronts over the coronavirus testing and when to ease the lockdowns. ANTHONY MASON: The economic strain is driving some Americans to protest stay-at-home orders. MANUEL BOJORQUEZ: Some Florida beaches are starting to reopen as the state considers how it will get businesses back up and running. WEIJIA JIANG: The administration continues to face backlash for not having a national testing strategy. GAYLE KING: Realistically, Jon, do you think we can go back to life as normal without an effective treatment or a vaccine? DR. JON LAPOOK: I think that it's going to be a new normal, unless-- until we get a vaccine that we know is effective. That's the ultimate backstop. JOHN OLIVER: Judi Dench is apparently doing TikTok dances with her grandson over FaceTime. (Excerpt from TikTok; internet video) JOHN OLIVER: Hard, yes, on that. I think we all just learned a lot there. One, Judi Dench can hit the role like a pro. Two, her grandson might be Ed Sheeran. And three, life is getting pretty weird on Earth right now. GAYLE KING: Nicely done, Dame Judi Dench and her grandson. Listen, I love, Tony, when I see anybody do anything creative and fun. My weekend went from walking from the kitchen to the living room, waving at a bird flying by, hello, my name is Gayle. I'll be here tomorrow. TONY DOKOUPIL: Yeah. I know. GAYLE KING: So, I love it when people can do stuff like that. TONY DOKOUPIL: I-- I agree. That's basically my weekend, as well. Although, Gayle, I think things will really be strange here on Earth if you start using your kitchen a bit more to cook. GAYLE KING: Yeah, yes. Well, that ain't happening. That ain't happening. Welcome back to CBS THIS MORNING. Like many of you, we are following the guidelines to stay home as much as possible and really hope that you are doing the same. This is where we begin--we're talking about the Senate today that could reach another funding deal today to help people struggling financially from this pandemic. The Paycheck Protection Program is what it's called. It helps small businesses with payroll, could get another three hundred billion dollars. That program, as you have heard, ran out of three hundred and forty-nine billion dollars in just two weeks. The deal could also provide seventy-five billion dollars to hospitals and twenty-five billion for testing. Tony. TONY DOKOUPIL: Testing-- testing, of course, is key to being able to reopen the country, but it's also a source-- source of tension. Vice President Pence is holding a call with state governors today. The White House is claiming that states have the capacity to do more testing, but some governors say they don't have the necessary equipment. CROWD (in unison): USA. USA. END 
2020-04-15	As confirmed cases of the coronavirus continue to rise across the globe, the virus has affected all aspects of life, from the economy to schools to jobs to how you do your grocery shopping. USA TODAY readers have asked us hundreds of questions about the outbreak: Do I need to disinfect my groceries after shopping? How will we know when this virus has been cleared? Has anyone with preexisting conditions gotten the coronavirus and survived? Our entire staff is dedicated to reporting on the COVID-19 outbreak, and we've tapped our reporters' expertise, as well as health experts, doctors and others to find answers to your questions. Should I be wiping down every product I buy with a Clorox wipe or a washcloth soaked in bleach? What about using alcohol? ??Jean B. from Charleston, South Carolina, and Helen S. from Denver, Colorado Do NOT use alcohol or bleach to disinfect your groceries, as it can likely harm you if ingested. In fact, experts say it's not necessary to disinfect your groceries at all, even with Clorox wipes. The virus is unlikely to be viable on those surfaces in the trip from the grocery store to your house. However, experts do recommend washing your hands throughout the process of unpacking groceries. Wash your hands before and after putting away the groceries, before washing fruit, after wiping down high-touch surface areas and, of course, before preparing a meal. And just like before the outbreak, it's always recommended to wash fruit and vegetables with water before consumption. Experts suggest against using soaps on produce as they're not meant to be ingested and can cause a stomach distress. If you think you had the virus but weren't tested, shouldn't you get tested now to see if you have the antibodies and can donate plasma? ??Linda from Dracut, Massachusetts Yes, but that's not widely available yet, and not everybody qualifies. Antibody tests can determine if someone had ??and recovered from ??COVID-19. The tests can tell doctors which staff members may have immunity to the virus and can help researchers figure out how many people were asymptomatic. The tests also are crucial for vaccine production because, to prove a vaccine works, you must show antibody production in someone who hasn't been exposed to COVID-19. Cellex Inc. of Research Triangle Park, North Carolina, has received an emergency use authorization for its test from the Food and Drug Administration. It uses blood drawn from a vein to measure antibodies to the SARS-CoV-2 virus that causes COVID-19. More than 30 companies have similar tests in various stages of readiness, and antibody tests are already being used in several countries, including China, South Korea and Singapore. Dozens of institutions nationwide are also participating in the National Covid-19 Convalescent Plasma Project, where people who were exposed to or contracted COVID-19 about three weeks ago and recovered can donate the plasma in their blood to people who are currently sick. If you tested positive and fully recovered, you can register on the Plasma Project's website to see whether you are eligible and if there's a plasma donation program near you. Can UV radiation from the sun kill the virus? ??Charlie from Dade City, Florida Experts have advised against using concentrated UV light to prevent or treat the coronavirus and do not recommend going in the sunlight to kill the virus. Only levels of concentration of UV light much higher than what is found in sunlight can kill viruses, experts note, and the levels that are able to kill viruses can irritate human skin and should be avoided. Neither sunlight nor UV light is listed as a preventive measure by the World Health Organization or the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. 
2020-04-14	TONY DOKOUPIL: In New York State, more than ten thousand people have died from the coronavirus in just a month. Most of them in New York City. Our lead national correspondent David Begnaud is there outside Mount Sinai West Hospital. David, good morning. So, what's the latest on hospitalizations in the New York City area? DAVID BEGNAUD (CBS This MORNING Lead National Correspondent): Well, the governor said that coronavirus has not overwhelmed the hospital systems here in the state and that they have controlled the spread. But I'll tell you, two thousand people are still entering the hospitals here in New York State every day with coronavirus symptoms. The latest twenty-four-hour death toll was six hundred and seventy-one. (Begin VT) DAVID BEGNAUD: New York's Governor Andrew Cuomo provided the graph which appears to show hospitalization statewide have plateaued. GOVERNOR ANDREW CUOMO: And I believe we can now start on the path to normalcy if we continue to be smart going forward. DAVID BEGNAUD: Yesterday, we told you that public health officials in New York City are telling medical providers to only test people who are hospitalized with COVID symptoms because the swabs that they use to perform the tests are running low. We called the only U.S. manufacturer for those swabs which is a company based in Maine, Puritan Medical Products. You have two shifts working ten hours each. That's twenty hours a day, six days a week. TIMOTHY TEMPLET: Yes. DAVID BEGNAUD: Is that enough? TIMOTHY TEMPLET: No. But you can-- you have to-- you have to respect your employees. Today, the demand is greater than what we could produce on a weekly basis. DAVID BEGNAUD: More than a thousand miles west of New York City in Sioux Falls, South Dakota, coronavirus has closed a pork processing plant. And that could affect the nation's meat supply chain, according to the company's CEO. Almost three hundred people working at Smithfield Foods tested positive for the coronavirus. South Dakota's governor is resisting a stay-at-home order for Sioux Falls, even as the state's cases rose by more than two hundred two days in a row. Back in New York, where the daily death toll has been at or above seven hundred for most of the last week-- PAT MARMO: I'm losing control. I'm-- I'm getting everything done at the wire. DAVID BEGNAUD: --Pat Marmo is struggling to meet the demands. He is a funeral director who owns six funeral homes in New York City. PAT MARMO: My phone is ringing probably, like, twice a minute. DAVID BEGNAUD: He calls himself one of the last responders. PAT MARMO: We're moving an average of anywhere between thirty and forty cases a day. (on phone): I'm trying to get caught up. I'm playing catch up, but I can't catch up. When it first started, I was just pushing social distancing. As long as they stood apart themselves from the chapel, I would prepare their loved one. We would do a COVID embalming, we get it in an open-casket, we even have a cosmetician come and a hairdresser. Now, we don't have time for all that because we have another family waiting to use that chapel. It's not slowing up. It seems like it's getting worse. It might just be me. And I'm hoping I'm wrong. This is one time I want to be wrong. (End VT) DAVID BEGNAUD: Outside of one of Pat's funeral home yesterday, we met a woman who told us she waited nearly thirty days to find a funeral home who could receive her sister's body and prepare it for burial. Tony. TONY DOKOUPIL: David, thank you very much. And we want to let our viewers know that Governor Andrew Cuomo, that's New York Governor Andrew Cuomo, will join us in our next hour to talk about what it will take to bring New York State back to normal. Anthony. ANTHONY MASON: China reported a hundred and eight new coronavirus cases yesterday, its highest number in almost six weeks. That's bad news for the country where the outbreak began and where most travel restrictions ended just last week. As Ramy Inocencio reports from Tokyo, health officials in other countries warn that the virus is returning. (Begin VT) RAMY INOCENCIO (CBS News Foreign Correspondent): This new pop-up hospital in Suifenhe in Northeast China is the country's latest battleground against coronavirus. With six hundred beds, state media showed workers setting up rooms for infected patients. Chinese officials say most of the country's new infections are imported. This town of eighty thousand right on the border with Russia is now on lockdown. Less than a week ago, Wuhan celebrated its liberation from a seventy-six-day lock down. WOMAN: That is our gates, and we are out. RAMY INOCENCIO: But that joy came with a warning from some still there, like Professor Sara Platto. SARA PLATTO: The virus did not disappear. The virus is among us and they will be among us forever. RAMY INOCENCIO: An uptick in infection numbers is now being reported across Asia. And now, a new worry--viral reactivation. More than one hundred people who recovered in South Korea have tested positive again. In terms of a second surge, are you nervous right now? DR. JEROME KIM: I am nervous. RAMY INOCENCIO: Doctor Jerome Kim is an epidemiologist based in Seoul. DR. JEROME KIM: What I hope is that what we see instead are little blips. So it's like putting out a fire. You know that there are going to be embers that are blowing or smoking. You want to stamp those out before the fire starts again. RAMY INOCENCIO: And here in Japan, a fire has started again. The northern island of Hokkaido has re-declared a state of emergency because of a resurgence of infections there. Japan now has more than seventy-five hundred reported infections. That's three times as many as April 1st. For CBS THIS MORNING, Ramy Inocencio, Tokyo. (End VT) GAYLE KING: We have other news this morning, starting with the devastating storms that are now blamed for at least thirty-three deaths across the South. Dozens of reported tornadoes left a path of destruction in several states on Sunday and Monday. The deaths included at least eleven people in Mississippi, nine in South Carolina and eight in Georgia. Jessi Mitchell is in Hampton County, South Carolina, that's about ninety miles west of Charleston. Jessi, good morning to you. I can't imagine a worst timing dealing with a deadly pandemic and now these storms. What is happening there? JESSI MITCHELL: Good morning, Gayle. The pile of rubble behind me was a home just days ago. But as the storm blew through, you can see the destruction--cars are mangled in the trees back there, and across the street the rest of the house blown away. This is in the town of Estill. One example of how the people of this state and others are being force to put their lives back together again. (Begin VT) JESSI MITCHELL: The spring storms were unrelenting in their march across the region, literally uprooting some communities here in South Carolina. CHARITY WOODS: All I heard was a crack and then the house shook really badly. JESSI MITCHELL: Ten-year-old Charity Woods was trapped by a tree that crashed into her room as she slept. Her father struggled to get her free. MAN: Right through there. You know, I don't understand how she got-- how we got out of there. JESSI MITCHELL: Governors in several effected states are concerned about recovering from these storms amid the coronavirus pandemic. BRIAN KEMP: And many of those Georgians are already suffering from being out of work due to the COVID-19 virus, and now they have literally lost everything that they owned. JESSI MITCHELL: In Georgia, where more than four hundred people have died from the coronavirus, tornadoes added to the death toll as they tore across the state, shredding through buildings like Emma and Charles Pritchett's home of several decades. EMMA PRITCHETT: It's a shame. We can't even get in the living room. JESSI MITCHELL: Amanda Pace (ph) said she nearly lost her mom and stepdad. Their mobile home in Chatsworth, Georgia, was destroyed by a tornado on Sunday. AMANDA PACE: I don't know how she made it out. I'd say God is the only reason that she made it out alive. JESSI MITCHELL: In Mississippi, nearly a dozen people were killed by the storms. Among them, Lawrence County Sheriff's Deputy Robert Ainsworth and his wife Paula, a former justice court deputy clerk. RYAN EVERETT: They're just both really fine people and come from really good families, and they're going to be missed by all. (End VT) JESSI MITCHELL: And the sheriff's deputy who died is being remembered as a hero today. He was a Marine Corps veteran and a longtime employee. His department says he died shielding his wife from the tornado. Tony. TONY DOKOUPIL: Just harrowing pictures down there. Jessi, thank you very much. Let's get a check on Campaign 2020. Nearly a week after dropping out of the presidential race, Senator Bernie Sanders has endorsed former Vice President Joe Biden. The two men appeared on a live stream yesterday, no hand shake, no rally and Sanders pledged to help Biden defeat President Trump in November. Political correspondent Ed O'Keefe joins us from Washington. Ed, good morning. This is unity pretty early for the Democrats. What does it mean for the Democratic Party going forward? ED O'KEEFE (CBS News Political Correspondent): It sure is, Tony, a big step towards party unity. To put this into perspective, Sanders' endorsement comes three months earlier than the one he gave Hillary Clinton four years ago and gives Biden about two hundred days now to take on President Trump. Listen here to some of what Sanders and Biden had to say. SENATOR BERNIE SANDERS: I am asking all Americans, I'm asking every Democrat, I'm asking every independent, I'm asking a lot of Republicans to come together in this campaign to support your candidacy which I endorse. JOE BIDEN: Oh. I'm going to need you, not just to win the campaign but to govern. END 
2020-04-10	TONY DOKOUPIL: Let's get some clarity on a variety issues from our Doctor David Agus who's going to join us from his home in Los Angeles. Doctor Agus, good morning. I want to begin with something that came out of the White House coronavirus briefing yesterday. The President himself said he did not think we need widespread testing. That seems to contradict the advice of-- of many of his medical experts. From your perspective, from where you're sitting, what do we need to have in place from a testing perspective before we lift this sort of social distancing guidelines at the end of the month? DR. DAVID AGUS (CBS News Medical Contributor): We're going to need three things, Tony. One is we're going to need the ability to do millions of tests a week. And that word was right, millions of tests. When we open up there's still going to be cases. We also need do what we call immune surveillance, that is a blood test to see whether you actually had the virus or not. So not whether you have it--that's the DNA test or the RNA test--but actually whether you have it. And then the third is we need do social tracing. That is we need the ability if you do test positive to go back and say who did you interact with over the past few days because those people need to be kept at home. And so when you have three of them in place and low numbers of cases, we're going to be able to let people out in a graded way. And we're going to get back to a new normal, but we need those in place. TONY DOKOUPIL: How much progress have we made to having those in place? I mean are they in place today? DR. DAVID AGUS: Well, we-- we're-- we're getting a capacity of tests. We're not there yet with testing who has the virus. We certainly have a ways to go. You know, there was data that the Abbott machines are out there, but not everybody's using them yet. So, the infrastructure needs to grow to do the test. The test for who had the virus--in the past tense, that blood test--we're nowhere with it. We really have not scaled that across the country yet. And there are a couple of small tests that are being done but very little. The idea of social tracing, we're going to have to talk about privacy issues going forward. Do you need to know who I interacted with over the last two days? I think you do to actually do true social distancing or quarantining of those individuals and to do it right. So, those conversations have to start happening now, and the technologies have to be scaled. TONY DOKOUPIL: On the subject of immunity, what-- what are we learning about whether once you've had this if you recover can you get it a second time? DR. DAVID AGUS: It's a great question. And there was data that came out of South Korea that showed that individuals who had it, tested negative twice, then tested positive again. So was it wrong test? Was it a false negative on the test? Did the virus reactivate? The answer is we just don't know. There's a separate study out of China, which I think was really illuminating, in that they looked at the level of immunity in the blood of people. And about thirty percent didn't have enough immunity after they recovered from the virus. And most of those were the younger ones who had the milder symptoms. So what does that mean in the scale of things? We just don't know yet. And those studies, while they're in South Korea and China, we need them to be done here in the United States. It's time now we started to do our own studies and had our own data so we can make the right decisions based on that data. TONY DOKOUPIL: All right. Doctor David Agus, progress clearly has been made, but there is still more ground to cover. Appreciate your perspective this morning. Now, Gayle, I'm going to send it back to you. GAYLE KING: Boy, Tony, so much is unknown, and the unknown is so scary. Thank you both. The economic impact of the coronavirus is getting worse every single day, affecting households all over this country. The newest numbers reveal that 6.8 million Americans have filed for unemployment benefits since mid-March. And that nearly wipes out the more than eighteen million jobs created in the past eleven years. That is the largest and fastest string of U.S. job losses in generations. You can see the damage almost everywhere you look. A seemingly endless mass of cars lined up at the San Antonio food bank just yesterday. It served around ten thousand families, and staffs say they are struggling--struggling to keep up with the rise in demand. We've also heard from Florida residents who waited to pick up unemployment papers this week from a popup drive-through in Hialeah. WOMAN: It's tough. It is tough. As of now, I'm living day by day. I have savings, you know, but there's so much money you can use. GAYLE KING: The United Nations says lockdown measures around the world affect nearly 2.7 billion workers with a B. Anthony. ANTHONY MASON: Yeah. Stunning numbers, Gayle. The latest CBS News poll shows Americans expect long-lasting economic pain. Nearly two-thirds of people we spoke to believe some businesses will bounce back fast, but others will not. We also found more Americans disapprove of President Trump's handling of the crisis as it wears on. Ben Tracy is at the White House. Ben, the President is still pushing for businesses to reopen as soon as possible? BEN TRACY (CBS News White House Correspondent): Good morning. He is. And the President says he would prefer to open up the country all at once with what he calls a big bang. CBS News has now learned that the President is considering forming an economic task force. This would focus on how you get the economy back up and running once the worst of this pandemic is over. But for right now, both parties agree that more financial relief is needed, they just can't agree on how much. The Republican-controlled Senate tried to pass an additional two hundred fifty billion dollars in small business loans on Thursday, but Democrats want double that amount. They want to include money for food stamp programs, hospitals and state and local governments. Now as for the widespread nationwide coronavirus testing that you were talking about with Doctor Agus, President Trump was asked if that's needed before the country reopens. Here's what he said. PRESIDENT DONALD TRUMP: We want to have it, and we're going to see if we have it. Do you need it? No. Is it a nice thing to do? Yes. We're talking about three hundred and twenty-five million people. And that's not going to happen, as you can imagine. BEN TRACY: Now, the government's own experts, including Doctor Anthony Fauci, have said that widespread testing and monitoring is essential before the country reopens. Now, the federal government had planned to end funding for some of those drive-through test sites that have been popping up in states around the country. In a reversal, Vice President Mike Pence now says the federal funding will continue for those sites, and it will be up to the states if they want to take them over themselves. Tony. TONY DOKOUPIL: All right. Ben, thank you very much. We want to give people an update on a coronavirus case we've been following very closely. That's the case of British Prime Minister Boris Johnson. He is out of intensive care but he continues to have coronavirus treatments. A spokesman says Johnson is still hospitalized and under close observation but is in, quote, "extremely good spirits." The acting prime minister is signaling that the nationwide lockdown in place for the prior three weeks will be extended. Officials fear the country has yet to see the peak of the virus' impact in that country. ANTHONY MASON: Ahead, the financial fallout from the pandemic. Why small business owners say the government loans they've been promised are not coming fast enough. But first, it is seven eighteen, time to check your local weather. (LOCAL WEATHER BREAK) (ANNOUNCEMENTS) GAYLE KING: We have much more news ahead. Nearly two thousand U.S. service members have tested positive for the coronavirus. Plus Defense Secretary Mark Esper, if that affects the military's readiness. Plus the toll the virus is taking on medical workers who are risking their lives every day. You're watching CBS THIS MORNING. You know we appreciate that. We'll be right back. (ANNOUNCEMENTS) TONY DOKOUPIL: Ahead in What to Watch, a landlord who did something you would never expect for his tenants. And only on CBS THIS MORNING, Tyler Perry tells Gayle why he was moved to buy groceries for thousands of people affected by the pandemic in Louisiana and Georgia. Your local news is next. Stay with us. (ANNOUNCEMENTS) END 
2020-04-09	While China has lifted a more than two-month coronavirus lockdown in the city of Wuhan, testing is still too behind to know for sure when restrictions should be lifted in the United States, Harvard epidemiologist Marc Lipsitch told the USA TODAY Editorial Board on Wednesday. Even when officials relax social distancing measures ??allowing students return to school and workers to their jobs ??the U.S. may see a second wave of cases, he said. "If we relax restrictions there's every reason to expect a resurgence of cases and we're back in the same problem," Lipsitch said. Lipsitch, an expert in public health interventions, told the Editorial Board he believes a large portion of the population must be immune to the virus either through infection or vaccinations before the country can be reopened. Only three states ??New York, Louisiana and Washington ??have matched or exceeded the testing rate of South Korea, whose testing procedures experts hold out as a model for the world. The country has performed 431,734 tests, according to the Korea Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, which is about 1 out of every 119 people. In comparison, Vice President Mike Pence said last week that more than 1.2 million tests have been given, which means roughly 1 in every 273 people were tested given that the U.S. population is at about 327 million. However, Lipsitch suspects testing numbers are only a fraction of actual cases in the U.S. The uneven testing rate among states has left public health and medical professionals without a clear picture of how much the coronavirus is spreading: Some states are not consistently reporting negative results, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration was slow to approve private sector testing. The lack of capacity has limited testing. The country's future rests in its ability to test and its immunity to the virus, either through infection or vaccinations, Lipsitch said, which could take up to a year to develop and be distributed. Earlier this month, the FDA authorized the first test for the coronavirus that measures antibodies in the blood. Such tests could identify people who have recovered from COVID-19, key for knowing who's immune and for developing a vaccine. However, a study from China suggests that patients who recover from COVID-19 may have a higher risk of reinfection than experts previously suspected. After analyzing the blood samples of 175 patients discharged from the Shanghai Public Health Clinical Center, researchers from Fudan University found that nearly a third had unexpectedly low levels of antibodies. In the meantime, Lipsitch doesn't believe that anyone will have answers on when social distancing measures can be lifted at least for another month or two. Although he acknowledged that the decision is also partly economic, and not totally scientific, he warned places that prematurely reopen may ultimately "see the consequences" of their actions. As the U.S. surpassed 400,000 cases and 14,000 deaths on Wednesday, Lipsitch called COVID-19 "the big one" ??the largest pandemic that the world has seen since the Spanish Flu in 1918. Studies suggest social distancing worked against the 1918 epidemic until they were hastily lifted by some cities in early celebrations. Instead of continuing to "flatten the curve," these cities experienced a second spike in cases. "A lot of the confusion, in general, is premised on the misunderstanding that if you control the epidemic once, then you're done," Lipsitch said. "There's no reason to think that." Contributing: Elizabeth Weise, Matt Wynn and Kevin Crowe, USA TODAY. 
2020-04-07	TONY DOKOUPIL: And, of course, testing is key to finding out exactly how many Americans have the coronavirus. And as states rush to do more tests, commercial labs are struggling to keep up with the pace. Results are still pending for tens of thousands of tests because of a nationwide backlog. Our national correspondent Jericka Duncan is investigating and she spoke to one man who waited more than a week for his results. Jericka, good morning. JERICKA DUNCAN (CBS THIS MORNING National Correspondent): Good morning to you. You know, simply put, there is a backlog in some places and the Michigan man that we spoke to said that he waited longer than expected for his results and that it was his family who happened to go online and sort of stumble upon those results. And it's not just the sick people that this waiting game, if he will, is impacting, hospital officials say that that is also costing them valuable resources. (Begin VT) MIKE HOFFER: I think you-- you want to know what's going on with your body and then what you might be facing, you know, further ahead. JERICKA DUNCAN: Mike Hoffer says he was left without answers for eight days after taking a COVID-19 test. LISA HOFFER: You're in this constant worry of, you know, is-- you know, he going to wake up in the morning? Is he going to wake up in the middle of the night gasping for air? JERICKA DUNCAN: His wife, Lisa, said the lack of information also left friends and family wondering if they were exposed in the meantime. LISA HOFFER: Not only can we not get answers, but we can't give answers to our employers, to our friends, to our family, people that we had been around in the couple weeks before. JERICKA DUNCAN: Mike's test was administered by his local urgent care. But even national groups like LabCorp are reporting turnaround times of four to five days. And Quest Diagnostics tells CBS THIS MORNING, it is still working to clear eighty thousand tests from its backlog. That's down from one hundred sixty thousand tests nearly two weeks ago. Should the private laboratories be doing more? DR. ASHISH JHA: I think everybody needs to be doing more. And then private labs are part of the solution. My sense is that they are working as-- as hard as they can. JERICKA DUNCAN: Doctor Ashish Jha is the director of the Harvard Global Health Institute. DR. ASHISH JHA: Without testing, you don't know how much disease there it is. You can't isolate people who are infected. You can't make treatment plans for people who are infected. JERICKA DUNCAN: Hospital officials say testing also helps to manage resources like bed availability and personal protective equipment, or PPE. DR. GEOFF BAIRD: When it comes down to lab testing, turnaround time is PPE. JERICKA DUNCAN: Doctor Geoff Baird is the acting chair of Laboratory Medicine at UW Medicine in Seattle. He says the hospitals in-house testing can process results within hours, which helps them save valuable resources. DR. GEOFF BAIRD: With a hospitalized patient or the patient evaluated in the emergency room or a clinic, we needed to treat all of those patients when they come in as if they had it because if they do we need to be protected, and if they don't we could then relax our PPE standards and treat them in a more appropriate way. JERICKA DUNCAN: But it's not just private companies struggling to keep up. As of Sunday, more than fourteen thousand people in California are awaiting test results from both private and public health labs. Many other states have yet to report specific numbers on testing backlogs. Inconsistencies between states inspired the COVID tacking project, which collects all the data state by state in one place. Alexis Madrigal, a writer for The Atlantic, is a co-founder. ALEXIS MADRIGAL: We feel like if you're part of the national response to this epidemic, then you owe the nation transparency. What we need from them is not perfection, but transparency, honesty and openness. (End VT) JERICKA DUNCAN: Both Quest and LabCorp tell CBS THIS MORNING that they have increased their testing capacity right now. Both companies say they are testing around thirty-five thousand each day. And combined, both companies have run more than one million tests. Tony. TONY DOKOUPIL: Yeah. But still more work to do. Jericka, thank you very much. Ahead, why the death toll in one of Europe's hardest-hit countries may be much higher than reported. CBS News gets a rare look at a nursing home on the front lines in Italy. You're watching CBS THIS MORNING. (ANNOUNCEMENTS) ANTHONY MASON: Italy is claiming progress in fighting the coronavirus. Authorities reported nearly thirty-six hundred new cases yesterday, the smallest day-to-day increase in almost three weeks. Italy has more than a hundred thirty-two thousand official cases, the third most of any country. The reported death toll of more than sixteen thousand seems to be an under estimates. CBS News foreign correspondent Chris-- Chris Livesay visited a town in Northern Italy that has paid a terrible price. CHRIS LIVESAY (CBS News Foreign Correspondent): Good morning. Throughout this pandemic in Italy, nursing homes have been particularly hard-hit. But perhaps, none more so than here at the Casa di Riposo of Nembro. They gave us an exclusive look inside. (Begin VT) CHRIS LIVESAY: Victim after victim, thirty-three at this nursing home. Agnese Magoni, a housekeeper who loved walks in the garden. Giulio Bonomi, a carpenter and bookworm. These are the empty beds that used to belong to patients who died of COVID-19, doctor say, but the unnerving thing is that they weren't tested before they died so they don't appear in the official number of COVID-19 deaths in Italy. The virus struck so hard and so fast, they never made to it a hospital. And it's only those who die in hospitals that are counted in the national tally. Even authorities acknowledge the actual death toll may be much higher. You called it a tsunami. DR. BARBARA CODALLI: Yeah, tsunami. CHRIS LIVESAY: A tsunami that killed three residents per day at its peak, says Doctor Barbara Codalli, and could still strike the fifty-two surviving residents. But have they been tested? (Dr. Barbara Codalli speaking foreign language) CHRIS LIVESAY: "No. And neither have we," she tells me. "I might have COVID, too. Two co-workers have died, and many others are home sick." And it's at home where untold victims also die, untested and uncounted like Alessandro Boromelli. Police are quick to collect his oxygen tanks now in short supply. (Valerio Boromelli speaking foreign language) CHRIS LIVESAY: "This disease is wiping out the generation that built everything around us," says his son. Were you or your father or anyone at your home tested for COVID-19? (FOREIGN LANGUAGE). VALERIO BOROMELLI: No. No. CHRIS LIVESAY: Underreporting the number of dead is common even in Nembro, a town which already has the highest per capita death rate in the country. We spoke to the mayor who crunched the numbers. So what's the death toll? (Claudio Cancelli speaking foreign language) CHRIS LIVESAY: "According to our analysis, it's four times higher. Most deaths simply aren't counted," he says. But the families and friends left behind believe every life matters and needs to be remembered. It's also important to remember that underreporting deaths isn't limited to this town. Mayors across the country are sounding the alarm, warning COVID-19 is even deadlier than we think. For CBS THIS MORNING, Chris Livesay, Nembro, Italy. (End VT) ANTHONY MASON: So hard to get a full estimate of the impact of this disease. Ahead, Vladimir Duthiers looks at the stories you'll be talking about today. But first, it's seven forty-three, time to check your local weather. (LOCAL WEATHER BREAK) (ANNOUNCEMENTS) TONY DOKOUPIL: I've noticed "cut your own hair at home" searches are rising on Google. But forget the scissors, bald is beautiful as our Vlad Duthiers shows every single day on his beautiful segment, What to Watch. And he joins us now. Vlad, good morning. GAYLE KING: Very nice. VLADIMIR DUTHIERS: Good morning. Actually, a lot of people on social media-- hi, guys, a lot of people on social media have been saying that they like me growing out my hair. So I'm going to keep this look for the time being, while we are working from home like so many millions of other Americans working from home, as well. But while we're working from home safe and healthy, we're checking out some of the stories we think you'll be talking about today, including this. Tributes are pouring in for legendary Bond girl Honor Blackman. Her family said she died of natural causes at her home in England. Blackman, of course, is best known for playing opposite Sean Connery in the 1964 James Bond movie Goldfinger. Goldfinger. She was also the original female sidekick in 1960s TV spy series, The Avengers. Honor Blackman was ninety-four years old. Her death was unrelated to coronavirus. My favorite line, Anthony, I know, you're a huge James Bond fan, as am I, even posting on social media is when Bond wakes up and he miss her, he says, "I must be dreaming." ANTHONY MASON: My fav-- my favorite Honor Blackman quote, Vlad, is she said "most Bond girls have been-- have been bimbos, I have never been a bimbo." And she was not at all. By the way, Vlad, if you grow your hair out, I'll shave my head. How about that? All right. Vlad, you've also got-- VLADIMIR DUTHIERS: All right. Looking forward to that. ANTHONY MASON: --a Hollywood star who-- we've got a Hollywood star who surprised some fans during their favorite game. What was up? VLADIMIR DUTHIERS: All right. All right. All right. Matthew McConaughey hosted a virtual bingo game for residents at a Texas senior center. His wife Camila Alves, their kids and his mom, Kay, joined him in the action. Take a look at this. MATTHEW MCCONAUGHEY: We got an I-24, I-24. KAY MCCONAUGHEY: I-24. MATTHEW MCCONAUGHEY: Oh. Richard Black just waving a hammer up high. We got Charles King in the iPad up high. We got two winners. Look at this, that board. VLADIMIR DUTHIERS: So if you got bingo, you got to ask Matthew a question. The residents posted a video on social media in September asking McConaughey to join them for a game of bingo. He wasn't able to do it until now, Gayle. What a great story. GAYLE KING: It's the type of thing that, you know, he's-- they've been asking him and asking him and he never had time until now. But we've all got lots of time. I think it's nice. Like everybody, he is trying to figure out ways to help out. But I'm-- I-- I just got to say about Anthony shaving his hair, please, please, Vlad keep growing your hair. I want to see that. I want to see that. VLADIMIR DUTHIERS: Deal. GAYLE KING: I think for that one. VLADIMIR DUTHIERS: Deal. GAYLE KING: Deal. Deal. Okay. TONY DOKOUPIL: Gayle, we're trying to keep yours. We're trying to keep them. GAYLE KING: So this next one-- you know, I think that would be hilarious. I would love to see that. I'm trying to think, Tony, what could we do to get in on this? Nothing. All right. Let's talk about your next story, Vlad. VLADIMIR DUTHIERS: All right. So not even-- GAYLE KING: Justin Timberlake is very excited. VLADIMIR DUTHIERS: --quarantine can stop Chuck-- so Chuck Franzke, he was getting down with his bad self. Take a look at this, this is a World War II veteran caught busting a move to JT's "Can't Stop the Feeling." The ninety-seven-year-old taps his feet back and forth, rolls his arms in the Instagram video. He first got our attention back in Christmas time for dancing to Christmas music. Franzke says he just wants people on social media to smile. Take a look. CHUCK FRANZKE: One of the-- on Facebook, one day I saw one dislike. And I wondered, what in the heck did I do that somebody didn't like? And I would like to know what it was. I like being liked. So that's why I try to be nice to everybody. VLADIMIR DUTHIERS: What a message, be nice to everybody. He is a better dancer than I am. My only move is the overbite, Gayle. Justin Timberlake said it made his day. GAYLE KING: Right. We like this. TONY DOKOUPIL: Oh, man. GAYLE KING: I like that so much. TONY DOKOUPIL: I don't have any moves at all, Vlad. I really don't. GAYLE KING: I like that so much, Vlad. TONY DOKOUPIL: I mean-- so, my-- my big question is-- VLADIMIR DUTHIERS: Made my day. TONY DOKOUPIL: --who was that individual who clicked the-- who clicked the do not like button on Facebook? I mean, show yourself. Come forward. ANTHONY MASON: There's always one contrary. GAYLE KING: A hater-- a hater, Tony. ANTHONY MASON: There's always one. VLADIMIR DUTHIERS: You got to love this. GAYLE KING: It's a hater. TONY DOKOUPIL: All right. Thank you, Vlad. GAYLE KING: It's a hater. TONY DOKOUPIL: Ahead and only on CBS THIS MORNING, actress Priyanka Chopra Jonas. (ANNOUNCEMENTS) *****************************************************************************(8:00 AM, EDT) GAYLE KING: It's Tuesday, April 7, 2020. Welcome back to CBS THIS MORNING. I am Gayle King with Tony Dokoupil and Anthony Mason. New challenges. We'll ask the U.S. surgeon general about the evolving fight against the coronavirus and if all states should adopt stay-at-home policies. TONY DOKOUPIL: Starry night. Inside a brand-new celebrity packed event bringing the world together to help front line workers. ANTHONY MASON: And Oprah's book club. She'll reveal her latest pick only on CBS THIS MORNING. And we'll talk with the author. GAYLE KING: It's different for her. But first, here's today's Eye Opener @ 8. U.S. officials report more than three hundred and sixty-eight thousand cases of the virus, though the real number could be much higher than that. DAVID BEGNAUD: Patients will not only come from New York, they are going to start coming from New Jersey, which is just right across the river behind me. And that's to help relieve some of the pressure on the New Jersey hospitals, too. JANET SHAMLIAN: Drivers are being diverted off the highway as they come in to Texas. They are being questioned by state troopers about where they plan to spend the next fourteen days in self quarantine. GAYLE KING: We are all craving some kind of positive news. And it looks like maybe we're seeing it here in New York. DR. TARA NARULA: We're certainly seeing this leveling off of ICU admissions, hospitalizations, intubations all of which is very encouraging, whether we are at the peak, or about to be at the peak. It's-- it's all good sign. STEPHEN COLBERT: Some local officials are customizing their requirements. For example, instead of saying to stay six-feet apart, one Florida county told residents to keep at least one large alligator between you and everyone else at all times. Luckily, everyone in Florida is issued an alligator. And, of course, you're then going to want to keep six-feet away from the alligator just to be safe. GAYLE KING: Try to avoid all alligators. Welcome back to CBS THIS MORNING. As you can see, we're now broadcasting from each of our homes out of an abundance of caution. You guys, too, are also always avoiding alligators at all costs. I know it's not just me. I know it's not just me. TONY DOKOUPIL: No. GAYLE KING: We begin-- we begin today-- ANTHONY MASON: Crocodiles too, Gayle. GAYLE KING: --of course, with the coronavirus. Yeah, me too. Me too, Anthony. Me too. We begin, of course, with the latest on the coronavirus and the awful-- awful, awful toll from the coronavirus has hit yet another milestone and it's not good. U.S. deaths have now surged to about eleven thousand, that's up from about ninety-six hundred yesterday morning. The U.S. now has more than three hundred and sixty-eight thousand reported cases. Anthony, the true number could be higher because of underreporting. ANTHONY MASON: That's right, Gayle. New York continues to have by far the most cases in America. But take a look at this, over the last twelve days that state's daily percentage increase in cases has been trending downward and that could mean the curve is starting to flatten, emphasize could. A crew member aboard the Comfort, the Navy hospital ship docked in New York City on the Hudson River, has tested positive for the virus. The Navy says the person is isolated from patients and operations will not be affected. The diagnosis came on the same day the ship was approved to treat coronavirus patients following a week long delay. Tony. TONY DOKOUPIL: The U.S. Surgeon General Doctor Jerome Adams joins us from Washington. He is a member, of course, of the White House Coronavirus Task Force. Doctor Adams, good morning. Good to see you again. DR. JEROME ADAMS (U.S. Surgeon General): Good morning. Good to be here. TONY DOKOUPIL: I want to begin-- I want to begin with those glimmers of hope that the White House has been pointing to. In New York State, our hardest-hit state, hospitalizations and deaths have stabilized in the last couple of days. What does that tell us about the fight here and the fight in other emerging hot spots? DR. JEROME ADAMS: Well, absolutely. I started off the week telling Americans that this was going to be a really rough week, but I also wanted Americans to understand that when we've dealt with tough times in the past the country has rallied and-- and what we're seeing now is the country is rallying. We're seeing New York and New Jersey have hospitalizations level off and start to come down. Deaths are starting to slow down and level off. And that's important because it tells us mitigation is working. It tells us what the American people are doing by staying at home, by social distancing, by practicing good hygiene and the thirty-day guidelines for America are actually affected and they will help us get through to the other side of this unfortunate tragedy. TONY DOKOUPIL: Doctor Adams, how-- how can we be sure that mitigation is working as well as we hope it to be working when we don't know, to put it plainly, how many Americans actually have this virus because we don't have widespread testing. So to put it more bluntly, how do we know when we're in the clear and we can get back to normal if we don't know how widespread this is? DR. JEROME ADAMS: Well, there are two questions in there and I'll quickly unpack both of them. The most important thing is that we know mitigation is working because when we look at the curves of Washington and California we see that they've been very flat and that's coincident with them instituting aggressive mitigation. We see Italy and Spain down on the down slopes of their curves coincident with them starting mitigation, so we know mitigation is working. Now you mentioned testing. Testing is a concern. We are going to be at two million tests this week and it's rapidly ramping up with the commercial industry coming on board. We're also seeing more people doing antibody testing. So what I want the American people to know is I've talked with Admiral Giroir. I speak with him every day. He is our testing czar. And he assures me that by the end of this month we should be not only just doing diagnostic testing but also having good surveillance testing across the country. At two million people by the end of this week, we're getting really close to South Korea's initial testing surge numbers and we are, in fact, doing surveillance testing in some parts of the country where they haven't seen a big increase in cases. So we're not there yet. But we are moving in the right direction. TONY DOKOUPIL: And-- and, of course-- and, of course, that surveillance testing is so important. I want to touch on another point of concern. And that is the-- the death rate among African-Americans. DR. JEROME ADAMS: Mm-Hm. TONY DOKOUPIL: In Louisiana, we heard the governor say seventy percent of the fatalities are people of color. In Chicago, we heard the mayor say more than seventy percent in that city. Your response to that and should the CDC or the federal government be tracking this virus demographically to warn people? DR. JEROME ADAMS: Well, absolutely. The CDC and the federal government should be and are tracking this virus and trying to break it down by different demographic groups so that we can help people understand. But my office long before COVID-19 has been talking about health equity, has been talking about the need to help people understand when they are at risk and to actually intervene. And when you look at being black in America, number one, people, unfortunately, are more likely to be of low socioeconomic status, which makes it harder to social distance. Number two, we know that blacks are more likely to have diabetes, heart disease, lung disease. And I shared myself personally that I have high blood pressure, that I have heart disease and spent a week in the ICU due to a heart condition, that I actually have asthma and I'm pre-diabetic. And so I represent that legacy of growing up poor and black in America. And I and many black Americans are at highest risk for COVID. That's why we need everyone to do-- TONY DOKOUPIL: So, Doc-- DR. JEROME ADAMS: --their part to slow the spread. TONY DOKOUPIL: So, Doctor, I imagine that it's-- it's frustrating for you to hear those numbers seventy percent of the dead in Louisiana, people of color, African-Americans. Is there a particular-- DR. JEROME ADAMS: It breaks my heart. TONY DOKOUPIL: --recommendation you have for that community? It breaks your heart. DR. JEROME ADAMS: My recommendation-- my recommendation is to understand that you are at risk. You are not immune. And-- and my recommendation is to all of America that we're really doing this to project not just ourselves but each other. Every single person who stays at home, whether you're white, black, brown or yellow, is a person who is not spreading COVID and is a person who can protect their neighbors. When you wear a cloth facial covering if you go outside, you're doing it to protect your neighbor. Now-- now is really the time for us to come together and say, look, I'm doing this not just for me and my family but I'm doing this for my community and all communities across the country. And it is working. We will get through this. We are seeing progress, but America has the power to change the trajectory of this epidemic. The public really needs to keep doing their part. TONY DOKOUPIL: All right. Doctor Jerome Adams, thank you very much for being here. Gayle, you heard him say breaks his heart. A lot of broken hearts in this country right now. What do we have coming up next? GAYLE KING: I-- I know, Tony. I actually call it an equal opportunity heartbreaker. What we know very clearly is that COVID-19 does not discriminate and we can't-- what Doctor Adams is saying we can't emphasize that enough. Only on CBS THIS MORNING, a message of hope. Oprah will reveal her next book club selection and the book's author will join us. It's a big pick for Oprah, something she normally doesn't do this type of book. I can't wait to tell you what it is. But first, it is eight-oh-eight, time to check your local weather. (LOCAL WEATHER BREAK) (ANNOUNCEMENTS) ANTHONY MASON: We have much more news ahead. Top artists and entertainers will take part in a historic global festival to celebrate health care workers fighting the coronavirus. Only on CBS THIS MORNING, actress Priyanka Chopra Jonas tells us how this massive event hopes to make a difference. You're watching CBS THIS MORNING. (ANNOUNCEMENTS) END 
2020-04-07	A proven plan for saving lives and our economy has emerged. The only thing left to do is execute it. The only thing harder than staying at home will be to learn that it has all been for naught. We are staying inside, as we all now know, to buy some time. And we will all have been in a futile exercise if we don't begin to take advantage of our long pause. We have all become familiar now with the models from the world's best epidemiologists, showing that if we practice social distancing we can help stave off overwhelming our hospital systems. What few have appreciated, though, is the tail end of these models. Yes, we can "flatten the curve," but what happens after two months or four months or six months once we let up? We need to keep progressing Here, the models are also consistent. Once we let up, because there is not widespread immunity, the virus comes roaring back. This is exactly what happened with the 1918 influenza pandemic. Wave one was bad, but it subsided. Wave two hit in the fall, killing millions. What does this all mean? If we don't use these next two months wisely, to ramp up and mobilize nationally, then the weeks of social distancing we have already done, at great expense, will be for naught. In other words, we'll be back right at the beginning. Ever land on the slide about three quarters of the way up at end at Chutes and Ladders? You know, the one that brings you all the way down? That could be us. The good news here is that there is a plan. It isn't a plan made up by just us, or favoring one balance over another, or ungraspable to the public. A consensus has formed on a path out of this. There is hope. Expert after expert is now saying the same thing. The plan -- isolate to surge to manage -- is quite simple. Limit the number of people who could be exposed to the coronavirus through social distancing; produce testing kits (on front end) and resources to avoid a decimation of our health system (on the back end); then manage the virus through a variety of measures until a vaccine is available. What we have happening is called consilience: when analysis from different disciplines begins to converge on a common approach and conclusion based on their different discipline's standards. From homeland security, public health science, clinical medicine, health care delivery and economics, we're all saying the same thing, just different words. And if there is solace in crowds, the crowd of experts has aligned. Scott Gottlieb, former commissioner of the FDA, called for a Life Science Marshall Plan. Politicians on both sides agree. Elizabeth Warren has a plan for Protecting our Economy and our People from Coronavirus; Newt Gingrich wrote an op-ed: "America must act now -- and act big." Expert after expert -- Lisa Monaco (foreign affairs), Atul Gawande (surgeon), Zeke Emmanuel (healthy policy), Marc Lipsitch (epidemiologist), Ashish Jha (physician) -- have published pieces on this in the past few weeks. A national plan is necessary Every disparate discipline with a stake in this fight has settled on some variation of this as the path forward: total convergence on means and end. The best part is that we know it works. South Korea did it. We can, too -- save lives and get our economy fired back up within a few months. But knowing what to do is different than acting upon that knowledge. Italy is a case in point. This plan only works if a few conditions are met. We must have a national plan and a national mobilization, not state-by-state ad-hoc approaches; a UNITED States plan. We cannot half-ass it; this is an "all-in" moment in history if there ever was one. We cannot think about this in terms of weeks; it took two months for each successful country or region to get this under control. We must act now. A forceful declaration from our national leaders would also bring stability to the economy and the country. The messaging needs to be clear and factual; Americans can handle the truth. We have a UNITED States plan; it works; the next two months will be bad, but we will bounce back beginning in June if we make these collective sacrifices. It's an "ask not what your country can do for you" moment. The true and only measure of success is at some point we start to see news stories that we over-reacted. And if we don't see those stories, then we screwed up, and we'll all know that, too, without the need for a news story. The only thing left to do is execute the plan. Will we?  Joseph Allen is assistant professor and director of the Healthy Buildings program at the Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health. Juliette Kayyem, the faculty chair of the Homeland Security Program at Harvard's Kennedy School of Government, was assistant secretary at DHS. 
2020-04-03	The FDA has authorized the first test for coronavirus that measures antibodies in the blood. Such tests could identify people who have recovered from COVID-19, key for knowing who's immune and developing a vaccine. Cellex Inc. of Research Triangle Park, North Carolina, received an emergency use authorization for its test Thursday from the Food and Drug Administration. It uses blood drawn from a vein to measure antibodies to the SARS-CoV-2 virus that causes COVID-19. It is the first of an expected flood of such tests as companies race to develop them. Antibody tests are already being used in several countries, including China, South Korea and Singapore. "Antibody positivity likely means a person has recovered and can't be reinfected. This test will be extremely valuable, especially for healthcare workers," said Alan Wu, a professor of laboratory medicine at the University of California, San Francisco and chief of the clinical chemistry and toxicology laboratories at Zuckerberg San Francisco General Hospital. The Cellex test and other blood-based tests are different from nasal swab tests that identify patients with active SARS-CoV-2 virus in their mucous membranes. Those tests show a patient has an active case of COVID-19. Blood tests can determine someone had ??and recovered from ??COVID-19. Such tests also will be crucial for vaccine production. To prove a vaccine works, you must show antibody production in someone who hasn't been exposed to COVID-19. Only an antibody test can do that. 
2020-04-02	In late February as coronavirus infections mounted in Wuhan, China, authorities went door-to-door for health checks ??forcibly isolating every resident in makeshift hospitals and temporary quarantine shelters, even separating parents from children who displayed symptoms of COVID-19, no matter how seemingly mild. Caretakers at the city's ubiquitous large apartment buildings were pressed into service as ad hoc security guards, monitoring the temperatures of all residents, deciding who could come in and implementing inspections of delivered food and medicines. Outside, drones hovered above streets, yelling at people to get inside and scolding them for not wearing face masks. Elsewhere in China, facial-recognition software, linked to a mandatory phone app that color-coded people based on their contagion risk, decided who could enter shopping malls, subwaysand other public spaces. "We couldn't go outside under any circumstances. Not even if you have a pet," said Wang Jingjun, 27, a graduate student who returned to Wuhan from the Chinese coastal province of Guangdong in mid-January to live with her elderly mother and grandparents. "Those with dogs had to play with them inside and teach them to use the bathroom in a certain spot." As the epicenter of the coronavirus pandemic has moved to the USA, Chinese officials and public health experts insist that even if President Donald Trump were to immediately adopt all the strict testing and lockdown measures that Western scientific advisers advocate, these actions would still not be sufficient to stem the spread of a disease that is swiftly approaching a million worldwide cases. More severe steps are needed in the USA, these officials say, although they cast doubt on whether Americans could do what the Chinese did, for a mixture of reasons: political will and deep-rooted cultural inclinations among them. To help quell its outbreak, Beijing embarked on one of the largest mass mobilization efforts in history, closing all schools, forcing millions of people inside, quickly building more than a dozen vast temporary hospitals, deploying thousands of extra medical staff to Wuhan and the surrounding Hubei province and meticulously testing and tracing anyone and everyone who may have encountered the virus. It did a lot more than that. "Lockdowns, bans on gatherings, basic quarantines, testing, hand-washing, this is not enough," Huiyao Wang, a senior adviser to China's government, told USA TODAY in a phone interview from Beijing. "You need to isolate people on an enormous scale, in stadiums, big exhibition halls, wherever you can. It seems extreme. It works. " 'No one left behind' was the slogan in Wuhan," he said. "No one." In the USA, Trump urged Americans to avoid gatherings of 10 or more people and suggested the worst-affected states should shutter schools, bars and restaurants. Overall, he has left it to individual states and cities to decide whether to close businesses or explicitly order people to stay at home, despite evidence from countries in Asia, such as China, Singapore, South Korea and Taiwan, that aggressively limiting public gatherings and social interactions can help stop transmission of COVID-19, when done in combination with extensive testing and tracing of the disease. Trump said he expects to see U.S. cases peak "around Easter," although his claims about how quickly the USA can overcome the outbreak and bounce back contradict assessments from top health officials, such as Anthony Fauci, the director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases. After New York City became the new locus of the outbreak, Trump announced Sunday an extension of federal guidance on social distancing measures through April and issued a "strong travel advisory" urging residents of New York, New Jersey and Connecticut to refrain from nonessential travel for 14 days to help limit the spread of the virus. The U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention said the new restrictions would help slow the spread of the respiratory illness, which has infected more than 209,000 Americans and killed more than 4,600. The daily death toll in the USA may not dip below 100 per day before June, according to a study by the University of Washington. China's nationwide response Wang, the Chinese government adviser, said the example of Wuhan, where authorities have started lifting some of their stringent anti-virus controls that kept tens of millions of people at home for two months, illustrates that the USA and West more generally need to take far more radical virus-dampening actions that many people outside China might find culturally, logistically and emotionally unpalatable. "It was not just families being isolated together in Wuhan but individuals being isolated away from their friends and families," said Andy Mok, a fellow at the Center for China and Globalization, a public policy think tank based in Beijing. "China's response to the outbreak was truly a nationwide response: systematic, comprehensive and coordinated. This is why China was able to 'flatten the curve' so dramatically," he said, referring to social isolation measures aimed at keeping the number of coronavirus infections at a manageable level for hospitals and medical workers who would otherwise be overwhelmed with sick patients. Mok said that even in Beijing, about 750 miles north of Wuhan, coronavirus rules were established requiring residents to have a formal pass to get in and out of their apartment buildings and homes. At the outbreak's height in Wuhan, nobody was allowed in or out of the city, and access to food stores was limited to once every few days. Video footage published by the Australian Broadcasting Corp., the country's state-funded broadcaster, showed Chinese authorities in Wuhan welding doors to entire apartment buildings shut ??with residents inside ??to enforce quarantines. The footage, collected from Chinese social media users, could not be independently verified by USA TODAY. Mok questioned whether Americans, raised on a diet of individualism and civil liberties that has informed every aspect of life from travel to economic institutions, would be willing to abide by invasive virus detection and containment methods that require a strong commitment to "collectivism" and abridged freedoms. Europe has adopted some, but not all, of China's most restrictive steps. In France, residents must fill out of a signed attestation to justify leaving their homes or apartments. Police hand out large fines to anyone who doesn't follow the rules. "It's a very clever form of social engineering for civic purposes: It forces you to think about and justify to yourself, as well as to the world, why you are leaving the house," said Sarah Maza, a French history professor and U.S. citizen living in France for the year. Yang Junchao, a member of a Chinese delegation of COVID-19 doctors and medical experts assisting Italy in halting its coronavirus infections ??the worst in Europe ??said its epidemic will be controlled "as long as the Italian public cooperates." Some American public health officials have acknowledged that to bring the virus under control ??outside of a vaccine breakthrough ??actions that overstep the bounds of what most Americans would be comfortable with, such as mass quarantines and other severe restrictions on movement, may be necessary. "The approach we should be taking right now is one that most people would find to be too drastic because otherwise, it is not drastic enough," Francis Collins, the director of the National Institutes of Health, said in a USA TODAY interview. "It may be a country like China has a more top-down ability to insist on certain behavior changes. But we ought to be able to do it in our way, in a bottom-up fashion," he said. 'Widespread discontent'? Trump administration officials have repeatedly condemned China's initial suppression of warnings about the outbreak and questioned the accuracy of Beijing's infection figures. China's central government has dismissed persistent allegations that it tried to downplay the severity of infections, although it has not denied initially detaining whistleblowing doctors and citizen journalists in December who tried to speak out about the mysterious virus in Wuhan. China's National Health Commission said Tuesday it will start including asymptomatic coronavirus carriers in its daily figures. As of Wednesday, China recorded less than half ??about 82,000 ??the number of U.S. coronavirus cases. It may be bracing for a potential second wave of infections: Over the past few days, China has reclosed some public spaces and businesses, such as movie theaters, amid spiking clusters of cases, mostly imported. "The Chinese are trying to paint the narrative that the model they have pursued has been a huge success and that we are failing" because of our mode of governance, J. Stephen Morrison, director of the Global Health Policy Center at the Center for Strategic and International Affairs (CSIS), a Washington think tank, said in a media briefing. Morrison said there's significant evidence that the Chinese government's handling of the crisis sparked "widespread discontent and dissatisfaction," pointing to the case of Dr. Li Wenliang, who was detained when he tried to alert other health care providers about the novel coronavirus. He died from the virus. Concern has grown over the whereabouts of Ai Fen, the head of Emergency at Wuhan Central Hospital. She is the doctor who first alerted Wenliang about the spread of the virus. An Australian investigation team that interviewed Fen last week said she has disappeared, possibly detained by the Chinese government. Heather Conley, the director of the Europe program at CSIS, said that although the response in democratic countries may look chaotic, there's strength in that approach. "You have neighbors helping neighbors, and you have states making decisions. Sometimes it's the federal level having to catch up with those decisions, and that's a much more dynamic, nimble and resilient response," she said. Jan Renders, 29, a graduate student who was studying Chinese politics at Central China Normal University in Wuhan and was airlifted out Feb. 1 to his home in Belgium, said the Chinese response was "too harsh" and lacked transparency. "In Wuhan, when everything went into lockdown, nobody could come or go, and that included patients. The hospitals were overloaded, and I'm sure people died because they couldn't be transported to other hospitals, where there was room," he said, noting that German hospitals started taking coronavirus patients from overcrowded hospitals in Italy, where more than 13,000 people have died of COVID-19, the most anywhere. Edward Tse, the Hong Kong-based founder of the Gao Feng Advisory Co., a management consultancy with roots in mainland China, said his perception is that, on the whole, most people in China supported the government's tough measures. "Isolation is the key," he said. "It just depends on how you do it. The Chinese government decided to do it in a certain way. It turned out to be quite effective." A British video blogger posted a video on China's Twitter-like Weibo platform last week that explained how China implemented the softer side of its policy of "ling jiechu," which translates as "zero contact." It allowed neighborhood committees to take charge of arrangements for shopping and deliveries. Highways were made toll-free, with no limits to the number of cars on a road. For those without a car, customized bus routes were set up and operated according to demand. Tickets could be purchased on a smartphone app, and capacity was set at 50%. Many restaurants installed basic but effective pulley systems to maintain employee-customer distance. Wang, the student who returned to Wuhan from Guangdong to live with her elderly relatives, said many people in China "have the idea, and maybe it's a stereotype, that medical care" in the USA and Europe is more advanced than in China. "I am worried about places like New York City and Milan," she said. "I don't know why the deaths are so much higher there. I hope they will be strong and keep calm." Hjelmgaard reported from London, Lyman from Rome and Shesgreen from Washington. 
2020-04-01	WASHINGTON ??One virus came from an unusual kind of cat and killed hundreds of people. Another was blamed on pigs and killed 18,000 people worldwide, two-thirds of them in the USA. A third came from camels, killed hundreds and remains more lethal than the others. inside In the Army, decades-old routine has been turned on its head. 2A April Fools' Day gags probably won't fly in these times. 4A When companies start reporting their earnings, be prepared to hold on to your hat. 1B Each of these respiratory viruses, which sparked worldwide panics during the past 20 years, offers lessons in how to battle the new coronavirus that has sickened more than 800,000 people around the world. Public health agencies in the USA are hampered in putting those lessons into action because they haven't spent enough time and money preparing between crises. Health funding at every level of government has spiked feverishly during outbreaks, only to stagnate or fall after the outbreak dissipated. "Every time we have an infectious disease emergency, you see a lot of interest in funding and robust response, and then that disappears when these events recede from the headlines. We have this cycle of panic and neglect, panic and neglect," said Amesh Adalja, a senior scholar at Johns Hopkins University's Center for Health Security. No two pandemics alike Health experts joke that if you've seen one pandemic, you've seen one pandemic. That's because transmission rates and the severity of illness vary from virus to virus. Severe acute respiratory syndrome, which swept the world from China in 2003, infected 8,096 people and killed 774. But it didn't spread easily among people. Limiting interactions with civet cats in China restricted the outbreak. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention still doesn't allow those animals to be brought into the USA. Swine flu, the nickname for a strain of H1N1, sickened 61 million Americans and killed 12,469 after erupting in North America in early 2009. A vaccine was widely distributed by that November, after the pandemic peaked. The remedy is incorporated in the annual flu vaccine. Middle East respiratory syndrome is more lethal than the others ??some estimates say it killed a third of those infected. That has limited its spread because people die before they can sicken others. After emerging in Saudi Arabia in 2012, the virus that originated with camels has largely remained in that region. There have been 2,494 lab-confirmed cases and 858 deaths. In comparison, the new coronavirus pandemic infected more than 823,000 people worldwide and killed more than 40,000 by Tuesday, according to figures compiled by Johns Hopkins University. "This is a virus that can spread easily, can spread surreptitiously and can cause severe disease, for which we have neither a vaccine nor demonstrably effective treatment," said Harvey Fineberg, former provost of Harvard University and former president of the Institute of Medicine (now called the National Academy of Medicine). "This mix is a real new danger." 'A knee-jerk-first thing' Ann Marie Kimball, a professor emeritus in epidemiology at the University of Washington who worked on the SARS outbreak, said technology improvements allowed researchers to identify the new coronavirus in about a week rather than the month it took for SARS. Chinese authorities isolated the virus Jan. 7 and shared the genetic sequence Jan. 12 so countries could develop tests. "The transparency recommendation internationally in the scientific community has definitely got legs," Kimball said, and there has been "terrific progress" in Chinese science and technology. As an unfamiliar pneumonia spread, political leaders in China, then in the USA, were initially reluctant to acknowledge the severity of the outbreak, she said. "This seems to be a knee-jerk-first thing for leaders, to say, 'Oh, this can't be as bad as you're telling me it is,' " Kimball said. The Chinese government notified the World Health Organization on Dec. 31 about a pneumonia outbreak with an unknown cause in the city of Wuhan. There were 44 cases by Jan. 3. The virus spread to Thailand, Japan and South Korea by Jan. 20. The first case may have been as early as Nov. 17, although it wasn't recognized at the time, according to Chinese reports. U.S. officials said China should have notified the rest of the world as the number of cases grew in mid-December. "I don't know if you'd say China is to blame," President Donald Trump said. "Certainly, we didn't get an early run on it. It would have been helpful if we knew about it earlier." SARS, MERS and H1N1 Though China didn't alert the World Health Organization until Dec. 31, it did track a handful of cases in mid-December under guidelines WHO adopted after the SARS and MERS outbreaks in 2005. Those regulations were tested for the first time in 2009 during the H1N1 pandemic. In 2014, Fineberg reviewed how they worked in The New England Journal of Medicine and found lessons that apply to the coronavirus pandemic. He found "outstanding performance" in identifying the pathogen and developing diagnostics. He also discovered vulnerabilities in national and local public health capacities, difficulties in decision-making and concerns about international cooperation. "The world is ill-prepared to respond to a severe influenza pandemic or to any similarly global, sustained and threatening public health emergency," Fineberg concluded. Fineberg told USA TODAY the Chinese "did not do well" in the earliest days of the new coronavirus because they tried to suppress information and chastised doctors who reported it. One of those doctors contracted the illness and died. Then China mobilized, quickly developed a test and locked down Wuhan to hinder further spread of the virus. "We see the pluses and minuses in that response," said Fineberg, who was named this month to chair the National Academy of Medicine's standing committee on infectious diseases. Other countries have demonstrated how to contain and treat coronavirus. "Singapore is a very interesting lesson," Fineberg said. "They have been able to manage and keep it at a very low level." That country suffered greatly from the SARS outbreak. This time, it aggressively tested and isolated those infected with or exposed to the virus that causes COVID-19. Authorities measured the temperature of anyone entering a public building. The result: 926 confirmed cases and three deaths as of Tuesday, according to Johns Hopkins. South Korea deployed widespread testing and treated patients with symptoms separately from others in standard clinical settings. "The worst thing you could do is bring infected people or those who have a higher risk of infection into proximity with a lot of people suffering other illnesses," Fineberg said. South Korea had 9,786 cases and 162 deaths as of Tuesday, according to Johns Hopkins. When crisis hits, the money flows Public health funding to respond to emergencies ??whether at the global, national, state or county level ??has spiked during outbreaks. Afterward, it has returned to the baseline or dropped. "If you're not having a crisis, and you have to make hard decisions about where you're going to fund, you tend not to fund the things that may happen ??you tend to fund the things that are happening," said Craig Fugate, a former head of the Federal Emergency Management Agency. "Over time," he said, "we have cut back and cut back and cut back our public health services, particularly at state and local levels." The response to the Ebola outbreak in 2015 in West Africa followed a typical pattern. U.S. funding for global health security from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, the Agency for International Development and the Pentagon generally ranged from $390 million in 2006 to $486 million in 2020, according to the Kaiser Family Foundation. During the height of the Ebola outbreak, the three funds combined for more than $1.3 billion. "When health crises strike ??measles, MERS, Zika, dengue, Ebola, pandemic flu ??and the American people grow alarmed, the U.S. government springs into action," the Center for Strategic and International Studies reported in November. "But all too often, when the crisis fades and the fear subsides, urgency morphs into complacency. Investments dry up, attention shifts and a false sense of security takes hold." Federal public health grants to states for three key programs has declined from a peak in 2003, according to a Government Accountability Office report in May 2018. Those programs strengthen state and local health departments, provide for surges in hospital capacity for infectious diseases and support labs. Funding peaked at a combined $1.4 billion in 2003. It declined until 2014 before recovering slightly by 2017, according to GAO. From 2003 to 2020, hospital preparedness grants were cut nearly in half. Public health preparedness grants fell more than 20%, according to the Trust for America's Health. "Congress should prioritize funding for health care preparedness even after this outbreak is under control," Nadine Gracia, chief operating officer for the Trust for America's Health and a former chief medical officer in the office of assistant secretary of Health and Human Services, told the House Homeland Security Committee on March 10. The $2 trillion package to deal with COVID-19 passed last week includes $250 million in hospital preparedness grants and $100 billion for hospitals and the health care system. Those grants are supposed to cover losses or expenses related to the crisis. Adalja, the Hopkins scholar, said respiratory viruses will remain a threat forever because they infect people so easily. "We need to be very prepared for other respiratory virus threats, not just coronavirus, not just flu," he said. "When a new respiratory virus appears and it shows an ability to be communicable in humans," he said, "we have to jump into action very quickly with diagnostic testing, vaccine development and antiviral development." States are short on equipment The neglect portion of the public health funding cycle has become apparent as states and hospitals scramble for equipment such as masks and ventilators. New Jersey has spent $1.8 million per month responding to the coronavirus, Christopher Neuwirth, an assistant commissioner for the New Jersey Department of Health, told a House Homeland Security Committee on March 10. Before the surge of federal assistance approved last week, the state received a total of $1.75 million from the CDC for acute care facilities, emergency medical services and health departments, he said. "Recognizing that medical supplies are facing a historic shortage and that health care supply chains are nearly frozen for respirators, disinfectants and other personal protective equipment, we urge you to consider additional funding to New Jersey and the distribution of items from the strategic national stockpile," Neuwirth said. New York Gov. Andrew Cuomo estimated the state needs 30,000 ventilators to care for the expected surge in patients. The federal government had provided 4,000 as of last weekend. Cuomo said New York competies against other states to buy ventilators, so the price for each one has risen from $20,000 to $50,000. "We need to give our health care professionals the supplies they need, and we need to do it now," Cuomo said Monday. "We're building a stockpile. The word 'stockpile' by definition means not for immediate use. It means you are preparing for a battle to come." Shortages aren't a surprise. Kim Saruwatari, the public health director in Riverside County, California, told a state legislative hearing a year ago that the county was prepared to respond to short-term emergencies, not a pandemic. "When you consider our global society and the ability of diseases to spread worldwide in a matter of days, preparedness is critically important," Saruwatari said. "Funding shortages have caused staff reductions in many areas," she said, which is especially challenging during a natural disaster or pandemic. Riverside County, about 50 miles east of downtown Los Angeles, has 2.4million residents. Its public health budget is $100 million a year, Saruwatari said. The $12 million contribution from the county general fund has been flat for years amid competing priorities. "Do they have the capability to respond to a large-scale, long-term public health emergency?" she asked. "No, not with our current infrastructure." 
2020-03-31	Veronica Velasquez's job as a physical therapist at a Los Angeles community hospital has become riskier as the number of coronavirus patients rises. But the risk of losing her working papers and being deported hasn't changed at all. Velasquez, 27, is among the nearly 700,000 young people who were brought to the USA as children and rely on the Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals program, or DACA, that President Donald Trump wants to terminate. A Supreme Court ruling could come any day. Her plight, along with those of about 27,000 DACA recipients working as doctors, nurses, paramedics and other health care workers, is full of irony. When the nation needs her most, she could be pulled from the workforce. "I am treating people suspected of having COVID-19, and all I'm asking is to stay in this country and provide that care," Velasquez says. "We're definitely helping them stay alive." As the Supreme Court considers their fate, USA TODAY spoke with DACA recipients working in the health care field in California, Florida, Texas and in the suburbs of New York City, where the coronavirus has hit hardest. Some face a shortage of personal protective equipment, often wearing the same masks for an entire hospital shift. Others are well-supplied but nervous nonetheless. Jesus Contreras helped fight Hurricane Harvey in Houston three years ago, a monstrous storm that dumped 40 inches of rain and led to 17,000 rescues. The virus, he says, is a far bigger threat. "We haven't seen its full potential yet," says Contreras, 26, a paramedic who answers 911 calls. "My biggest concern is we'll have to start turning patients away, deciding which patients get treatment." That's not his only concern. Contreras must worry about contracting the virus himself, as well as staying in the country he came to from Mexico in 1999. "I'm not so much worried but precautious, hyper-aware of the amount of risk that my line of work brings," he says. "We're not only going to have to worry about this pandemic, but we're going to have to worry about our immigration status and deportation." 'Would be catastrophic' President Barack Obama sought to alleviate those worries in 2012 by creating the program after failing to get a more ambitious plan through Congress. Four years later, federal courts shot down his effort to extend similar protections to more than 4 million undocumented adults. The Trump administration was prodded into curtailing the program when Texas threatened a lawsuit. Federal courts from California to New York stepped in, leaving the program in place and setting up the Supreme Court showdown. During oral argument in November, the court's conservative majority appeared likely to side with the administration. If the justices simply refuse to overrule the Department of Homeland Security's decision, a new president just as easily could renew the program. If they declare the entire program unlawful, Congress would have to step in. In legal papers submitted last October, the Association of American Medical Colleges cited federal warnings about "the risk of a pandemic" as a reason to keep DACA recipients contributing to a "robust health workforce." "Infectious diseases can spread around the globe in a matter of days due to increased urbanization and international travel," the group warned. "These conditions pose a threat to America's health security ??its preparedness for and ability to withstand incidents with public-health consequences." Friday, a legal services organization at Yale Law School sent a letter to the high court urging that the administration's decision to terminate DACA should be blocked in light of the pandemic. "Health care providers on the front lines of our nation's fight against COVID-19 rely significantly upon DACA recipients to perform essential work," it said. "Termination of DACA during this national emergency would be catastrophic," the letter said. That effort took on political overtones Sunday when Democratic presidential front-runner Joe Biden warned that such a decision "will leave a gaping hole in our health care system that is liable to cost American lives." 'Just my calling' The lives of DACA recipients, also known as DREAMers, could be among them. In Northern California, Ana Cueva, 27, has been working 12-hour shifts as a nurse in the intensive care unit of a community hospital. She decided on her career at the age of 9, having arrived in Utah from Mexico. "The hospitals are way underprepared for a pandemic on this scale. They ration the equipment out, specifically the masks," Cueva says. "I did not really agree to being exposed to certain diseases ??viruses, pandemics, whatever ??because the government wasn't prepared." In Fort Myers, Florida, paramedic Aldo Martinez, 26, worked a 48-hour shift late last week, helping a COVID-19 patient the second day. A native of Mexico who arrived in the USA when he was 12, Martinez has seen what happens when fellow health care workers need to self-quarantine, leading to staff shortages. "It's been hectic. It's been crazy. We're learning as we go," he says. If DACA recipients were to lose their ability to work, he says, it would "create more chaos in an already chaotic situation." In northern New Jersey, about an hour outside New York City, a registered nurse who came from South Korea at age 11 lives in fear that he might infect his wife and parents. His hospital, like many, faces a shortage of protective equipment. "This is very difficult," says Daniel, 32, who did not want to use his last name because of his immigration status. "Everybody's getting more anxious about it." For Velasquez, a native of the Philippines who came to the USA when she was 11, the coronavirus has been a rude awakening after five months as a physical therapist. Her hospital set up three tents to prepare for the expected influx of patients. "A lot of them do get weak, and they can't even get out of bed due to their poor respiratory status, which causes weaknesses in their muscles," she says. "That's where physical therapy comes in." "This is just my calling. I worked very hard to become a physical therapist, especially with DACA," she says. "I knew this was something I wanted to do, pandemic or no pandemic." 
2020-03-30	ANTHONY MASON: Patients who have been infected with the coronavirus and have recovered could be the key to fighting the disease. One potential treatment uses the antibodies built up in the blood of patients who've had the illness. Doctor Jon LaPook shows us how testing is already underway. (Begin VT) DR. ERIC SALAZAR: What we're doing is monitoring these patients very closely. DR. JON LAPOOK (CBS News Chief Medical Contributor): This past weekend, Doctor Eric Salazar supervised the treatment at Houston Methodist Hospital he hopes will become the first proven therapy against COVID-19. Here's how it works, blood taken from recovered patients contains antibodies that can attack the virus. Doctor Salazar and his team transfused plasma, the part of blood containing those antibodies into two critically ill patients. Have you discussed that goal for how many people you'd like to be able to treat a day using this method? DR. ERIC SALAZAR: As many as possible. DR. JON LAPOOK: Doctor Salazar is watching closely to see if the transfusion works. It may have helped in a small number of patients in China, but much more study is needed. Kindergarten teacher Julie Thaler, a COVID-19 survivor, has donated her blood to possibly be used in a similar transfusion in New York City. JULIE THALER: I am one of the survivors. It's a tough ride. I got very lucky. And it was a way that I could give back. DR. NICOLE BOUVIER: A lot of it's going to depend on, you know, the donor pool. DR. JON LAPOOK: Doctor Nicole Bouvier and her team at New York's Mount Sinai will soon be using the same treatment just performed in Houston. Why do you think this might work? DR. NICOLE BOUVIER: We have some idea partially from the 1918 influenza pandemic that taking blood plasma from one person and giving it to another actually may improve outcomes. DR. JON LAPOOK: Antibodies against coronavirus are not only being used for treatment. They also help identify people who may have been infected without knowing it. LOU REESE: An aggressive testing regiment with our front lines to find out, you know, who has levels of immunity. It's an opportunity to get back to the new normal quickly as possible. DR. JON LAPOOK: Lou Reese and Mei Mei Hu are co-CEOs of United Biomedical, an international biotech company. They are one of several companies to develop a simple rapid blood test for COVID-19 antibodies to see if someone has been infected and build up immunity to the virus. Their current plan, test as many of the residents of Colorado's rural San Miguel County as possible. How many people do you think you'll be testing? LOU REESE: There's just under eight thousand in the county. We'll be able to find out who's been exposed and has antibodies, and hence, who has a certain level of immunity to this. DR. JON LAPOOK: Once the antibody test is more widely available, researchers will be able to screen large numbers of potential donors for antibody-rich plasma to be used for treatment. DR. ERIC SALAZAR: I don't think any center across the country is going to have any trouble recruiting donors that have recovered from COVID-19. These are incredibly generous people. (End VT) ANTHONY MASON: And Doctor Jon LaPook joins us from home now. Jon, why is it so important to do widespread antibody testing? DR. JON LAPOOK: Anthony, you know, it's very likely that there are a lot of people out there who have been infected with the new coronavirus but had little, few, or maybe no symptoms at all. And this is going to help us get our arms around it. I mean, this is hugely important. Think about it. If it turns out that those people have some immunity, some protection because of these antibodies, now depending upon how much protection they have, maybe they could go back to the frontlines again and we can get-- we won't have to make this choice between do we save-- do we save the economy or do we save the health care system. There are a lot of questions here. You know, how protected are people, how long will the immunity last? There are a lot of questions and a lot fewer answers right now. ANTHONY MASON: Jon, how soon after patients get these plasma treatments will we actually know if it's working? DR. JON LAPOOK: You know, in-- in China, there was a report of just five patients in China who had this done. And they had other therapies, so it's hard to really know. Over the next week or two, they seem to get better. But again, we don't know if it was the antibody treatment or other medications they were getting. In the past, back in 1918 and in the pandemic flu, there was success and there were sporadic cases here and there. But there's never been a huge controlled trial to see exactly how this works and in what people it works and for how long it lasts and things like that. So this will be an opportunity to do that, Anthony. ANTHONY MASON: All right. Still something promising, Doctor Jon LaPook. Thanks, Jon. Ahead, how Chicago is preparing for a potential surge in coronavirus cases. We'll talk with the commissioner of the city's Department of Public Health. But first, it is eight-oh-eight, time to check your local weather. (LOCAL WEATHER BREAK) (ANNOUNCEMENTS) GAYLE KING: There's much more ahead for you. The Late Late Show's James Corden wants to bring people together tonight. JAMES CORDEN: I know the social distancing is what we're calling this. I'm not really a fan of that. I much prefer the phrase, "physical distancing." GAYLE KING: Okay. JAMES CORDEN: I think the world has never been better served to be in touch with everybody in your life right now. GAYLE KING: He is onto something with that. Ahead, what to expect from his primetime variety show. You're watching CBS THIS MORNING. You know, we thank you for that. We'll be right back. (ANNOUNCEMENTS) TONY DOKOUPIL: Heartbreaking news from over the weekend. The first infant is believed to have died from the coronavirus. An investigation is now underway. The medical history of the baby who lived in Chicago was not immediately released. The commissioner of the Chicago Department of Public Health, Doctor Allison Arwady, joins us now. Doctor, good morning. Thank you for being here. DR. ALLISON ARWADY (Chicago Department of Public Health Commissioner): Good morning. TONY DOKOUPIL: It seems like we constantly have to recalibrate our sense of risk when it comes to the coronavirus. At first, it was only people in the upper bounds of age. And then it was middle-aged people, as well. And now we have this tragic news about a baby there in Chicago. What more can you tell us about this infant's case? DR. ALLISON ARWADY: So I can tell you it's very unusual to be seeing a case like this. So, obviously, we're doing a thorough investigation, working really with the family, our hearts go out to them, the pediatrician, the medical examiner, the CDC. Really, wanting to make sure we're doing confirmatory testing, looking at everything that's underlying it. I spent a lot of time yesterday on the Facebook Live that I do every day here in Chicago really putting into the context the risk that still where we look across the world, where we look across populations. It's a tragic situation here in Chicago. We're obviously concerned about it. But by and large, the-- the main risk does remain in the older populations, the folks with the underlying medical conditions. And what we don't want to see, we did see in Chicago people bringing in, you know, healthy babies to emergency departments worried about their-- their health. That's not what we want to see. We do want to make sure that we're keeping this in perspective even while we're doing the full investigation. TONY DOKOUPIL: That's an important note. It is a saving grace that so far at least it appears this virus does not affect children and infants. And this is an out-- an outlier case. But cases are surging there in Chicago-- DR. ALLISON ARWADY: Yeah. And-- TONY DOKOUPIL: --and we know as the virus makes its remorseless way across the country, no city, no state, no county will be spared. So as you see this surge, talk-- talk to us about the steps Chicago is taking to bend that curve down. DR. ALLISON ARWADY: Yeah, absolutely. So, we have a very strong save-- Stay Home, Save Lives campaign. We've been tracking every day here. We're continuing. We're at about two thousand cases or so in Chicago residents, about forty-five hundred across the state. And we are working very hard to do everything we can to keep the spread down while we prepare the health care system. So, we've got the hotels in place for isolation. We're doing lots in our congregant settings, working with the jails, working with homeless communities, working with our long-term care facilities. We're working and even looking at surge capacity and things like McCormick Place, which is our largest convention center. Not waiting until the time where we run out of capacity to try to build it. We've been working at the health department to distribute hundreds of thousands of masks just in the last few weeks, gloves, all of the other equipment that we've had on hand here really as part of our planning for a pandemic. But we really do look to the strategic national stockpile at the federal level for even more support around things like ventilators, things like the supplies. Certainly, more needs still for testing capacity here. Our numbers-- TONY DOKOUPIL: Well, Doctor-- DR. ALLISON ARWADY: --are what they are, but we know-- yeah. Mm-Hm. TONY DOKOUPIL: Well, I-- I just wanted to pick up on that point about working with the national stockpile. The coordination between state and-- and federal and city officials all across the country, it-- it seems to be marred by-- by lapses in communication. The federal government will say they sent something, the state government will say it hasn't gotten there, and then of course it's got to make its way to cities like yours. Can you talk to us about the communication process and the coordination going on from where you sit? DR. ALLISON ARWADY: So, yeah, I can tell you. First of all, we have a strong city-level emergency preparedness program that has been informed over the years with good work between the states and the federal government. And so we're not waiting for support from-- you know, from any external source, like I said. We're using a lot of the plans and stockpiles we have here. We've put in requests. We certainly-- there are pieces, certainly we're working closely with the state, and where we see, for example, the Army Corps of Engineers is helping to do the structural build-out at McCormick Place. We've gotten some indication that we'll receive some supplies which is really important. We're really thankful for any ventilators in particular that we're able to be getting because we, again, you can't make ventilators out of nothing. You need them here when you need them. But as we're thinking about what does it look like to staff up some of these, especially the external care sites, really wanting to make sure that this is part of a national-- TONY DOKOUPIL: Doctor-- DR. ALLISON ARWADY: --framework for planning. Mm-Hm. TONY DOKOUPIL: Doctor Allison Arwady, a veteran of outbreak fights in Liberia and overseas and now leading the fight on the front lines in Chicago. Doctor, thank you very much for being here. DR. ALLISON ARWADY: Thank you. TONY DOKOUPIL: James Corden will host a unique variety show tonight from inside his garage. Ahead, how he hopes it will help bring people together. We could use some of that. You're watching CBS THIS MORNING (ANNOUNCEMENTS) ANTHONY MASON: This morning, CBS News is mourning the loss of one of our own to the coronavirus. Maria Mercader who died at fifty-four was unique. No matter what was going on in her own life she always had time to listen. She battled health problems for decades and used her deep faith and enormous smile to light up and inspire others. She was the best of us. (Begin VT) ANTHONY MASON: Maria Mercader's career at CBS News spanned more than three decades. She rose from page to an Emmy Award-winning producer who helped guide coverage of some of the biggest stories. But her last role as a talent executive may have been her most fitting because Maria was always a guiding spirit, a shining light. Ingrid Ciprian-Matthews was a close friend. INGRID CIPRIAN-MATTHEWS: No matter how dark the day, Maria brought in the sunshine with that heartwarming smile of hers. ANTHONY MASON: She was born in 1965 in New York City. Her father, Manuel, was in finance on Wall Street. Her mother, Gladys, was an accomplished pianist who spent her career touring with the American Ballet Theater. Maria adored her mom who inspired her lifelong passion for the arts. Exuberant, intelligent and fiercely loyal, Maria was a cheerleader for so many at CBS News and beyond, even while quietly dealing with health troubles herself. Over twenty years, she survived multiple battles with cancer without an ounce of self-pity or complaint. Doctor Valerie Rusch was her surgeon at Memorial Sloan-Kettering. DR. VALERIE RUSCH: She had an incredible drive and perseverance. I also saw her be a great patient advocate for other cancer patients and cancer survivors. ANTHONY MASON: Two years ago, Maria took a grand trip with her father, brother and sister-in-law across Europe and North Africa. After all her health issues, she was thrilled to have this adventure with her family, still determined to get joy out of life. Maria Mercader was one extraordinary woman. And to so many of us at CBS News, our friend, our confidante, our hero. (End VT) GAYLE KING: Boy, you got the news yesterday, guys, and it was so hard to believe because she has certainly rallied before. And we were all hoping that this would be the case. Still hard to believe that we're not going to see her anymore in the building. And it just shows you that this virus does not discriminate, and this one is personal for us, Anthony. ANTHONY MASON: All right. Well, thank you, Gayle. Your local news is next. (ANNOUNCEMENTS) *****************************************************************************(8:30 AM, EDT) GAYLE KING: Welcome back to CBS THIS MORNING. It's time to bring you some of the stories that we call the Talk of the Table this morning. Just that we're all coming from different tables, as you know. We're coming from home. We each will share a story with each other and all of you. That's our Talk of the Table today. We're just rolling with it. Tony, what do you have? You-- you're up first. TONY DOKOUPIL: Hey, Gayle. Well, since we're doing this from home, I'm doing something close to my home. And it's a reminder that when you get outside of-- of medical workers who are doing heroic-- heroic work on the front lines, there are a lot of other workers doing essential things for us and-- and putting their own lives at risk at the-- at the same time. So, my Talk of the Table is about Amazon workers in New York City who could potentially walk off the job in protest this afternoon. And they are doing so because they want their warehouse in Staten Island, not far from where I am, to be closed and sanitized. There's an assistant manager there who claims as many as seven workers have been diagnosed with coronavirus. Amazon tells us that those accusations are unfounded, but sources do confirm that there are several positive cases there. The company also says it has taken extreme measures to keep people safe. So this is on my mind because-- while I don't know for certain, I do get Amazon packages, and it's likely that they do cycle through that warehouse at some point. So, I want to-- I want people to spare a thought today as we-- we keep in mind the medical workers doing heroic work, there are so many other people while we're all stuck at home who are doing essential jobs to keep our lives running in some regard. And they, too, are putting their lives at risk. And-- and we appreciate it. ANTHONY MASON: Yeah. And they are a real lifeline for us, Tony. And their volume is just surging. So they are working like crazy. We need those folks. We want them to be safe. TONY DOKOUPIL: Yeah. What do you got for us, Anthony? ANTHONY MASON: All right. As-- yeah. And, you know, one of the-- one the-- this circumstance where we're all stuck at home is forcing everybody, if-- if you want to celebrate something, you have to do it really creatively. So a young woman-- GAYLE KING: Yeah. ANTHONY MASON: --in Los Angeles got neighbors in her apartment complex to surprise her fiance by singing "Happy Birthday." Take a look. HANNAH CHUNG (internet video): Three, two, one. (Crowd singing; internet video) JASON SHIELDS: What the-- (Crowd singing; internet video) JASON SHIELDS (internet video): (INDISTINCT) I'm excited to sing. ANTHONY MASON: Pulled off the surprise by delivering notes door-to-door in the apartment complex, she asked neighbors to come to their windows at two thirty to sing to her fiance, Jason, who is turning thirty years old. She literally put, I think, it's seventy-six note cards. She slipped them under the doors to people, gave them the appointment time. And as you heard, people showed up in droves. They were supposed to get married this month. Obviously, had to postpone it. But this at least was a consolation. GAYLE KING: I love that, Anthony, because I don't care who you are, everybody likes to have their birthday acknowledged. And you think in a time like this, well, I'm not going to make a big deal about it because there are certainly bigger things. But the fact that-- ANTHONY MASON: Yeah. GAYLE KING: --his fiancee would do that for him, and that the neighbors joined in, I think it's very, very nice. My Talk of the Table is James Corden. We all know him, the Late Late Show host returns tonight with a primetime special. He is calling it Homefest. Why? Because he recorded it from his garage. And, boy, has he got quite the lineup. He says everybody he asked said yes. The Late Late Show stopped taping weeks ago as a precaution during this coronavirus outbreak. Corden says he needs-- he wants to remind us all that despite our physical distance, we are all still very much connected. (Begin VT) GAYLE KING: May I just say you have been missed on late night. I'm so glad you're coming back. What is your pitch to your guests when you say I want to do this show because you've got a great lineup? JAMES CORDEN: So point of view was in a couple of weeks time people are going to need something that we hope is joyful, that's uplifting in some way. Then we started thinking, well, maybe there's a world in which we can really try and show our audience at home that we are all in the same boat really. So we thought, well, if we can go to Billie Eilish's house-- GAYLE KING: Yeah. JAMES CORDEN: --and then we'll go to South Korea and BTS will perform a song, and we'll go to Tuscany and Andrea Bocelli's going to sit at a piano and bring a song and then what if we got in touch with David Blaine and he could do a magic trick on all of us over the internet, we think we could make it feel like we are all together in this notion of being kept apart. GAYLE KING: Yes. Because you know the thing is, James, this coronavirus does not discriminate. And while we have to maintain social distance, we keep saying you don't have to be emotionally distant from each other. That's what I like so much about what you're saying. JAMES CORDEN: I know that social distancing is what we're calling this. I'm not really a fan of that. I much prefer the phrase, "physical distancing." GAYLE KING: Okay. JAMES CORDEN: I think the world has never been better served to be in touch with everybody in your life right now. We can keep checking in on each other all the time. And if we do that and we keep our physical distance but we don't lose our emotional distance, then maybe we'll get through this. GAYLE KING: Part of the problem with this is that we don't know how much longer we're going to be living like this. JAMES CORDEN: You know, I think our first sort of crisis or emergency certainly happened in-- in my lifetime. 9/11 or you think about hurricanes or-- or natural disasters or any of those things that have happened, they are a finite moment. And your main conversation is, what do we do now to rebuild? It's very difficult right now while you're in the middle of it. And that's why I hope that-- that people will find some kind of light and levity in our show tonight when it-- when it's on at ten o'clock. GAYLE KING: How do you not be afraid when things appear to be so terrifying? JAMES CORDEN: There's something to be said for being open to everybody and saying I'm feeling the exact same spikes of anxiety that you are. And I feel at moments helpless in the sadness of it, and that's all right. GAYLE KING: Yeah. JAMES CORDEN: That's okay. It's okay to have those feelings. And it would be odd if none of us were. And actually, once you embrace that feeling and you start to put your mind into a place of I wonder who else might be feeling this at the moment, and maybe I should check in with them and give them a call and see if they're all right. I can't wait for the day to come when I can bound into your studio in New York and see all of you. And, you know, I can give you a big hug. That's what it's made me feel, that there are so many things that I've taken for granted in all of this. GAYLE KING: I was just going to say-- JAMES CORDEN: All the blessings. GAYLE KING: Yes. I was just going to say, I realized I used to enjoy being at home by myself. And now that I'm supposed to be at home by myself, I find I rather don't like it, you know, all the stuff I've taken for granted. JAMES CORDEN: I think that's the only way to-- to look at it really-- GAYLE KING: Mm-Hm. JAMES CORDEN: --and know that it's going to be difficult. My son is nine. And I see it in him, the anxiety of not being at school. And I kind of said to him the other day, why don't we have a code word to use which is just when you want me to know that you might be struggling with this, and I'll know that that's when we can go off and sit together and put our arms around each other and talk about it? GAYLE KING: How is home schooling going for you at the Corden house? JAMES CORDEN: Home schooling is an up-at-dawn, pride-swallowing siege. That's what it is. I mean, I have never had more respect for teachers. I've never had more respect for what goes on in this house when I leave and go to work. I am never, ever going to come home and complain to my wife that I might be tired ever again. GAYLE KING: Last week, you would have celebrated your fifth anniversary. You took us back to that first day. JAMES CORDEN: I-- I really couldn't be more honored to be stood here talking to you now. And believe me, however shocked you are that I am doing this job, you will never be as shocked as I am. GAYLE KING: How are you feeling five years later? JAMES CORDEN: I mean, look, it's been the most glorious, unexpected ride. In many ways, this-- this sort of enforced break that we've had right now has-- has made me appreciate it more than ever really. And it's made me appreciate the show that we get to make and what a privilege it is to do such a thing because once that's kind of taken away in the form that you know it anyway-- GAYLE KING: Mm-Hm. JAMES CORDEN: --you really start to think, man, I love that place. I love that job. And I absolutely refuse particularly after this to take a second of it for granted, you know. (End VT) GAYLE KING: Well, nobody is shocked that James Corden is doing this job now. He says that he wanted to create a show tonight that would cross all generations, something that everybody could watch. And Anthony, I thought about you, I got a kick out of this because we've all seen his parents who are, you know, over the age of sixty. He said his-- his dad says he plays saxophone in the church and he was still going to go to church and play. And James told his dad, no, dad, you can't do that. It's like your daughter told you, no, dad, you can't go to the gym. My kids told me, no, you can't go to fairway and get orange juice. So it's like the kids are telling their parents stay at home. Stay at home. ANTHONY MASON: They are the-- GAYLE KING: It's great. ANTHONY MASON: --they are the enforcers, Gayle. They are the enforcers. I can't believe it's been five years already for James Corden. GAYLE KING: I know. I know. And not only that, five years but his-- TONY DOKOUPIL: Yeah. Five years for James Corden. GAYLE KING: --very first guest was Tom Hanks. His-- his first guest, Tony, that first day was Tom Hanks. TONY DOKOUPIL: Five years for James Corden but with this-- well, I was going to say it's five years for his show, but it feels like five years for all of us working from home, living with-- with people in-- in the closest of confines. I-- I think he-- he said when it-- when this is all over, he'd like to bound into our studio and give us all a big hug. I think the whole country would like to-- GAYLE KING: Yes. TONY DOKOUPIL: --bound out of their homes and give everyone else in this country a big hug. Whenever this is all over, cities all across America better plan one heck of a party. Streets should be closed, and we should be all outdoors hugging, kissing and taking our shoes off. I'm looking forward to that, Gayle. GAYLE KING: Oh, me, too. And you know what, guys, it hasn't even been that long. And we have so much longer to go. So we've got to figure out a way to adjust on many different levels with this new normal. By the way, you can watch Homefest at James-- James Corden's Late Late Show Special tonight at ten, nine Central right here on CBS. Best-selling author Brene Brown is out with a new podcast, tailor-made, we think for these very uncertain times. Ahead, Brene Brown will tell us how she is helping listeners navigate difficult new challenges. But first, at eight forty, time to check your local weather. (LOCAL WEATHER BREAK) (ANNOUNCEMENTS) ANTHONY MASON: Brene Brown is The New York Times' best-selling author and researcher behind of the most-- one of the most popular Ted Talks in history. The Power of Vulnerability has been viewed more than forty-six million times. She's also released a Netflix special and was profiled last night on 60 MINUTES. Now she is out with a new podcast, Unlocking Us, about why being new at anything is hard. Brene Brown joins us from Houston. Good morning. Welcome, Brene. BRENE BROWN (Author and Podcast Host, Unlocking Us): Good morning. Thank you for having me on. ANTHONY MASON: The-- the theme of your first episode is about navigating these first times. And, boy, are we all dealing with a lot of them? First time I'm broadcasting from home. But you actually-- you believe these-- these are kind of critical learning moments for all of us. Why is-- what's your advice for dealing with it? BRENE BROWN: I-- I personally am not comfortable like everyone else with first times, but I think they are incredibly important because we get to applies especially as adults where we stop doing anything that we're not already good at. And that discomfort and vulnerability and awkwardness of being new is really the juice. It's the lifeblood for us. And the more new things we lean into, the more new things we're willing to try, and that's-- that's growth for us. And when we shut that down, we stop living, we stop growing. And so unfortunately, we were all collectively hurled into this first time. But there are things we can do to make first times which are often pretty terrible better. GAYLE KING: I feel emotionally drained. I feel spiritually drained. I think a lot of people are feeling this during this time. And you say when you named the hard things, it gives you power. What do you mean by that? Because I don't feel a lot of people feel that their-- that they are powerful at this particular time or even feeling they are in power. BRENE BROWN: Yeah. I-- I think, you know, my favorite definition of power is from Martin Luther King Junior. He said "Power is the ability to effect change." That simply. What I-- what I mean by owning it is when we're in grief which I think we're all in collective grief right now, when we're in grief, when we're in fear and anxiety, a lot of us have this myth that if I name it, and if I say that out loud, it gives that hard feeling power. When the truth is it gives us power because we put a handle on what we're feeling. And so I do think most of us feel very powerless right now around COVID especially. But to be able to name what we're feeling helps us move through it and helps us say, okay, this is normal. I mean, we are-- we are both trying to grieve the loss of normal and also at the exact same time find our footing in a new normal. And that's a big ask of us individually and collectively. TONY DOKOUPIL: Hey, hey, Brene. There's a great moment in the Amy Poehler movie, Wine Country, where you play yourself with some people come to your table at a restaurant and you lecture them on boundaries. You draw the boundaries like this. With all these people working from home and dealing with family boundaries, how do they go about gently drawing the line and saying, hey, this is my space and my time? BRENE BROWN: You know, I got to tell you, like in-- for me and my family, it's my twenty-year-old who's, you know, used to living by herself off at college that has been-- she-- she's shown me the way this time because she sat down and said, you know, here's what's okay, and here's what's not okay. And so I think checking in-- yeah, because you're like, I know you love me and you're happy to have me home. But, you know, here's what works for me right now. And so, and we are all just asking each other, you know, here's what's working, here's what's not working. But the minute you shut down the-- the communication about what you need, resentment is a really festering thing when you're sharing space involuntary with a lot of people. So I think asking for what you need-- ANTHONY MASON: All right. Brene Brown, thank you. BRENE BROWN: --is great. ANTHONY MASON: All right. Brene Brown, thank you so much for being with us. Unlocking Us is available on pad-- podcast platforms. We'll be right back. (ANNOUNCEMENTS) TONY DOKOUPIL: Before We Go, here is one thing you can do today to live a happier, healthier and more productive life. It's all part of our partnership with Gretchen Rubin and her award-winning podcast Happier. As self-isolation and social distancing become the new normal here in America, here are some ways to give yourself a healthy mental break during a tough time. Start with a fun project like a movie marathon or a crossword puzzle. You can cook your favorite meal or maybe open that special bottle of champagne you've been saving. Another good one, look at photo albums or family movies. Research shows that one of the most effective ways to make ourselves happy is to reflect on happier times. And though we mentioned that, I will say I think we could look back at this moment, Gayle and Anthony, with a little bit of fondness. I just did a TV show from my basement with my wife working as my production assistant. GAYLE KING: I know. TONY DOKOUPIL: That makes me smile. GAYLE KING: I know. I get why we're all separate. I get it because if something happens to one of us and we all go down, so to keep us separately, I understand. It's-- taking some getting used to. Shout out to Shanta and the team for pulling this off because this is very, very difficult. We'll see you tomorrow. Stay safe. Stay home. cMMXX CBS Broadcasting Inc.All Rights Reserved. END 
2020-03-30	The coronavirus epidemic reached Beadle County, South Dakota, last week. A single case tied to travel has exploded into 20 infections and counting, with no way to know how many were exposed while supply shortages forced the entire state to briefly suspend testing. Confirmed cases in New York City, where hospitals have fallen into chaos as resources run thin, on Thursday surpassed Beadle's entire population of 18,500. With too few tests for too many cases, doctors there already had been told it no longer made sense to test most ill patients. From its biggest cities to its smallest towns, America's chance to contain the coronavirus outbreak came and went in the seven weeks since U.S. health officials botched the testing rollout and then misled scientists in state laboratories about this crucial early failure. Federal regulators failed to recognize the spiraling disaster and were slow to relax the rules that prevented labs and major hospitals from advancing a backup. Scientists around the country found themselves shackled as the disease spread. "We were watching a tsunami and standing there frozen," said Dr. Debra Wadford, director of the public viral disease laboratory in California, where some of the country's earliest patients were identified. The nation's public health pillars ??the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and the Food and Drug Administration ??shirked their responsibility to protect Americans in an emergency like this new coronavirus, USA TODAY found in interviews with dozens of scientists, public health experts and community leaders, as well as email communications between laboratories and hospitals across the country. The result was a cascading series of failures now costing lives. CDC leaders not only bungled their role in developing the first coronavirus test permitted in the country, they also misrepresented the efficacy of early solutions to state health authorities. Then, public and private lab directors felt rebuffed by the FDA when they first offered to help troubleshoot the problem by developing their own tests. In a statement to USA TODAY, FDA spokeswoman Stephanie Caccomo said validating outside tests is essential in a crisis when "false results can lead to significant adverse public health consequences." A reliable, accessible test was key to averting today's disaster. Countries such as South Korea had already shown how such diagnostics ??developed and scaled up with the help of the private sector at the onset ??could be used to identify people with early infections before they spread the virus widely. In late February, the CDC's deputy director of infectious disease projected calm in a conference call with state laboratories. The labs were told they could now send samples to the CDC and receive results within 24 hours. "That was a baldfaced lie," said Wadford. At that point, she was waiting four to five days on test results for samples she had sent to the CDC. "The most disappointing part was that they couldn't just be frank and straight with us," said Wadford, who took detailed notes of the conference call that she dictated to USA TODAY. "Tell us the situation. Don't sugarcoat it and lie." The next week, President Donald Trump tweeted: "The Coronavirus is very much under control in the USA. We are in contact with everyone and all relevant countries. CDC & World Health have been working hard and very smart. Stock Market starting to look very good to me!" Since then, the United States has gone from 51 confirmed cases to more than 125,000, from zero deaths to more than 2,200, while the economic toll of shuttering wide swaths of the country has cost millions their jobs and pummeled the stock market. Caccomo denied that the FDA was overly restrictive at the onset of the outbreak and then slow to adapt to the "unprecedented public health emergency." "We recognized the urgent need for even faster testing availability, so we quickly adapted our policies to help expedite patient testing," Caccomo said. The agency worked with outside labs as early as Jan. 22, she said, before opening up the emergency authorization process at the end of February. The CDC also rejected criticism that its initial response was too slow and restrictive. "CDC took the swiftest path toward getting a quality test in the face of an incredibly challenging public health threat," said spokesman Tom Skinner. The time lost in February was crucial to containing the outbreak and helping hospitals prepare, experts say. With each delay, the virus spread undetected as people likely unaware of an infection attended conferences and weddings, frequented bars and restaurants and took long-planned cruise vacations. America is now paying the price. More than half of the country's population has been ordered to stay home to slow the spread. Doctors are rationing supplies. From Texas to New York ??now the epicenter of the U.S. outbreak ??medical facilities burned through protective supplies, including masks, almost immediately, in part because doctors did not have widespread access to tests a month ago, which forced them to take extensive precautions with all patients showing symptoms. New York City health officials now recommend against testing patients who do not require hospitalization, even if they have symptoms such as fever, to preserve limited resources. The crisis may soon be just as dire in rural communities. As of mid-March, Dr. April Abbott, the microbiology lab director at the largest hospital chain in southern Indiana, said she could not get equipment to run her own tests, in part because the federal government does not consider her area a priority like New York or California. "We're not able to get testing supplies because we can't prove we need them," Abbott said, "And we can't prove we need them because we can't perform the tests." Abbott initially looked into sending her Deaconess Hospital patients' samples to other labs. But the state-run lab told her they were too overwhelmed by a bottleneck of demand to take them. Increasingly alarmed, she sent emails to private companies pleading for them to loan her equipment to run tests. "Below Indianapolis, our state has virtually no functional testing capability," Abbott wrote to a diagnostics company on March 16. "I cannot overemphasize the lack of testing available in our region." Eventually she found labs in other states to take her samples, but results took almost two weeks. "The infrastructure has failed us," Abbott said in an interview. Federal testing push falls behind Since early January, a virus raging in China had the attention of public health experts. A coronavirus, it was the newest member of a large family of viruses whose evils include the common cold. Twenty-plus years of public health preparedness drills dictated what the government should have done next: mobilize state, hospital and commercial laboratories to develop testing to isolate the sick and buy time for hospitals to activate plans for handling a surge. "When you see a disaster coming, you want to go big and go now," said Dr.Tara O'Toole, who helped develop pandemic response plans in the Department of Homeland Security under former President Barack Obama. But for weeks, the federal testing push fell further and further behind. On Jan. 31, after Americans began returning stateside from the outbreak's origin in Wuhan, China, Health and Human Services Secretary Alex Azar declared a public health emergency but called the threat to the United States "low." Shortly after, the FDA gave the CDC authority through an emergency use authorization to begin rolling out a diagnostic test kit for the state public health labs. If any scientists at universities, the public labs or private facilities wanted to develop their own tests ??which they sometimes call "home brew" ??or adopt the World Health Organization's, they would need to submit separate applications with 28 pages of guidelines. Labs found the process more burdensome than any other regulation they deal with. Under normal circumstances, scientists can run various tests without special FDA approval. But emergency orders shift the regulatory landscape, imposing restrictions. Experts say the agency moved far too slowly to lift them, given the magnitude of the crisis. Instead, the FDA stuck with one of the most restrictive approaches possible, according to Dr. Josh Sharfstein, a former deputy commissioner at FDA. "The response has been backwards," said Sharfstein, now vice dean for public health practice and community engagement at Johns Hopkins University, who advocates for more regulation during non-emergencies and less in urgent situations like this one. The FDA, an arm of the Department of Health and Human Services, regulates according to laws passed by Congress and guidance laid out by the administration. Yet Trump has blamed the initial approach on the prior administration, which he said created barriers that made it difficult to rapidly ramp up testing. "I don't take responsibility at all," the president said at a news conference two weeks ago. The White House did not respond to requests for comment and directed USA TODAY to the health department, which also did not respond. Flawed test, flawed response The federal emergency declaration allowed the CDC to begin distributing test kits to state health department labs across the nation in early February. Right away, a problem surfaced. California received its kits on a Friday. Scientists worked through the weekend, discovering that some components of the CDC's test were flawed and produced inconclusive results. The problem centered on one of the three testing components, or reagents, used to detect the new virus, COVID-19. On Sunday, Wadford, one of the directors of the California public health lab, frantically messaged colleagues at the Association of Public Health Laboratories. She wanted to know if other labs had found the same problem. "We are hearing of it from at least one state lab," an official from the laboratory association wrote back in an email. "Seems like it might be real." The CDC promised to quickly fix the test. But for two weeks, the agency offered temporary solutions ??such as creating a new "surge" lab and offering to receive samples at CDC headquarters in Atlanta. Those patches themselves were so flawed that results that took days were often inconclusive, too, Wadford said. The CDC has acknowledged problems with its testing development. "This has not gone as smoothly as we would have liked," Dr. Nancy Messonnier, director of its National Center for Immunization and Respiratory Diseases, told reporters in late February. On Feb. 24 ??the same day Trump tweeted "the Coronavirus is very much under control" ??Scott Becker, executive director of the Association of Public Health Laboratories, sent a letter to the FDA begging the agency to scale back its original strategy and lift the home-brew restrictions preventing them from making their own tests. Around the same time, more than 100 scientists in private labs and universities wrote a similar letter to Congress. "They are first responders with lab coats and they couldn't actually gown up," Becker said in an interview, calling the situation at that stage desperate. On Feb. 29, the administration changed course and began rolling back the restrictions. In the coming days and weeks, the FDA continued to ease restrictions to make it easier for others to come online with tests, including commercial laboratories. Experts criticize the agency, however, for moving slowly given the magnitude of the health epidemic unfolding. "CDC tests were never supposed to meet the entire need for the U.S.," said Dr. Tom Frieden, a former CDC director. During these lost weeks in February, federal officials missed their chance to contain the outbreak before it swept across the country, unseen. States find themselves behind At Texas Children's Hospital, doctors lament the weeks that passed without an in-house test to show in hours, not days, what they were dealing with. Dr. Jim Dunn, director of medical microbiology and virology at the hospital, had developed lab tests for the Zika virus outbreak for weeks before the FDA stepped in. He said the restrictions this time prevented Texas Children's from getting out in front of COVID-19. "They pulled the plug before we even had a chance to get going," Dunn said. In Beadle County, South Dakota, the Huron Regional Medical Center rolled out a testing protocol that leaders now acknowledge was aggressive to the point of overuse. Clinicians burned through supplies, using four nasal swabs to run testing for COVID-19 and other respiratory concerns. The protocol eventually was scaled back to one swab per nostril, then one per patient. As the state lab backlogged, with limited supplies to process the tests, people with suspected cases were urged to self-quarantine. Testing hit a snag just as an early cluster of travel-related cases surfaced in the county of 18,500 people within a state whose entire population is less than 900,000. Lacking a crucial chemical used to process the test, which was in short supply nationally, South Dakota's public testing lab posted a notice online last Wednesday that it had temporarily suspended testing. "It was alarming," said Dr. Robert Summerer, president of the South Dakota State Medical Association. The lack of test data presented a challenge for members of the association, who were trying to draft guidelines for the governor on closing restaurants and canceling elective surgeries. No one knew whether the state really had few cases or was clueless for lack of test results. The day after the state halted testing, Republican Gov. Kristi Noem told the White House on a conference call that it had been juggling shortages for two weeks. She described how the CDC kept directing the state to private suppliers, which would cancel orders for the chemical reagent at the last minute. "I need to understand how you're triaging supplies," she told the White House, according to a transcript of the call. "I just don't want to not be a priority area, because we're a smaller state or less populated." "It will never happen to your state," Trump responded. With limited supplies, however, the state lab focused on processing cases identified as higher priority. Beadle County's cases already had multiplied as test results came back. The day before the governor's White House call, Beadle County had a single case. On the day that Noem spoke with Trump, the count rose to four. By Sunday, when city and county officials voted in an emergency session to shut down restaurants, gyms and movie theaters, there were 10. 
2020-03-25	WASHINGTON ??President Donald Trump has said he wants to curtail the strict social distancing guidelines his administration put in place to slow the spread of the coronavirus pandemic because of the potential impact on the U.S. economy. But Trump is not the only executive to take action in the hope of "flattening the curve," the term medical experts use to describe a slow and steady rise in the number of cases of COVID-19 rather than a sharp spike that could overwhelm the nation's health care system. As the president weighs loosening the federal guidance, he does so against a backdrop of governors who have implemented their own statewide ??and independent ??restrictions, from curfews to lockdowns to sweeping school and business closures. "We're going to be opening relatively soon," Trump said during a Fox News town hall Tuesday. "I'd love to have it open by Easter. It's such an important day for other reasons but I'll make an important date for this too. I would love to have the country, opened up and just raring to go by Easter." But does Trump have the authority to revoke or alter that guidance? And what impact would the move have on work-from-home orders signed by state governors? What is Trump's guidance? Trump announced guidelines March 16 aimed at slowing the spread of coronavirus. Officials describe the effort as "15 days to bend the curve" of new cases. The guidelines called on Americans to avoid gatherings of 10 or more people and suggested that states with "community transmission" close their schools, bars, restaurants and other businesses. The guidelines also recommended seniors stay home and avoid contact with other people, that Americans avoid discretionary travel shopping trips and social visits, and that customers use drive-thru, pickup and delivery options instead of eating out. The federal guidelines are not mandatory, but both the president and public health officials have previously said that following them is critically important to slowing the spread of the virus. Many private companies, school districts and medical facilities have been honoring the guidelines. Trump has signaled growing impatience with the federal guidelines and their potential impact on the U.S. economy. In a press conference Monday, the president shifted his message significantly and argued that the "cure" of the virus shouldn't come at the cost of a massive economic slowdown. He did not say specifically when he will lift the guidelines but suggested it would be a matter of weeks and not months. "Our country's not built to shut down," Trump said Tuesday during the Fox News town hall. "You can destroy a country this way by closing it down." The guidelines were set to expire early next week. Because the guidelines are not mandatory, the president has wide latitude to adjust them as he sees fit. While Trump can set the guidelines however he wants, states and private industries are not required to honor them. What about stay-at-home orders? States with stay-at-home orders made by their governors could continue those orders, regardless of whether Trump lifts the guidelines. As of Tuesday, at least 17 states have stay-at-home orders in place, and at least 10 others have some cities or counties that have issued their own orders. Each state has its own rules in place for how long the orders last. If Trump changes his guidance, would that affect states? The country's public health law is a patchwork of responsibilities divided up between the federal and state governments, but typically states are in control of "police powers," according to professor Glenn Cohen, faculty director for the Petrie-Flom Center for Health Law Policy, Biotechnology & Bioethics at Harvard Law School. But if Trump decides to lift the federal guidance, states such as California or New York that have issued stay-at-home orders "may decide to follow suit or not, but typically have significant discretion as to what to do," he said. While legally states remain largely independent of the federal government in regard to these measures, governors and state health officials may face political pressures in defying the federal government's guidelines. Could changes help the economy? The president and his economic advisers have shown they are eager to roll back the "15 Day to Slow the Spread" initiative as economists warn of a dramatic economic contraction in the months ahead. Investment banking giant Morgan Stanley reported over the weekend the economy could shrink by 30.1% in the second quarter. The Dow Jones Industrial Average has lost more than three years of gains. But loosening restrictions too early and resuming public life could lead to tighter crackdown in the future, according to Jay Shambaugh, director of The Hamilton Project and a senior fellow in Economic Studies at the Brookings Institution. "The whole point is to lock down until you control the virus," Shambaugh said. "Anything you do to kind of erase the gains you're trying to get by controlling the virus, it's not just that it has health consequences, it requires further lockdown later on." Trump has suggested parts of the country where there hasn't been a large outbreak could resume normal activities in the coming weeks, while New York Gov. Andrew Cuomo has floated the idea that younger, healthier people could return to work while more at-risk populations remain at home. Shambaugh argues the question is not when the U.S. should begin lifting restrictions in an effort to revive the economy. The question instead should be to health officials, asking what the conditions are in which the country could return to work ??whether that's a matter of increasing testing production, quarantining or contact tracing like South Korea implemented in its effort to combat the spread of the virus. Should Trump ease the federal guidelines while states keep schools, restaurants and businesses closed, it may not revive the economy as much as it makes people take the restrictions less seriously, Shambaugh added. "The economic pain is not something we can avoid simply by relaxing restrictions," he said. "Millions of people have lost their jobs already. That has an impact on the economy regardless of if we try to open things up immediately." Health officials have stressed social distancing is a key part of stemming the spread of the virus to ensure hospitals are not overwhelmed amid medical supply shortages. Regardless of whether Trump reopens American business, the economic repercussions are already underway. Aside from the equity market wealth that has already been lost and the subsequent expected cutback in consumption over the next 12 months, the contractions in Europe, China and other places will also affect U.S. economy, according to Shambaugh. 
2020-03-24	Kim Hjelmgaard, a London-based world affairs correspondent for USA TODAY, interviewed Francis Collins, the director of the National Institutes of Health, as part of ongoing coverage of the coronavirus pandemic. This is a lightly edited transcript of that interview. When will there be a vaccine? We are flat out on this. But everyone needs to recognize that even flat out for a vaccine means we're a year to a year-and-a-half away. And that would be breaking the record by a factor of three or so given how long it usually takes to get something fully ready to be distributed to the public. Two days ago (March 16), the first volunteers were injected with a vaccine that is a collaboration between the NIH research center and a company called Moderna. There are 45 volunteers in Washington state and this will be our opportunity to find out whether it generates any good and safe responses. Depending on how that goes, and if it's remarkably positive also provides efficacy, it will move on to a phase two trial with larger numbers. Following that, but not until the fall, you'd expect to see a phase three trial, and possibly an opportunity to scale this up because if it works, we may need hundreds of millions of doses. But it would need at least a year for wide deployment, which is why people should not be waiting to take actions that will help minimize the impact of this growing pandemic. ( Editor's note: Scientists, companies and governments around the world are racing to develop and test other vaccines. ) Can the U.S. 'flatten its curve' ??slow down the spread of coronavirus ??as places in Asia have? China, South Korea, Singapore, Taiwan ??we can take very significant lessons from these places. Anyone who looks at the experiences in Asia will see highly activated systems to avoid further transmission by having people shelter in place, avoid interactions, hand-washing and all the other things that we know make a difference (easy access to testing and tracing). That lesson should apply to any circumstance where this virus is spreading. It may be that a country like China has a more top-down ability to insist on certain sets of behavior changes. But we ought to be able to do it in our way, in a bottom-up fashion. Americans are smart. They now have some data they can look at it to know how important this is. We just have to get together and say, as a people, this is so important for saving what may otherwise be a million lives lost. Can the U.S. avoid the dire Italy-like situation? We should be able to blunt it. But let's be clear: There's going to be a very rough road in the weeks and months ahead of us. They are trying to manage the situation and make awful decisions about who gets a ventilator and who doesn't. God help us if this happens more broadly across the world and we certainly hope that it doesn't happen here. When you make a decision about one of these measures, such as social distancing, and it's front of mind for everybody, don't expect that you can see an immediate consequence. Right now, in the U.S., we supposedly have 6,500 cases (as of March 16). That's got to be a vast underestimate because we have not been able to sample all the people who may be infected or who have no symptoms at all. Some of these people are already destined to become very sick. If we did everything right today, you would still see the numbers going up over the next two weeks because of what's out there already. We can't change that. But, what we might be able to do is change what's going to happen three or four weeks from now. That's our challenge. When you're on an exponential curve, every moment is dangerous. This is a particularly critical moment for us to try to bring all the resources and determination of government and the American people to try to get off of it. How concerned are you about a second wave of infections when restrictions are lifted? The risk of a second wave when much of the population is still not immune because they didn't get it in the first place is always there. China will be watching this closely (now that it has started to ease restrictions in some areas and reported no new cases). Until we have a vaccine, and we get herd immunity with 90%-95% of the population immunized, this risk of another wave is not going away. We have to think about that, too. If we're organized enough, if we're smart enough, if we're motivated enough, to flatten our curve this year, and, say, only 10% of the U.S. population gets it this year, then when the next wave comes along we'll be better off. But only if we have the vaccine. Should the U.S. impose a total lockdown now? It's so hard to answer that but what I would say is what Anthony Fauci (director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases) has said a few times in recent days and that is that the approach we should be taking right now is one that most people would find to be too drastic because otherwise, it is not drastic enough. Does the U.S. have enough medical staff for this? We're getting there. Hospital ships are being placed on the West and East coasts. The next few months will determine whether we are outstripping our capabilities or not. I don't know any hospital that isn't running around trying to maximize what it can do. Here at NIH, we run a hospital and we stopped elective admissions ten days ago to make sure we have all the resources we may need for extremely ill patients. I imagine most hospitals have done the same. But when it comes down to it, will we have enough physicians, nurses, respiratory therapists, laboratory technicians, ventilators? We don't know what the need is going to look like and we should be doing everything we can to spread this need out over a few months instead of having it hit in one terrible crisis, which is what we are seeing happening in Italy. It would be almost impossible to look at the situation in Asia and just say they were lucky their curves flattened. We are at a point in the U.S where we are doubling the number of new cases about every two to three days. That's called an exponential curve. If you map that up next to Italy you might say we're about eight to 10 days behind them in terms of infections. We better get busy. Is testing improving? It got off to a rocky start. We can't fix that now. What we can do now is to make sure it's available much more broadly for people with symptoms. Drive-thru testing should help. But it may also freak everyone out when these facilities are widely set up because the number of known cases will take a sudden leap up. Although nobody should assume that means that a lot more people just got infected all of a sudden. 
2020-03-23	WASHINGTON ??The coronavirus pandemic is stressing the military's ability to keep its troops ready to fight as 124 service members, their families and civilian workers had contracted the disease as of Friday and the Pentagon seeks to halt its spread. Limiting the spread Training has been canceled or cut back. The Air Force scrapped Red Flag in Alaska, a training exercise for top-gun combat pilots, Gen. David Goldfein, the Air Force chief of staff, told reporters Wednesday. The Army is altering operations at bases that prepare troops for combat to accommodate National Guard units needed in their states for relief operations. War games in Europe, Africa and at sea have been cut back or scrapped. At least 67 troops in the U.S. and abroad as of Friday have been diagnosed with COVID-19, the disease caused by the virus. In Europe, 2,600 troops and civilian employees are quarantined as a precaution. The Army is shuttering its recruiting centers across the country, moving to online efforts only. It has also reduced the number of recruits in training centers by 50%, said Gen. James McConville, the Army chief of staff. Six recruits have shown possible symptoms, he said. Foreign and domestic travel for troops and their family members has been banned or severely restricted until mid-May. The Pentagon has canceled or curtailed major war-training exercises, quarantined thousands of troops, closed recruiting centers and slapped limits on foreign and domestic travel. One former Pentagon official said the virus could degrade everything from maintenance of warplanes to troops' effectiveness in combat. Senior officials insist that the military remains ready to fight and win against any threat around the world. "I want to assure the American people that the United States military remains ready and capable of meeting all of our national security requirements," Defense Secretary Mark Esper said this month. The cumulative effect of the illness, quarantines and missed training opportunities is difficult to calculate, experts and military officials say. But there is agreement that the disruption will have an impact on what the military refers to as its "readiness" to fight. "All of the readiness processes are so nested that anything disruptive can have cascading effects," said Brad Carson, a former top personnel official in the Obama administration and professor of public policy at the University of Virginia. "Coronavirus will affect everything from ship and air frame maintenance to professional military education to military exercises. And readiness has proven hard to achieve in even the best of circumstances, so the possibility of what would be a massive 'stand down' of indeterminate length could be devastating to readiness." In Europe, a major exercise devoted to meeting Russian aggression with NATO allies has been curtailed. Since January, the Pentagon has deployed 6,000 troops to take part in Defender-Europe 20, the major war game. On March 13, the Pentagon halted the stream of troops and equipment from the United States to Europe because of the pandemic. Modified exercises will take place, Air Force Gen. Tod Wolters, commander of U.S. European Command, said Friday. But they will achieve less than half the combat tasks troops had been scheduled to drill on. Mitigating the disease's impact on U.S. forces in Europe is manageable for now, he said. "Can we do this in perpetuity?" he said. "We'd be challenged." The Army has used the desert at its National Training Center at Ft. Irwin, California, as a dress rehearsal for troops heading to combat deployments in Iraq and Afghanistan. The austere conditions on the training grounds can mimic those encountered on battlefields overseas. Troops train and live in the field, often in close contact. Gen. James McConville, the Army chief of staff, noted that troops in South Korea and Italy have been ordered to maintain social distance and other efforts to mitigate the spread of the virus. Those efforts have been working. Also, in Iraq, U.S. troops have suspended training of local forces to avoid contracting and spreading the virus. Soldiers will still train in the field, but they'll maintain distance from one another, McConville said. A unit from the Washington National Guard saw its training deployment to Ft. Irwin canceled because its soldiers come from a state hard hit by the virus. "We're anticipating the governor may need them," McConville said. The virus' effect on troops' ability to fight will likely be small and temporary, predicted Michael O'Hanlon, a military expert at the Brookings Institution. He likened the effects to what Hall of Fame quarterback Troy Aikman faced when his Dallas Cowboys teammates were plagued with nagging injuries. Even units hard hit by the virus will likely lose about 20% of their troops for a few weeks. "You won't be quite as sharp for a bit, but Troy Aikman will still be Troy Aikman," O'Hanlon said. 
2020-03-20	It's not just adults 65 and older. Americans of all ages have faced serious health complications amid the new coronavirus outbreak, a federal health report says. New data from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention show that among the roughly 12% of COVID-19 cases in the U.S. known to need hospitalizations, about 1 in 5 were among people ages 20 to 44. The CDC report released Wednesday tracked the health outcomes from Feb. 12 to March 16 for the 2,449 COVID-19 patients in the U.S. whose ages were known. Health officials have warned that older adults and people with underlying medical conditions face a higher risk of complications due to COVID-19. The data still indicates older Americans face a higher risk of hospitalization, admission to an intensive care unit or even death. However, that doesn't mean younger Americans will not face serious health outcomes, either. Anywhere from 14% to 21% of adults ages 20 to 44 with COVID-19 have been hospitalized, the CDC data estimates. Two to 4% of cases led to ICU admissions, and less than 1% were fatal. "This virus is impacting the entire population, and it's something the entire population should be responding to," Dr. Wayne Tsuang, a pulmonary and critical care physician at the Cleveland Clinic told USA TODAY. The data set the CDC used is limited and does not account for underlying medical conditions. Many more young adults could have COVID-19 with mild symptoms not requiring hospitalization and without their cases being tracked by public health officials. Tsuang said more data collection is needed to better understand the risks younger people face. The data may overestimate the prevalence of severe disease, the report says, because testing has skewed toward those with travel histories or more serious symptoms. Still, a hospitalization can have long-term effects on young people. Those hospitalized with COVID-19 will likely be isolated for many days and away from school or work, Tsuang said, not to mention the serious symptoms they're facing that caused their hospitalization. "It takes a while for a patient to fully recover after a hospitalization," he said. "A hospitalization for this virus is very impactful, particularly for a young person." The CDC report also underscores a warning from Dr. Deborah Birx, the White House's coronavirus response coordinator. "There are concerning reports coming out of France and Italy about some young people getting seriously ill, and very seriously ill in the ICUs," Birx said a news conference Wednesday. Birx said younger adults taking fewer precautions may have gotten sick as they saw early reports from China and South Korea showing mostly older people and those with underlying conditions affected. "(Within) the millennial generation there may be a disproportional number of infections among that group. And so even if it's a rare occurrence, it may be seen more frequently in that group and be evident now," she added. Of the 2,449 cases the report analyzed, 508 have resulted in hospitalizations, including 121 patients known to have been admitted to an intensive care unit. Cases of ICU admission remained low among younger people. Those ages 20 to 44 made up only 12% of ICU cases. There were no ICU cases among people under 19. Deaths were also low for younger people. Only nine of the 44 known deaths in the report were among those between ages 20 and 64, and no one under 19 was known to have died. The report also highlighted the serious risks older Americans face. Between 10% and 27% of cases among people over 85 were fatal. People ages 75 to 84 saw up to 31% of cases leading to ICU admissions and up to 11% of cases being fatal. Similarly, for people between ages 65 and 74, up to 19% of cases led to ICU admissions and up to 5% were fatal. Public health officials have stressed for younger people to better practice social distancing by staying away from large gatherings and staying home if they feel sick. Preliminary research has suggested that those with the virus can infect others before becoming symptomatic, posing a particular risk for older Americans who interact with young people who may feel no symptoms. Photos on social media have shown spring breakers in Florida still partying on beaches or young adults out at bars and restaurants. "We cannot have these large gatherings that continue to occur throughout the country for people who are off work, to then be socializing in large groups and spreading the virus," Birx said Wednesday. "You have the potential then to spread it to someone who does have a condition that none of us knew about and cause them to have a disastrous outcome." Follow USA TODAY's Ryan Miller on Twitter @RyanW_Miller 
2020-03-19	GAYLE KING: Good morning to you, and welcome to CBS THIS MORNING. I'm Gayle King with Anthony Mason and Tony Dokoupil. Possible progress today in the push for coronavirus testing, plus a new warning for young people. ANTHONY MASON: Big economic relief from Washington as millions of workers worry about being left behind. TONY DOKOUPIL: And how to stay fit and healthy even in isolation--the new tools that can keep you moving and eating right. GAYLE KING: I'm working on that. It's Thursday, March 19, 2020. We'll have the latest updates on the coronavirus right after today's Eye Opener--your world in ninety seconds. PRESIDENT DONALD TRUMP: We're going to defeat the invisible enemy. I think we're going to do it even faster than we thought, and it will be a complete victory. It will be a total victory. NORAH O'DONNELL: President Trump is closing the border with Canada and calling himself a war-time President. ANDREW M. CUOMO: This is a war, and we're in the same trench. MAN #1: This is no time to panic, but it's just as much no time for business as usual. JEFF PEGUES: Infections in the U.S. have swelled to more than eight thousand. The first known members of Congress have tested positive. BEN MCADAMS: Probably the worst cold I've ever had. And-- I'm sorry-- and-- and I'm healthy. MAN #2: The New York Stock Exchange said it would temporarily close its trading floor and move to electronic trading beginning Monday. JIM CRAMER: We're in a real doozy of a crisis. You simply cannot do enough to help make things better. WOMAN #1: Gun and ammo sales are way up amid the novel coronavirus outbreak. Some stores are having trouble keeping up with the demand. GAYLE KING: All that-- MAN #3: If you still want to have a holiday experience, you can take inspiration from these Melbourne retirees who managed to enjoy their canceled cruise without leaving the comfort of their own home. GAYLE KING: --and all that matters-- GAL GADOT: We're all in this together. (Crowd singing) (Woman #2 singing) (Maya Rudolph singing) (Gal Gadot singing) GAYLE KING: --on CBS THIS MORNING. STEPHEN COLBERT: The coronavirus continues to be everywhere. After Trump made a big deal about it not being in West Virginia, last night we found out that West Virginia is the fiftieth state to report a coronavirus case. So, now we're all in this together. No red states or blue states, just fifty anxious pale states. This is a crisis that we have to face together by staying as far apart as possible. GAYLE KING: Welcome to CBS THIS MORNING. It's fitting that we end with Stephen Colbert because if this looks familiar to you, it's because we are in the home of Stephen Colbert. It's a historic Ed Sullivan Theater in New York where Stephen Colbert broadcasts every night. He's on hiatus right now. So, it's located-- Studio 57 is temporarily closed out of an abundance of caution. So, we are so grateful to Stephen and his entire team, Chris Licht, who used to be the EP for our show. ANTHONY MASON: Yeah. That's right. GAYLE KING: You remember that. Dante on camera one. We have some of Stephen's people and our people. So, we get to be here while Stephen's on hiatus. We're so glad to be here. ANTHONY MASON: We promise-- yeah, we promise to be good house guests and leave the place like we found it. TONY DOKOUPIL: Yeah, yeah. I'll safe my-- GAYLE KING: Not to tinker on the piano (INDISTINCT). TONY DOKOUPIL: I've-- I've got a hankering and tell some funny antidotes we're going to save them I think. We have funny story to tell, but we do appreciate having this home-- ANTHONY MASON: Yeah. We sure do. GAYLE KING: Yes, very much so. We want to be very careful. We're taking this very seriously as I know you are, too. And this is where we stand this morning in the coronavirus pandemic. There are now more than ninety-four hundred reported cases here in the United States. Across all fifty states now the number of deaths in this country has jumped to at least one hundred and fifty-two. ANTHONY MASON: President Trump now says he considers himself a war-time President because of the coronavirus. Last night, he signed a one-hundred-billion-dollar emergency aid package into law. It includes free virus testing for every American, paid sick leave, and expanded unemployment benefits. Weijia Jiang is at the White House. Weijia, President Trump is also expected to reveal a significant development from the FDA this morning. What do we know about that? WEIJIA JIANG (CBS News White House Correspondent): Well, good morning, Anthony. The White House is being very tightlipped with any details. But the President could talk about a potential treatment for the coronavirus. He has also mentioned that researchers are working on a test that people could give themselves. In the meantime, he has taken a series of stunning steps that underscore how serious this outbreak is, even activating FEMA to level one, the highest level, across the country. (Begin VT) PRESIDENT DONALD TRUMP: We're winning, and we will win. It's a question of when. And I think it's going-- going to go quickly. WEIJIA JIANG: Before meeting with a group of nurses on the front lines, President Trump said he was using the full power of the federal government to combat the coronavirus. PRESIDENT DONALD TRUMP: We'll be invoking the Defense Production Act. WEIJIA JIANG: The President signed a Korean War-era law that compels manufacturing companies to produce certain goods during a crisis like masks and other protective gear for health workers, though he later said it was for a worst case scenario. One major concern is having enough ventilators to help patients breathe. MIKE PENCE: We have a specific number of ventilators in the stockpile in excess of-- of ten thousand. And you just heard the announcement from the Department of Defense. They'll be adding several more thousand to that. WEIJIA JIANG: On Capitol Hill, lawmakers are working on a trillion-dollar economic stimulus package to bail out the airline and hotel industries, help small businesses and even send money directly to Americans in need. SENATOR MITCH MCCONNELL: We are moving rapidly because the situation demands it. WEIJIA JIANG: But Senate Minority Leader Chuck Schumer warned that's only a quick fix. SENATOR CHUCK SCHUMER: This is not a time for small thinking. This is not a time for small measures. This is a time to be bold, to be aggressive. WEIJIA JIANG: President Trump is also under fire for frequently referring to coronavirus as the Chinese virus. The President says the virus originated in China, and he's pushing back on a Chinese official who had suggested the U.S. military brought the disease to Wuhan. PRESIDENT DONALD TRUMP: It's not racist at all. No, not at all. It comes from China. I want to be accurate. (End VT) WEIJIA JIANG: But many Asian-Americans say it is racist and that the President's actions have led to a growing number of attacks on the community, both verbal and physical. Tony. TONY DOKOUPIL: Weijia, thank you very much. Last night, we learned at least two members of Congress have tested positive for the coronavirus. They are congressmen Mario Diaz-Ballart from Florida and Ben McAdams from Utah. They say they developed symptoms over the weekend, and both are now in isolation. McAdams actually described his symptoms to our Salt Lake City affiliate KUTV. REPRESENTATIVE BEN MCADAMS: I have a temperature of about a hundred and three, and-- and feels like I have a belt around my lungs. So, I just-- I can't take too deep a breath. It's a little bit labored breathing and-- and then just really achy. So, probably the worst cold I've ever had. And-- sorry-- and-- and I'm healthy. GAYLE KING: A lot of people feel that way. We understand others who may have been in contact with those congressmen are now self-quarantining. Doctor Deborah Birx is a response coordinator for the White House coronavirus task force. And she joins us now from Washington. Doctor Birx, thank you for taking the time. I know your plate is overflowing. But I want to refer to Weijia Jiang's piece where we heard the President say we are going to win, and we will win very quickly. What is the White House definition of quickly? DR. DEBORAH BIRX (White House Coronavirus Response Coordinator): I think we're all looking very closely at the data--the data coming out of China, the data coming out of South Korea. We're encouraged by the recent reports from China of no new cases. We're very-- watching very carefully about China going back to work and seeing it that impacts the-- the spread of the virus. So, we're learning from other countries. If our profile looks like China, we believe that, that is very quickly, but if we are evaluating every single country and the data coming from that country. TONY DOKOUPIL: Doctor Birx, I think Americans can handle just about anything, but they do need to know what to expect. You mentioned China as a possible timeline. Right now we are in these two weeks to slow the spread period. But there are other reports coming from the administration about a possible eighteen-month fight. How long should Americans be prepared to take precautions to fight this pandemic? DR. DEBORAH BIRX: You know, that's a great question. The models not only looked at what's happening during this current outbreak. But we know with respiratory diseases they have a peak and often fall off during the summer months. If this works like every other respiratory disease that comes to us in the winter then we're tracking very carefully about what would happen if it had-- came back in the fall or came back in the fall after that. And that's why the President's been working nonstop both on therapeutics that could be available in the summer and fall and vaccines that could be available in the fall of 2020. So it's a long-- it's a-- just a today vision, a tomorrow vision, but also a ninety-day vision, a fall vision and a fall 2021 vision to make sure that we're following everything. ANTHONY MASON: At this point when do you anticipate the peak to be? DR. DEBORAH BIRX: Well, the only thing we can look at is the same thing you all are looking at is what the peaks look like in every other country. Now, in every other country where the peak came and the cases declined, it was because every single person in that country followed the guidelines that our President has put out. These guidelines are extraordinarily important. It's about social distancing. It's about washing your hands. It's about ensuring that you're protecting yourself and protecting others. It's not about partying on beaches during spring break. GAYLE KING: So Doctor Birx, what concerns you most at this point? DR. DEBORAH BIRX: I think the rapidness of getting our own data. I think that's very important. We applaud the legislation for putting in the White House request for reporting. I think we need to see a hundred percent of the cases. I know a lot of people are looking at the data that came out of the MMWR this morning. The numbers are not large enough for us to make conclusions from. But as we-- we've always been worried about individuals with pre-existing conditions in every age group. So, we're asking every hospital, every clinic to report both their testing results and their outcomes at the hospitalization places. GAYLE KING: Can you give an update on the testing? How-- how many cases are out there, how many more do you need? When you take the test, how long does it take to get the results? People are very concerned about the testing. DR. DEBORAH BIRX: That's an excellent question. Because what happened with the testing before we could get the high-speed laboratory commercial labs up and running is there was a backlog. And so to every Americans out there that's watching-- watching the new cases, these are new cases coming from the backlog for samples that were collected four, five, and six days ago. And as those get run, our number of new cases will dramatically increase because they're not daily cases. They're cases that are from the last few days. Once we get through the backlog, we'll be able to tell you precisely how many tests are negative, how many are positive, and with this new reporting requirement, it will be accurate. TONY DOKOUPIL: Doctor Birx, thank you very much. We appreciate you being with us this morning. DR. DEBORAH BIRX: Thank you. TONY DOKOUPIL: CBS News medical contributor Doctor Tara Narula will be with us throughout the show to answer questions. And she joins us now. We heard Doctor Birx mention spring break and people shouldn't be out there on the beaches. That's mostly young people. We also now know that the CDC says twenty percent of hospitalizations are young people. So what does that population need to know? DR. TARA NARULA (CBS News Medical Contributor): Right. So those CDC numbers are really important. Twenty percent of those, aged twenty to forty-four, were hospitalized in this country. Twelve percent of those aged twenty to forty-four needed ICU-level care. So, we're still learning a lot about this virus. So for those young individuals who think it can't happen to me, I'm not susceptible to this, that's just not the case. And we are seeing, you know, young people in Italy and France-- ANTHONY MASON: Yeah. DR. TARA NARULA: --who are having issues with the virus. GAYLE KING: I know, Tara, I saw a knucklehead on the beach yesterday from Florida saying, look, it's my spring break. ANTHONY MASON: Yeah. GAYLE KING: If I get it, I get it. But it's really so irresponsible because you put so many other people in jeopardy. DR. TARA NARULA: And that's-- GAYLE KING: That's what so frustrating watching that. DR. TARA NARULA: Right. And that's this big idea of social distancing. We can't hammer it home enough. And this comes down to something we call the reproduction factor. That's how infectious I am. So, if I have the disease I can spread it. We think with coronavirus to about three people. That reproduction number is affected by how the virus properties itself, who-- who is susceptible but also the duration of contact with individuals and the number of people you contact. ANTHONY MASON: Yeah. DR. TARA NARULA: So by decreasing the duration of people and contact with those people, you're decreasing the speed of the spread of the virus. ANTHONY MASON: Yeah. And this can seriously affect young people is the point. TONY DOKOUPIL: Yeah. GAYLE KING: Yes. DR. TARA NARULA: Right. TONY DOKOUPIL: Doctor Narula, thank you very much. As an elder millennial, I do want to point out that those people on the beach are probably generation Z, twenty year olds. GAYLE KING: Whatever-- whatever, Tony. It was just so maddening to see. ANTHONY MASON: It was good of you to stand up for your people. GAYLE KING: That's right. TONY DOKOUPIL: Thank you very much, Doctor. And we'll be checking in with Doctor Narula throughout our broadcast. END 
2020-03-19	TONY DOKOUPIL: And the more we test, the more infections we find. Infections in the U.S. have now topped ninety-four hundred and at least a hundred and fifty-two people have died. Let's get to our lead national correspondent, David Begnaud, who is self-quarantine-- self-quarantining in his New York apartment. David, good morning. What have you got? DAVID BEGNAUD (CBS News Correspondent): Tony, good morning. You know, we hear so much about the numbers. But we've been trying to focus on the stories behind those numbers. I want to tell you about the Fuscos, a close-knit family from central New Jersey. Weekend family dinners are reportedly a tradition in their household. They are regulars at Sunday mass. But the virus has tragically affected them. At least six, six of them have tested positive for COVID-19, and three of them have already died, including seventy-three-year-old Grace Fusco, who was a mother to eleven, and a grandmother to twenty-seven. At least three of the Fuscos are still in critical condition this morning. Now, on the other hand, let me tell you about some good news out of one of the hardest hit areas in New York. A New Rochelle lawyer who was one of the first to be diagnosed with the virus in New York State is now on the road to what is apparently a full recovery. Lawrence Garbuz's wife tells CBS THIS MORNING that he is awake and alert, and after reportedly being in a medically-induced coma for more than a week, his first words to her after he was taken off the ventilator were, "I love you so much." GAYLE KING: Hm. TONY DOKOUPIL: That's beautiful. GAYLE KING: Boy, David. I'm so glad that you ended on that note. We've been following that story. ANTHONY MASON: Yeah. GAYLE KING: And you hear medically-induced coma, you think this could go a couple of ways. I'm so glad that it's turned out the way it has. That's very good news. Thank you, David Begnaud. DAVID BEGNAUD: I thought you would be. GAYLE KING: Yeah. DAVID BEGNAUD: Just wanted to share that. GAYLE KING: Yeah. DAVID BEGNAUD: You bet. GAYLE KING: We're very happy to hear that. Our Doctor Tara Narula is a cardiologist at Northwell Health in New York and she joins us once again. Tara, I know you have a lot to discuss. But before you do, I just want to talk about your piece yesterday because I honestly can't stop thinking about it. ANTHONY MASON: Yeah. GAYLE KING: We were all-- we all felt some kind of way when you hear a doctor say I'm scared. DR. TARA NARULA (CBS News Medical Contributor): Mm-Hm. GAYLE KING: I'm worried. I'm afraid. You just don't hear doctors speak this way. DR. TARA NARULA: And that's really why we wanted to tell the story. You know, we never open up as doctors-- GAYLE KING: Yes. DR. TARA NARULA: --about our own vulnerabilities. We run into the room, we take care of people when they're dying, when they're bleeding, when they're in pain. And we comfort them. But we're human, too. GAYLE KING: Mm-Hm. DR. TARA NARULA: And so it was very important to show that side. And doctors are scared. And they're really scared because they feel like they're going to not only be infected themselves but more importantly the risk of infecting their family. GAYLE KING: Yes. ANTHONY MASON: Yeah. DR. TARA NARULA: And they feel like they're having to make a choice that no one should have to make, which is a choice between a profession that you took an oath for to heal and protect and serve others and your family. And what do you do when you're in that position? So, you know, the feedback we got from the piece yesterday was just all these, you know-- GAYLE KING: Yeah. ANTHONY MASON: Yes, sure. DR. TARA NARULA: --health care professionals saying-- GAYLE KING: Yes. DR. TARA NARULA: --I was crying-- GAYLE KING: Yes. DR. TARA NARULA: --you know, for the first time. GAYLE KING: I felt that too. I felt that too. ANTHONY MASON: And-- and we're not even-- we're not even near the peak here of what we're expecting to-- to be up against. DR. TARA NARULA: Yeah. ANTHONY MASON: When you look at the numbers at other countries, Tara, what-- what-- what are we potentially face here? DR. TARA NARULA: Well, it depends. It depends how good we socially distance and how good we follow all the public health measures we're talking about. So certainly we have seen a plateau, a decrease in the numbers from China and South Korea. That's encouraging. It tells us that if you follow these measures-- GAYLE KING: Yeah. DR. TARA NARULA: --now granted those were aggressive and they had more testing, you can slow it. And that's why it's really important for Americans to understand that this term of flattening the curve and social distancing, it's powerful. GAYLE KING: Yeah. Yeah. DR. TARA NARULA: And-- GAYLE KING: Those aren't just empty words. DR. TARA NARULA: They are-- GAYLE KING: They mean something. DR. TARA NARULA: They mean something. They mean protecting our vulnerable, they mean decreasing the impact on the health care system. One of the things that's very important for people to understand is what is going on in Italy. Those doctors talk about a difficult decision. They're having to make decisions like in war-time about triage. Meaning, I can't save you, I won't save you because you're older and you're sicker and you're not going to survive. TONY DOKOUPIL: Yeah. DR. TARA NARULA: Imagine being put in that position. TONY DOKOUPIL: Yeah. DR. TARA NARULA: And that's what we could face here. TONY DOKOUPIL: Yeah. The benefit of-- of care calculation if it's an older person taking the bed or a younger person. We really hope that doesn't come here. We've got the Navy sending two ships, the Army setting up field hospitals. But I'm-- I'm interested in telemedicine-- DR. TARA NARULA: Mm-Hm. TONY DOKOUPIL: --remote medicine as a solution for doctors, it would reduce their physical risk. ANTHONY MASON: yeah. TONY DOKOUPIL: Is-- is that really a stand-in? DR. TARA NARULA: It is. I mean, it's-- it's kind of the perfect thing for a pandemic. We're doing that in my hospital system. We're, you know, condensing the number of visits. And we're using telemedicine. So it can never replace that in-person visit, right? GAYLE KING: Yeah. DR. TARA NARULA: But it can go a long way. And so I think right now in the situation we're in, it's really a great tool for us. And I think it's going to allow the field to really grow and expand. GAYLE KING: We heard about the self-swab test yesterday. DR. TARA NARULA: Mm-Hm. GAYLE KING: The President mentioned that. What do you think about that? Do we know enough to self-swab ourselves to self-test? DR. TARA NARULA: So just yesterday-- GAYLE KING: Yeah. DR. TARA NARULA: --there's a company that announced it will be releasing and producing a self-swab test this month. GAYLE KING: Do you like this? Do you like this? DR. TARA NARULA: I think it's a good idea in the sense that we can use it more widely. It's, again, safer in the sense that you're not having somebody come into the office and expose themselves. ANTHONY MASON: Yeah. DR. TARA NARULA: Doctors and health care professionals are not exposed. There's some experience with self-swab when you look at flu-- GAYLE KING: But we're so self-swabbing our nose, right? How do we know to we do that? DR. TARA NARULA: Nose-- well, it's relatively-- it's not going to be like the kind you see that's very aggressive. GAYLE KING: Yeah. ANTHONY MASON: Right. Is it a relia-- DR. TARA NARULA: You know, it's a-- it's a little bit simple. ANTHONY MASON: --reliable test? DR. TARA NARULA: Well, that's what we really need to figure out, right? (Cross-talking) DR. TARA NARULA: And-- and that will give us more of a sense of the, you know-- ANTHONY MASON: Scope. DR. TARA NARULA: --how widespread this-- this is. And one other thing that's in the works is also these antibody or blood tests. Those are really going to look at who has had the infection at some point. ANTHONY MASON: Right. DR. TARA NARULA: And that will give us the best picture of how the virus is spreading, and what the true mortality rate is. ANTHONY MASON: All right. Tara Narula, thank you so much. GAYLE KING: Thank you. ANTHONY MASON: As the pandemic reshapes our daily lives, what are the biggest unanswered questions for you? E-mail coronavirus@cbsnews.com with your questions. A major challenge for millions of Americans staying home because of the co-- coronavirus is how to eat a healthy diet. Ahead, we'll get some tips from a registered dietitian including how to avoid snacking all day. GAYLE KING: Too late. TONY DOKOUPIL: My favorite pastime. GAYLE KING: Too late. ANTHONY MASON: But first, it's eight-oh-eight, time to check your local weather. (LOCAL WEATHER BREAK) (ANNOUNCEMENTS) TONY DOKOUPIL: Ahead, Meals on Wheels workers are taking risks every day to make sure older Americans isolated at home have enough to eat. We're going to ride along to see how the coronavirus is changing their mission. GAYLE KING: Plus the online school Khan Academy has class schedules and learning tools for students who are out of school during this time. Founder Salman Khan will join us to explain. You're watching CBS THIS MORNING. We thank you for that. We'll be right back. (ANNOUNCEMENTS) GAYLE KING: If it little-- if it looks a little different this morning, there's a reason for that. We're at the home of Stephen Colbert with the Ed Sullivan Theater, the historic theater, because our broadcast center is closed for the time being. TONY DOKOUPIL: And that phrase, we hear a lot--an abundance of caution. ANTHONY MASON: Of caution, yes. GAYLE KING: Abundance of caution. We are taking no chances. ANTHONY MASON: That's right. END 
2020-03-19	LONDON ??Soon, the United States will find out whether it's likely to be the next South Korea or Italy or even China when it comes to the acceleration of coronavirus cases and deaths. A data analysis by USA TODAY finds that two weeks after the U.S. first entered into community transmission on March 3, America's trajectory is trending toward Italy's, where circumstances are dire. U.S. officials are sounding the alarm, urging Americans to heed what federal, state and local officials are asking of them in order to curtail the spread and dampen the impact of the virus on the U.S. population. Although it's too early to draw conclusions about which countries will ultimately weather the COVID-19 storm best, public health data shows nations that are so far faring well at suppressing the outbreak have done so through this combination: easy access to testing, rigorous contact tracing, clear and consistent science-based messaging, and a commitment to studiously abide by quarantines while clamping down on socializing no matter how tempting it may be to stray. "When you're on an exponential curve, every moment is dangerous," said Francis Collins, director of the National Institutes of Health, in an interview. "This is a particularly critical moment for us to try to bring all the resources and determination of government and the American people to try to get off of it." Outside of China, territories, city-states and countries in Asia such as Taiwan, Singapore, Hong Kong and Japan appear to be making the most progress. But experts say U.S. comparisons to the experiences of other countries are not clear-cut for a variety of reasons, including population size, different medical systems, America's geographic expanse, and cultural reasons that are difficult to account for. U.S. officials are monitoring what is playing out in other countries, particularly Italy, where rates of transmission and deaths in its northern regions have been so catastrophic that the Italian College of Anesthesia, Analgesia, Resuscitation and Intensive Care recently drew up guidelines for doctors about how to manage the crisis if the outbreak intensifies. "We're following every single country's curve," said Dr. Deborah Birx, the White House coronavirus task force response coordinator, in a briefing Wednesday. For most people, the new coronavirus causes only mild or moderate symptoms, such as fever and cough. But for older adults, especially those with pre-existing health conditions, it can cause much more severe illness, including pneumonia. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention's worst-case-scenario is that about 160 million to 210 million Americans will be infected by December. Under this forecast, 21 million people would need hospitalization, and 200,000 to 1.7 million could die by the end of the year. "The extent to which we can prevent direct and excess deaths depends on how quickly we can flatten the outbreak, mobilize health services, and for how long we can prevent a relapse," said Robert Muggah, founder and director of the Brazil-based security think tank Igarape Institute and a leading expert on pandemics. Estimates vary, but most public health experts believe that the U.S. is one to two weeks behind what has befallen Italy, where a near-total lockdown has been imposed on 60 million citizens, with only supermarkets and drug stores open to the public. Italian authorities began enforcing their lockdown on March 12, 18 days after the point where community transmission, defined as more than 100 cases, had taken hold, according to World Health Organization data analyzed by USA TODAY. It's too early to say whether restrictions in Italy, and similar ones in Spain, are working. Collins said that if the U.S. takes measures that many Americans might find overly drastic "we should certainly be able to blunt" the U.S. curve. "But let's be clear: There's going to be a very rough road ahead of us over the next weeks and months." In the U.S., 115 people have died amid more than 7,300 confirmed cases as of Wednesday, according to Johns Hopkins University's data dashboard. There has been no federally ordered lockdown in the U.S., and access to testing has been sporadic, although President Donald Trump has urged Americans to refrain from gathering in groups of more than 10 people. San Francisco on Monday became the first U.S. city to order its residents to stay home over the coronavirus outbreak. In China, where COVID-19 originated, the outbreak followed a pattern similar to Italy's. The country initially saw an exponential rise in infections. Beijing ordered a complete lockdown in Wuhan and other cities in Hubei province on Jan. 23, about halfway into the first 25 days of reported community transmission. Yet after authorities embarked on one of the largest mass mobilization efforts in history, closing all schools, forcing millions of people inside, quickly building more than a dozen vast, temporary hospitals and meticulously testing and tracing anyone who may have encountered the virus, Beijing has appeared to all but eradicate new cases. Michael Merson, director of the National University of Singapore Global Health Institute and the Wolfgang Joklik Professor of Global Health at Duke University, said places in Asia such as South Korea, Taiwan, Hong Kong, Japan and Singapore, enjoy public health factors that are difficult for countries like the U.S., with its fractured system, to replicate. In Singapore, "there's strong government leadership, but also trust in the government," Merson said. "Every time a case is identified, there is a very strong action plan to identify contacts. It's also very good at promoting hand-washing and keeping people at a safe distance from one another. . "They take prudent steps at prevention, but they haven't entirely shut the country down." 
2020-03-19	SAN FRANCISCO ??Six Bay Area counties in California are under quarantine for three weeks. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention has urged no group gatherings for two months. President Donald Trump said relief may come by August. And leaked British documents projected that a coronavirus outbreak could rage until spring 2021. As parts of the United States head into a coronavirus lockdown, it's unclear how long these severe restrictions will last. Only one thing is certain: The nation's COVID-19 crisis will be as bad as we let it get. Scientists, government officials, historians and cultural observers say the size and duration of the outbreak will depend on our collective actions over the next few weeks and months. The promising news, they say, is that we have the power to not just resist, but also to come together as a country in a way reminiscent of World War II. "Back then, the government and the public joined to mobilize for the war effort, producing armaments and food, and that same effort is needed here," says Timothy Massad, senior fellow at Harvard University's Kennedy School of Government and chairman of the Commodity Futures Trading Commission under President Barack Obama. "The government should mobilize the private sector to get more virus testing kits, more hospital beds, more ventilators," he says. "We need to treat this like a fight that everyone from the top down needs to rally for to end this sooner rather than later." As alienating as the effects of a coronavirus quarantine can be, isolation ??in form of the growing number of city- and county-mandated orders to shelter in place with the exception of trips out to buy necessities ??is crucial to bringing this outbreak to an end. There are no vaccines or treatments yet, so staying clear of one another is key to flattening the pandemic's contagion curve. "This all hinges on how people behave," says Natalie Dean, a biostatistician at the University of Florida-Gainesville specializing in the statistical analysis of infectious diseases such as Ebola and HIV. "Things will get more severe before they get better. It's going to be a shock to the system for some people." But everyone staying home for weeks or months comes with its own range of issues that could include unemployment, new child care costs and, foremost, the stressful byproducts of isolation. "Hugging, seeing people's faces, they're an important part of how we connect and feel safe," says Elissa Epel, professor in the department of psychiatry at the University of California-San Francisco. "We are going to make an extra effort to stay connected in the ways that we still can to get through this." Lessons from overseas A hint at how long this all might last comes from China. In Wuhan, the epicenter of the outbreak about 21/2 months ago, life is slowly returning to normal as reports of new COVID-19 cases ebb. That could signal an abatement there by late May. But Italy offers a more harrowing and urgent marker. Experts say that much like the U.S. government's lagged response to the virus when it first appeared, Italian officials initially responded with less urgency than Asian nations such as South Korea and Singapore. Italy has since been hit hardest in Europe by COVID-19, with 31,000 cases and more than 2,500 deaths in a country of 60 million. A YouTube video gone viral features Italians giving themselves "from 10 days ago" advice. Virtually all the messages are identical: Shame on me for initially not taking this seriously enough. So far globally, there have been about 200,000 cases with nearly 8,000 deaths. The U.S. has seen 6,500 cases and more than 100 deaths. A recent British report suggested that without action from the U.S. government or its public to halt the spread of COVID-19, more than 2.2 million Americans could die from the virus. "People here probably still don't yet understand the severity of things," says researcher Dean, noting that some Florida beaches were packed this week with spring break revelers. "The measures some cities are taking in terms of quarantine may sound extreme when you look outside and everything seems normal. But they're appropriate." If perhaps a bit too late. Lawrence Wright, a staff writer at The New Yorker, spent years talking to experts on pandemics and viruses for his eerily prescient forthcoming novel, "The End of October," in which a deadly flu ravages a surprised world. While Wright doesn't believe COVID-19 will prove to be the worst-case scenario conjured in his book, he is nevertheless shocked at the how the U.S. was caught on the back foot for this pandemic. "I did all the research into what this could look like, but watching it unfold in real life highlighted how little preparation we had for this," he says. "This pandemic may well still be a devastating event for us. It's wounding. It takes a bite out of life to be separated from people we love." Wright, who lives in Austin, says he has had a regular Monday breakfast meeting with friends for the past 30 years. This past Monday, the meal turned into a walk. "Even that made me feel nervous," he says. "You don't know where a contagion may arise." That sort of caution contrasts with pockets of the U.S. where bars and restaurants remain open despite health official warnings to avoid groups sizes as small as 10. A cavalier attitude toward the virus ??which in turn could get in the way of slowing its spread, especially since asymptomatic carriers can pass it along ??could be partly the result of Hollywood's love of dramas starring bacteria and zombies, says Canadian writer and director Jeff Barnaby. "We have spent so much time dramatizing events like this that we then are underwhelmed by the actual thing," he says, referencing movies such as 2011's "Contagion" and the hit TV drama "The Walking Dead." Barnaby's new movie adds to that oeuvre. "Blood Quantum," whose release was delayed by the virus, finds the Mi'gmaq Native American director spinning an allegorical story about indigenous peoples being attacked by white zombies. "When your brain is conditioned like that, it makes for a climate where everyone's casual about the real thing," says Barnaby, who planned to hole up in his Quebec apartment after hearing that his movie's publicity tour was canceled. "That causal approach then is what brings on the exponential growth threat. So who knows when this thing ends." Bringing out our best selves Given our state of uncertainty, some say it's better to focus not on when this global nightmare will be over but rather on how we can be our best selves during these unsettling times. "We shouldn't call this the new normal, because nothing about this is normal," says Pepper Schwartz, sociology professor at the University of Washington. "We don't know what we're dealing with today, and we don't know what willcome tomorrow. So we have to adapt." Schwartz says it's important to take stock of the good things in your life to put these times in perspective. Consider the conditions for the homeless and the working poor who may lose their jobs, she says. Or working parents suddenly facing child care challenges to keep their employment. And have compassion for those both famous and unknown who have tested positive for COVID-19. Feeling grateful will help mitigate the inevitable stress that comes with being in close quarters with spouses and family, and perhaps steer couples away from divorce and families from arguments, says Schwartz, who lectures globally on issues facing couples. "I tell people, this is a time to be ambitious," she says. "Ask more of yourself in terms of patience, generosity and compassion. Be empathetic, because in times like these tempers and anxiety flare." Orlaith Murphy and her Bay Area family now start each morning with three minutes of meditation. "It's important more than ever to be thoughtful about what you can and cannot control," says Murphy, who works for a large San Francisco-based retailer. She and her husband Justin, a cybersecurity expert, are hunkered down working from home alongside their 9-year-old twins in the small Bay Area suburb of Mill Valley, whose picturesque downtown looks increasingly like an abandoned movie set. "We have to band together and see what's needed for the greater good of the community," she says. "We are all in this together." A Pearl Harbor, a 9/11 If there is indeed one certainty, historians, scientists and artists say, it is this: When this staggering global outbreak finally ends ??and it will end ??there will be reckoning of sorts, one that will judge how we responded as a nation, as communities, as friends. Epidemics, wars, terrorist events and natural disasters have preceded COVID-19, and in each of those instances human beings were presented with an opportunity to define their very humanity, says author and Rice University history professor Douglas Brinkley. "In American history, this outbreak stands with maybe Pearl Harbor and 9/11 as a massive shock to the national system," says Brinkley, who is at work on a book about how the environmental movement of the 1960s brought about global change. "This, too, can have a huge galvanizing effect in making a new America." Much the way past social crises gave rise to the Food and Drug Administration, child labor laws and a clean-up of the meat packing industry, Brinkley says our shared COVID-19 trauma could renew calls for public health, create SWAT teams for future pandemics, and find more college students going into the medical field. "There are moments that transcend politics and become bipartisan movements, like the push to go to the moon," Brinkley says. Rob Citino, executive director of the Institute for the Study of War and Democracy at the National World War II Museum in New Orleans, notes the things the U.S. accomplished under the crucible of war "changed us as a nation for the better." Citino says that some 80 years ago, when confronted with the challenge of vanquishing Nazi Germany, Americans did what they had to ??rationing gas, food and clothing, working overtime in factories and sending loved ones into battle. "I see that as another parallel to today's crisis," Citino says. "We don't have a timeline, but we're in this for the duration as a nation and it's going to last until it's over. And then we'll be back, perhaps with a new perspective on ourselves." 
2020-03-18	GAYLE KING: Well, we want to know what your new normal looks like as the coronavirus changes the way we work, the way we parent our children, and the way we connect with other people. Please share your story on Twitter by using the #MyNewNormal or by e-mailing us at coronavirus@cbsnews.com. Who knows? Maybe we'll be able to share your story with our viewers. ANTHONY MASON: All right. Our Doctor David Agus joins us now from Los Angeles to separate fact from fiction when it comes to treatment of the virus. David, good morning. DR. DAVID AGUS (CBS News Medical Contributor): Good morning, Anthony. ANTHONY MASON: There's so much misinformation about there-- about-- out there about the ways to treat this virus and its symptoms. Can you help us separate fact from fiction here? Starting with what we-- we've been hearing about ibuprofen? DR. DAVID AGUS: There was some data out of France where a statement was made that ibuprofen can dramatically increase symptoms of the virus. And it's just not true. It is okay to take Tylenol, it's okay to take ibuprofen. There is no association with severity and symptoms or outcome to the virus. Then we're seeing it with herbs and supplements and vitamins. I am getting barraged with hundreds of e-mails a day. And there is no data that any of them work. GAYLE KING: Mm-Hm. DR. DAVID AGUS: What I don't want people to do is take one of them and then go into a more high-risk behavior because they say, hey, I'm protected because I'm taking X or I'm taking Y. I want people to realize that social distancing while it's not sexy and it doesn't come as a pill in a bottle, it is the only thing that really works against this horrible virus. GAYLE KING: David, I heard something-- and I've been doing it for the past week. I got something online, a lot of people got this. If you hold your breath for ten seconds and you don't experience any discomfort, that's a sign that maybe you're doing okay. Does that-- allegedly came from doctors at Stanford. DR. DAVID AGUS: That's not true. GAYLE KING: Have you heard anything like that? DR. DAVID AGUS: Yeah. I've-- I got so many copies of that e-mail. It is totally-- GAYLE KING: It's not true? DR. DAVID AGUS: --unfortunately made up, and it is not true. You can stop holding your breath, and you can breathe. GAYLE KING: I was only doing-- I was-- I was so proud of myself because I was going for twenty seconds. ANTHONY MASON: Yeah. Then you'll pass out. GAYLE KING: Yeah. Yeah. So-- DR. DAVID AGUS: Gayle found on floor after holding breath. GAYLE KING: Yeah, I know. So what do you-- what do you make of the stories we're hearing about older people who are not really following the social distancing rules? DR. DAVID AGUS: Yeah. And when we look at this-- GAYLE KING: We have to stress how important this is. DR. DAVID AGUS: When we look at the South Korea data, South Korea is the most analogous system to us in terms of medical care. And they have an excellent infrastructure. The death rate in people over eighty years old was over eight percent. Seventy to eighty, the death rate was five and a half percent. Sixty to seventy, the death rate was three and a half percent. Under sixty, the death rate was about point one percent. So the key is if you are older six-- over sixty, no matter how healthy you think you are, no matter how much you can run and jog and do whatever, you are still at dramatically high risk for complication and even death from this virus. So you have to listen to these guidelines. Please, please, please. The reason our country is going through these aggressive measures is to protect the people over sixty. TONY DOKOUPIL: Yeah. DR. DAVID AGUS: They have to play along. And I really hope they do. TONY DOKOUPIL: And the people who are not over sixty needed to remember that what they do can have an effect on those people in that more vulnerable category. Doctor David Agus, thank you very much. DR. DAVID AGUS: Yep. TONY DOKOUPIL: Ahead, Facebook's Sheryl Sandberg tells Gayle how the company is fighting false information about the coronavirus and also helping small businesses. That's a very big deal. But first, it is eight ten, time to check your local weather. (LOCAL WEATHER BREAK) (ANNOUNCEMENTS) GAYLE KING: There's much more news ahead, including John Legend's online coronavirus concert. Only on CBS THIS MORNING, he tells Anthony why he felt compelled to reach out to his fans from his home. We'll be right back. (ANNOUNCEMENTS) END 
2020-03-17	GAYLE KING: Because every day, we're going to be bringing you everything you need to know about these unfolding ever changing coronavirus crisis. How America is coping and what you can do to stay safe. We're very glad to be doing that. First Americans are hunkering down this morning as the pandemic brings us our personal and work-- work lives, rather, to a complete standstill. It is very scary. President Trump has made it clear this is no time to take any chances. PRESIDENT DONALD TRUMP: My administration is recommending that all Americans, including the young and healthy, work to engage in schooling from home when possible, avoid gathering in groups of more than ten people, avoid discretionary travel, and avoid eating and drinking at bars, restaurants and public food courts. GAYLE KING: It's very good advice. President also said for the first time yesterday that this crisis could lead to a recession. On Wall Street yesterday, as you heard, the stocks plummeted right after the opening bell. The Dow Jones Industrials lost nearly three thousand points. That is close to thirteen percent. ANTHONY MASON: The U.S. has now more than-- the U.S. now has more than forty-five hundred reported coronavirus cases. But the actual total could be much higher, at least ninety people have died. Our coverage of this new normal in America begins with Mola Lenghi in New York City. Mola, it's remarkably quiet in this typically crazy city. MOLA LENGHI (CBS News Correspondent): Absolutely, Anthony. It is. You know, New Yorkers here are waking up to new rules and that new normal that you guys are talking about and that's really defined by empty streets, deserted, desolate streets. This is Columbus Circle, one of the busier areas in the city. It sits adjacent to Central Park. But, of course, as you mentioned, bars, restaurants, coffee shops all closed. Retail stores have adjusted their hours, as you can see, illustrated by that sign and further illustrated by the transit systems here. Columbus Circle, one of the busier subway stations in the city, normally hundreds if not thousands of people would be pouring out of here as you can see now down to a trickle. Meanwhile, in other parts of the country, leaders are taking even more drastic measures to stop the spread of the virus. (Begin VT) MOLA LENGHI: The streets of New Orleans eerily quiet on the eve of St. Patrick's Day. The crowds were kept home after Louisiana forced all bars to close over coronavirus fears. From San Francisco to New York City, businesses were shuttered Monday night and streets deserted under similar orders. PRESIDENT DONALD TRUMP: No matter where you look, this is something. It's an invisible enemy. MOLA LENGHI: The President's guidance to limit gatherings to no more than ten people is part of a plan for all Americans to help stop the spread, something emphasized by the White House coronavirus response coordinator on the CBS EVENING NEWS with Norah O'Donnell. DR. DEBORAH BIRX (White House Coronavirus Response Coordinator; CBS EVENING NEWS Exclusive): If you get behind a pandemic, this virus is about two to three times more contagious than flu. And so that's why we want everybody to do everything that they can. WOMAN: Hi. MOLA LENGHI: New York, New Jersey and Connecticut announced coordinated social life shutdown with theaters and gyms closed and restaurants and bars limited to take out and delivery. In the San Francisco Bay Area, officials called for several counties to shelter in place. LONDON BREED (San Francisco Mayor): What we are asking for everyone to do is to remain at home for all but the most essential outings for your safety and the safety of those around you. MOLA LENGHI: The mass shut down is being felt by businesses big and small. Chef Eric Ripert of New York's Le Bernardin restaurants says he is not able to pay his staff, but is committed to covering their health insurance through April. What are the discussions that are being had? ERIC RIPERT: I have been talking to some of my friends in the industry-- MOLA LENGHI: Mm-Hm. ERIC RIPERT: --who are (INDISTINCT), and everybody is terrified by the situation. I wish I could do better for our employees. I-- I just can't. MOLA LENGHI: While grocery stores have been inundated, some shops have set aside special time just for seniors. A group that's especially vulnerable to the virus. SEFERINO HOLGUIN (Customer): We've been standing in line for other markets, but by the time we get in there's a lot of it gone. MOLA LENGHI: Travelers are also on high alert. This Delta flight to Seattle was grounded in New York Monday night after a passenger said they might have been exposed to coronavirus. But the race for a vaccine took a drastic step Monday, when Jennifer Haller from Seattle volunteered to become the first person to receive an experimental dose. JENNIFER HALLER (Vaccine Test Subject): You know, everybody feels so helpless right now. And I was so excited to be given this opportunity to actually do something tangible to potentially help thousands, millions of people. (End VT) MOLA LENGHI: Potential vaccine still being studied. But, Tony, we're still about a year away from any sort of widespread use. TONY DOKOUPIL: Can't come soon enough. Mola, thank you very much. For more on the impact of social distancing, CBS News chief medical correspondent Doctor Jon LaPook joins us via Skype from his home-- DR. JON LAPOOK (CBS News Chief Medical Correspondent): Tony. TONY DOKOUPIL: --in New York City. He is self-quarantining there after possibly coming into contact with someone who tested positive for COVID-19. More and more people are in that situation these days. Good morning, Doctor LaPook. DR. JON LAPOOK: Good morning, Tony. TONY DOKOUPIL: We're dealing with these dizzying changes in-- in everyday life, the restrictions and advisories have gone from don't go to Italy now to don't go to your corner bar and don't gather in groups of more than ten, all in the name of social distancing. How much of a benefit do we expect to get from social distancing? DR. JON LAPOOK: I think it could be a very big benefit and I will tell you why. We talk about it again this flattening of the curve. But early on with an epidemic, you get this big peak. With that big peak, big load on the health care system, you kind of have shortages of health care professionals and supplies as-- as you're hearing. Does it work? That, if we can blunt that-- if we can blunt that curve and flatten it out and instead of having one big spike spread them out a little bit, it may last little longer. But you won't have that big load at that point. Does it work? Yeah, we're seeing in China, in South Korea, elsewhere these kind of efforts make a difference. And we're seeing there a slowing of new cases. So, yes, it-- it matters. And especially people who are young. And you heard President Trump talk about the young and the healthy. It's important for them also even though they may be relatively spared from the severe effects of COVID-19, they can spread to it others. So we're hearing reports of young people out in the streets are still, you know, doing the normal gathering. And don't do that because you-- you may bring asymptomatically without symptoms or with minimal symptoms and infect your mother, your grandmother, etcetera. So everybody has to be responsible here. GAYLE KING: Yeah. That's why they said millennials are the key to-- to spreading this, Jon. What about playdates for your kids? Is that a good idea? Is that okay? DR. JON LAPOOK: You know, you have to think of, of course, with kids when you have, you know-- kids are mingling like, there's no way you're going to say to them, listen, stay six feet apart and cough into the crook of your arm, right? GAYLE KING: Right. DR. JON LAPOOK: You have to assume you're mingling germs with kids. Then you have to think of what are their contacts. So if you're with a child, if your child is with a child who is in contact with them, is there somebody in that family who is at high-risk? High-risk means somebody with underlying medical condition-- serious medical condition like high blood pressure, heart disease, diabetes, of course, a weakened immune system. And then the question of, if they are with somebody who is elderly. Now, I've been trying to hunt this down. What's elderly? Yeah, Gayle, you may be like me, elderly is somebody at least ten to fifteen years older than what I am-- whatever I am at that point, right? TONY DOKOUPIL: Same minds. GAYLE KING: Exactly. DR. JON LAPOOK: But I'm-- I actually checked with the CDC. They are kind of like, well, you know, sixty-five and above but there's very good data here to look at it in the current situation. If you look in Italy, you see that the mortality rate really spikes up from seventy to seventy-nine and above. ANTHONY MASON: Yeah. DR. JON LAPOOK: It's not like sixty-nine and you're fine, and seventy-one you're not fine. But I think that's a good sort of idea. It gives you an idea of a data point though what might be a time when your-- when your risk really goes up. ANTHONY MASON: All right. Doctor Jon LaPook. Thank you, Jon. The White House and Congress are working on measures to limit the economic damage from the pandemic. Weija Jiang is at the White House. Weija, what is being considered at this point? WEIJA JIANG (CBS News White House Correspondent): Well, Anthony, there are a lot of options on the table as President Trump warns this outbreak is bad. For weeks, he had been urging Americans to relax and stay calm. But yesterday, his tone was markedly more somber. In addition to avoiding social gatherings with more than ten people, he did not rule out taking more drastic actions like ordering regional quarantines. And on a call with the nation's governors, Mister Trump told them to find critical supplies of respirators and masks on their own because federal help may be too slow. This week, the Senate is expected to pass a stimulus bill that already cleared the House to provide paid sick leave as well as free virus testing. And today on Capitol Hill, Secretary treasury-- of the Treasury Steven Mnuchin is expected to talk about a third spending package stimulus bill that would actually be aimed at helping small businesses as well as the hotel and airline industries. Gayle. GAYLE KING: Weija, we were hearing yesterday that many lawmakers are floating the idea of monthly cash payments to help Americans get through this crisis. You know, Andrew Yang talked a lot about giving people money during his campaign. What can you tell us about that? Beyond to something? WEIJA JIANG: Well, Senator Tom Cotton, who we know is a close ally of President Trump, as well as Senator Mitt Romney have both proposed some version of this. Cotton wants to provide stipends to low and middle-class families to buy food and pay bills, and Romney's proposal would send a thousand dollars to every American adult to help them meet short-term obligations and help boost the economy. Something like this could have a huge price tag. But the fact that you have the moderate Romney, the more conservative Cotton and several Democrats pushing this idea means it could get some serious consideration. Gayle. GAYLE KING: All right. Weija, thank you very much. ANTHONY MASON: Wall Street hopes to rebound today after yesterday's historic losses, but traders are still thinking about the long-term impact of this outbreak. CBS News business analyst Jill Schlesinger joins us. Jill, good morning. What more, Jill, can the government do at this point in the midst of what one firm called a profound-- profound pervasive persistent contraction that's going to go on indefinitely at this point? JILL SCHLESINGER (CBS News Business Analyst): Well, I think the most important part of this is to provide relief to the people who are really suffering. Those could be the folks who are laid off, senior reduction in hours, those are the people who need paid sick leave, they need money to take care of their sick relatives. You know, you're absolutely right. We're in unchartered territory here. We have never seen an economy just go full stop, slam on the brakes and now here we are. We just don't know where we're going next. And I think that's what really contributes to the uncertainty in the markets and is also really confounding to economists. We don't have data yet that confirm how bad this is going to be. What we do know, there are going to be millions of Americans impacted. Millions of people who work in small businesses who are going to need help. The business owners and, as you note, the industries themselves. TONY DOKOUPIL: Yeah. Jill, there may be a necessary slowdown in economic life in order to protect public health. But for the people who are affected by the economic downturn, what's the best fix? We just heard that idea of maybe a thousand dollars a month to every American. Mitt Romney is behind that idea. Is seems to have support across the aisle. Is that the right fix? JILL SCHLESINGER: Well, I think there's got to be a couple of things here. We need a big bold package. Again, this economy just stopped. If you go back six weeks from where-- today it has, as if things have turned around one hundred eighty degrees. What we need, we need a package for-- for that will deal with all different levels. Remember, there are people who may say a payroll tax cut. That's only great if you are actually working. So we need to focus-- TONY DOKOUPIL: Yeah. JILL SCHLESINGER: --on the ones who are actually out of work. ANTHONY MASON: Jill, how do you stimulate an economy when you're telling people essentially don't go outside? GAYLE KING: Right. JILL SCHLESINGER: Well, I-- I don't think that you're trying to-- I think that we're in the exact phase of the-- with the economy as we are with this pandemic. Meaning, we are done with containment, we're in mitigation. And mitigation with the economy means making sure people have what they need. You're not going to convince people go out and spend, but we do have the ability to make this period much better for those who are impacted most. That's what the government's role is here. TONY DOKOUPIL: All right. Jill, thank you very much. END 
2020-03-17	TONY DOKOUPIL: School closures in thirty-seven states affect more than thirty-seven million kids from kindergarteners all the way through twelfth graders. Some families are struggling to adjust as the coronavirus crisis grows. Meg Oliver is at an empty middle school in Montclair, New Jersey. Meg, good morning. We know your kids are home right now probably with your husband working on their school work. But how about students there, how are they getting an education? MEG OLIVER (CBS News Correspondent): Yeah. This is a time when students normally line up here in front of Buzz Aldrin Middle School. But this is one of the schools in New Jersey that has already closed down as millions of students across the country logon from home, some with laptops provided by the district and parents juggle this new world of learning but it looks different in each family. (Begin VT) AUSTIN BEUTNER (Los Angeles Unified School District Superintendent): We're taking this step to keep our school communities safe. MEG OLIVER: Public schools in Los Angeles closed this week. Some six hundred thousand students forced to stay home. The same happened on the East Coast in New York City, where there's a five week closure the country's largest public school district, serving more than a million students leaving officials scrambling to assure child care for emergency personnel and health care workers. WOMAN #1: And take your lunch, Sir. MEG OLIVER: Another major concern is making sure students don't go hungry. More than seventy percent live in poverty so free breakfast and lunch is being offered at all New York public schools. WOMAN #2: Two meals I don't have to provide, which is two meals I can provide another day. MEG OLIVER: City schools are also moving to online classes next week, but even the head of New York's public schools says some three hundred thousand kids don't have electronic device or internet access at home. RICHARD CARRANZA (New York City Public School Chancellor): We ordered hotspots. We're-- we've teamed with Apple. We've bought laptops. We're going to have laptops coming in at about twenty-five thousand a day. MEG OLIVER: In Miami, Mary Williams is racing to find child care for the rest of the week and beyond. MARY WILLIAMS (Parent): Thank God, I was off today and was able to come out here and get them something to eat. But for the rest of the week, I won't know. TRISHA ANGELILLO (Parent): Everyday we're going to have a morning meeting. MEG OLIVER: In New Jersey, remote teaching started Monday for several districts. GIRL: We did realistic fiction. TRISHA ANGELILLO: Realistic fiction. MEG OLIVER: Substitute teacher Trisha Angelillo has four kids ranging from preschool to seventh grade. How long are you prepared to keep this up? TRISHA ANGELILLO: The school says two weeks, I'm assuming a month. And I think the hope is this week we get into a rhythm. MEG OLIVER: How overwhelmed are you feeling? TRISHA ANGELILLO: It's a lot, I think. And my kids can see it. I can feel it. (End VT) MEG OLIVER: I can feel it too as a parent, Tony and Gayle and Anthony, as you all know. New Jersey's governor now has ordered that all schools across the state be closed by tomorrow. Here in Montclair, the school district deployed three hundred Chromebook laptops to families in need. Gayle. GAYLE KING: I know, Meg. We saw you yesterday with Cormack (ph), Maria (ph) and Tommy (ph), all sitting at home, being home schooled. You got-- MEG OLIVER: Good memory. GAYLE KING: Yeah. Parents have to figure it out. I know that. We got to figure it out. Thank you very much, Meg. Good to see you. MEG OLIVER: Yeah. GAYLE KING: Vladimir Duthiers is in his New York apartment looking at the stories you'll be talking about today. Vlad doesn't have to worry about kids. He's got to worry about other things. Vlad, what do you have today? Good to see you. VLADIMIR DUTHIERS: Good to see you all. Look, there are a lot of cruise ships that are stranded off many coasts around the world. Ahead, we're going to tell you why one couple is panicking. They are trapped off the Chilean coast. We're going to share that with you. TONY DOKOUPIL: All right. GAYLE KING: Thank you, Vlad. We'll see you in just a few minutes. But first, it is seven forty-four, time to check your local weather. (LOCAL WEATHER BREAK) (ANNOUNCEMENTS) TONY DOKOUPIL: Vitamin C is usually good for what else? Yeah. But this is a morning with some Vitamin V. GAYLE KING: Yay. TONY DOKOUPIL: We got a very special dose of it coming from Vlad's apartment. GAYLE KING: Yay. TONY DOKOUPIL: Opening his home to us, we appreciate it. Good morning, Vlad. VLADIMIR DUTHIERS (CBSN Anchor): Good morning and so good to see all of you. I am here in my apartment, Maison Duthiers. Although my fiancee Marian said to make sure I mentioned it Maison Wang, too. We are not under quarantine, we're safe and healthy here. But we are tracking a couple of stories that we think you'll be talking about including this, couples that are stranded, in fact, all over the world, cruise ships that are stranded because of the coronavirus outbreak. Let me share this with you. There are protests breaking out in Chile after people heard a British cruise ship there with infected passengers was headed there. The ship was turn away from several ports in the Caribbean. Another ship which is operated by Celebrity Cruises is stranded off the Chilean coast after being denied entry there. CBS News spoke to one woman couple on board. And the woman tells us she is desperate. Her and her husband are desperate because they are out of his heart medications. So, that's really troubling. ANTHONY MASON: Yeah. There's ninety ships and like something-- sorry, forty ships and like ninety thousand passengers out at sea, Vlad, right? VLADIMIR DUTHIERS: Exactly, right. And, you know, a lot of people are wondering perhaps why folks are still getting on cruises. A lot of folks got on these cruises, guys, before some of these measures went into place. And that's why they find themselves now stranded. TONY DOKOUPIL: I keep thinking just a week ago-- VLADIMIR DUTHIERS: All right. TONY DOKOUPIL: --we heard every-- every sports season was-- was rolling along and now we're getting more and more cancellations. You got another one for us, Vlad? VLADIMIR DUTHIERS: We do, Kentucky Derby. Those of you who are fans of the Kentucky Derby-- GAYLE KING: Yes. VLADIMIR DUTHIERS: --multiple reports are saying right now that the Kentucky Derby is going to shift dates. This hasn't happened, guys, in a very longtime. This is an official announcement that we are expecting perhaps today. It is the first time in seventy-five years the race won't be held on the first Saturday in May. The last time this happened, guys, was way back in 1945 when the government briefly banned horse racing during World War II. GAYLE KING: Oh, gosh. We understand. VLADIMIR DUTHIERS: That happened back in June. ANTHONY MASON: Yeah. GAYLE KING: We understand, Vlad, but I had started hat shopping. TONY DOKOUPIL: I was going to say-- GAYLE KING: I like the Kentucky Derby. But, okay. We all understand. That's good decisions. Good decision. VLADIMIR DUTHIERS: There will be another day for that, Gayle. And I'm sure you'll be splendiferous in that hat that you're going to wear. GAYLE KING: I'm working on it. VLADIMIR DUTHIERS: All right. I want to share with you, guys, a wonderful story. We really need one right now in these days. GAYLE KING: Yeah. VLADIMIR DUTHIERS: This is such a beautiful story. Check this out. It's an act of kindness. A staff at an Ohio restaurant, they got a tip that they will never forget. That's because a loyal customer left them a twenty-five-hundred-dollar tip on a nearly thirty-dollar bill. The cash, of course, is a welcome relief for the employees. They won't be getting paychecks since, of course, the restaurants are closed because of coronavirus concerns. Listen. MAN: Humanity lives on. It's not going to pay every bill, is it going to help? Sure. But it's going to keep in mind that people care. We're not all out there fighting for toilet paper and sanitizers. So that's where we're at least here. VLADIMIR DUTHIERS: I can get behind that message, guys. ANTHONY MASON: Yes, yeah. TONY DOKOUPIL: Yeah, that's awesome. VLADIMIR DUTHIERS: Humanity, humanity, humanity. GAYLE KING: Humanity lives on. ANTHONY MASON: Yeah. GAYLE KING: Can we just say, Maison Duthiers, Maison Wang is very nicely done? Go, Marian. TONY DOKOUPIL: Looking good, the bathroom's door-- GAYLE KING: I'm always for Marian-- TONY DOKOUPIL: --you can cross. ANTHONY MASON: Thanks, Vlad. Coming up-- VLADIMIR DUTHIERS: I'll see you guys tomorrow. ANTHONY MASON: --this growing concern about the shortage of medical supplies. (ANNOUNCEMENTS) *****************************************************************************(8:00 AM, EDT) GAYLE KING: It's Tuesday, March 17, 2020, St. Patrick's Day. Welcome back to CBS THIS MORNING. I am Gayle King. Ahead, the coronavirus stretched to health care workers. How the lack of basic supplies is putting their health at risk. TONY DOKOUPIL: And I am Tony Dokoupil. The outbreak puts family finances under strain. The right moves you need to make to prevent a personal financial crisis. ANTHONY MASON: And I am Anthony Mason. We'll ask psychiatrist Doctor Sue Varma how to keep our spirits up while we're isolated at home. GAYLE KING: Can't wait to hear what she says. But first, here's today's Eye Opener @ 8. Americans are hunkering down this morning as the pandemic brings us our personal and work lives to a complete standstill. MOLA LENGHI: Bars, restaurants, coffee shops all closed. Retail stores have adjusted their hours, as you can see, illustrated by that sign. WEIJIA JIANG: For weeks, he had been urging Americans to relax. But yesterday, his tone was markedly more somber. ANTHONY MASON: Traders are still thinking about the long-term impact. JILL SCHLESINGER: We have never seen an economy just go full stop, slam on the brakes and now here we are. We just don't know where we're going next. TONY DOKOUPIL: How much of a benefit do we expect to get from social distancing? DR. JON LAPOOK: I think it could be a very big benefit. We're seeing in China, in South Korea, elsewhere these kind of efforts make a difference. STEPHEN COLBERT: New York Mayor Bill de Blasio went to work out as local YMCA. Come on, Mister Mayor. Don't you know that during an epidemic, it's fun to stay at your h-o-m-e, because if you don't we'll be d-e-a-d? You can talk to yourself, you can water your plants, you can walk around without pants. End scene. TONY DOKOUPIL: Welcome back to CBS THIS MORNING, where we are-- GAYLE KING: Yeah. Let's please not miss-- let's please not miss that message, though, Tony, because nobody wants to be D-E-A-D. ANTHONY MASON: E-A-D. Yes. GAYLE KING: So you're-- he's-- Stephen is right. TONY DOKOUPIL: Yes. That is right. GAYLE KING: Stay H-O-M-E. TONY DOKOUPIL: Yeah. GAYLE KING: Save lives. He is right. TONY DOKOUPIL: That's right. Socially distant here. GAYLE KING: Exactly. TONY DOKOUPIL: But not emotionally. GAYLE KING: Exactly. Exactly, you're right. TONY DOKOUPIL: All right. We're going to get through it. ANTHONY MASON: Very well said. TONY DOKOUPIL: We're going to help you get through it, as well. We're going to start again with the coronavirus. States, cities and towns all across this country are enforcing historic restrictions to-- to try to stop the spread of the coronavirus. Businesses are closing. Streets are emptying throughout America. The San Francisco Bay Area is under a near total lockdown. There is a shelter-in-place order and calls for nearly seven million people there in six counties to stay home as much as possible until early April. President Trump wants all of us to avoid groups of more than ten people to prevent spreading the virus that he calls a, quote, "invisible enemy." GAYLE KING: And the numbers are big. More than thirty million people who live in New York, New Jersey and Connecticut, the tri-state area have no access to theaters, bars or restaurants which will only, by the way, be open for takeout and delivery business. Many business owners across the country are worried about staying afloat. MAN #1: My heart was-- was with our employees first. Me and my wife, and I, obviously, this is our income, everything. We need-- neither of us have another job. MAN #2: None of us are trying to make any money. We're trying to stay in business at this point. GAYLE KING: Many grocery stores are now closing early to clean and get their shelves restocked. And some of them have set aside designated shopping times just in time for the seniors only, it's a group that is especially vulnerable to the virus. I think this is a really great idea. ANTHONY MASON: Yeah. GAYLE KING: I saw an older woman saying she was very grateful for it because when she goes to the store she feels she gets knocked around-- ANTHONY MASON: Yep. TONY DOKOUPIL: Yeah. GAYLE KING: --and pushed aside-- ANTHONY MASON: Yep. GAYLE KING: --by younger people. ANTHONY MASON: Yeah. GAYLE KING: So I think this is a good thing in a way. ANTHONY MASON: And they don't want to be exposed. GAYLE KING: No. TONY DOKOUPIL: And there are more than fifty million Americans over the age of sixty-five-- GAYLE KING: Mm-Hm. TONY DOKOUPIL: --in this country, so. ANTHONY MASON: Right. END 
2020-03-16	ANTHONY MASON: Concern over anticipated shortages of food and other supplies is driving people to supermarkets and big box stores. In many places, shoppers are finding empty shelves, long lines and limits on purchases. But experts say do not worry. Mark Strassmann is inside a local Atlanta business where the shelves are stocked and the lines are short. Mark, I'm coming to your shop. Why is it like that there? MARK STRASSMANN (CBS News National Correspondent): Oh, here's the story, Anthony, and good morning. This is a Candler Park Market. It's an in-town independent grocer. If you want wine, if you want peanuts, if you want wasabi green peas, they got it. But if you want bread, you're out of look. Same thing, no-- no hand sanitizer, no toilet paper. And if you want the dairy section which is over there, this is all they have left. But here's the deal, some of these little guy grocers actually have more on the shelves than the big guys. (Begin VT) MARK STRASSMANN: Shelves picked to the bone at a Walmart in Washington State, over-the-counter medicines vanishing from a Target in Virginia, long lines and bare shelves at this Whole Foods in New York City. MAN: Panic mode, people are terrified and they're unsure of what to do, and I think-- I don't know, there's no sign of it getting better. MARK STRASSMANN: It's a scene being repeated at brand-name stores all over the country. Sunday, even the President weighed in. PRESIDENT DONALD TRUMP: The stores are stocking up at a level that's beyond Christmas time. There's no need for anybody in the country to hoard essential food supplies. DOUG BAKER (Food Industry Association Vice President): There is no chance that they will not be able to fill. MARK STRASSMANN: Doug Baker is with the Food Industry Association. He says the industry is trying to adjust to all the shortages. DOUG BAKER: There could be periodic shortages, and there might be times where consumers might not be able to get it for a couple of days. But supply is flowing, machines are running and the product will make its way back to the shelf. MARK STRASSMANN: Baker says now is not the time to panic, but to think about others before you buy more than you absolutely need. DOUG BAKER: Buy the items that you believe you need to have in order to do that, but also remember your neighbors and your families and your friends and your co-workers are also trying to do the same thing. And if you purchase too much of that item, that hand sanitizer, that household cleaning solution, then you actually take that away from somebody else and you actually put them at risk for this virus. (End VT) MARK STRASSMANN: So this market is expecting a supply truck later today, but they have no idea what's on it. It's hit or miss. So what they don't have on the shelves today, they may still not on the shelves tomorrow. Gayle, get them while they last. GAYLE KING: I know, Mark. Mark, what he said was very helpful. Remember your neighbors. Toilet paper, we all need it, we all use it. Please don't buy more than you really need. What are you doing about that, Mark Strassmann? Everybody's out of toilet paper. MARK STRASSMANN: I-- I'm leaving it to my wife who is a much better person than I am. And she is only buying what this family needs. ANTHONY MASON: Okay. GAYLE KING: Thank you, Mrs. Strassmann. ANTHONY MASON: Yes. GAYLE KING: Thank you, Mark. Good to see you. Joining us now from Washington is Doctor Jerome Adams. He is the U.S. surgeon general. He is a member of the White House coronavirus task force. We've seen him on TV a lot these days. Doctor Adams, it's good to see you. Thank you for joining us. You know-- DR. JEROME ADAMS (U.S. Surgeon General): Well, it's-- it's really good to be here, Gayle. And I appreciate the segment you just-- you just played. GAYLE KING: Mm-Hm. DR. JEROME ADAMS: We really want people to understand that it's about preparation, but not panic. And that you can't build a toilet paper fortress that's going to keep coronavirus out. GAYLE KING: You are so right about that. But people are a little freaked out. They are a little panicked. And it's not just the stores that are running low. We keep hearing stories about hospitals that may not be well-equipped. What are you saying or what are you doing to make sure that the hospitals have everything that they need? DR. JEROME ADAMS: Well, we have the national that strategic stockpile that has been around for years and that we're always keeping-- keeping updated, keeping maintained so that when states have specific shortages we can respond to those. But we're also looking on the demand side. And we're having conversations with the American Hospital Association, American College of Surgeons put out a statement this weekend telling people that, look, talk to your doctor if you've got an electively surgery planned. Now may not be the best time to have that elective procedure done because it uses up personal protective equipment. It potentially brings in coronavirus cases into the hospital and it taxes health care workers. So, we're trying to lower the demand while also increasing the supply of critical materials and resources. ANTHONY MASON: Doctor, the administration is putting out new guidance today. Can you give us any-- any idea of where-- where things might be headed? DR. JEROME ADAMS: Well, we are at a critical inflection point in this country. We have the same number of cases that Italy had two weeks ago, and so we've got a choice to make. Do we want to follow the trajectory of a South Korea where they had aggressive mitigation measures and everyone really leaned into this issue, or do we want to follow the trajectory of Italy where we're seeing a rapid increase in cases and more deaths? And so the CDC put out guidelines just this morning saying that we should no longer have large gatherings of more than fifty people. We really are all in this together. And we want people to think about social isolation, social distancing, so that we can make sure that coronavirus isn't being spread in our communities. TONY DOKOUPIL: Well, Doc-- Doctor, you bring up a great point. I mean, social distancing and social isolation as a recommendation enough, or do we need to get ahead of the Italy situation by federally mandating that bars, restaurants, and other leisure activities shut down until this passes? DR. JEROME ADAMS: Well, it's important to understand that a lot of that authority in the United States lies at the state and the local level. And I know this as someone who used to work for both a local health department and a state health department-- TONY DOKOUPIL: That is certainly true. But-- but the federal government has a lot of leadership capability. And if it said so, it might be done. It would give a lot of cover to local politicians. So federally, should there be a mandate? DR. JEROME ADAMS: I completely agree with you. TONY DOKOUPIL: Yeah. DR. JEROME ADAMS: Completely agree with you. And that's why the CDC put out the guidance this morning, and that's why the President declared an emergency last week. And that's why you saw the tweet from me this weekend, saying hospital systems should pull down their elective cases when-- when appropriate-- when they consider appropriate. GAYLE KING: Doctor-- ANTHONY MASON: Do the-- do the hospitals, Doctor, do the hospitals have enough supplies? Some of them are saying they are concerned. Or are hospitals ready for this? DR. JEROME ADAMS: Well, again, we are leaning into the stockpile. We're increasing purchases. We're working with companies like 3M to make sure we can make more masks available. And there will be issues that pop up across the country, and that's what the stockpile is for. ANTHONY MASON: What-- what about ventilators? Do they have enough ventilators? DR. JEROME ADAMS: Well, as of right now, we have enough ventilators. When you look at different modeling projections, there are scenarios where we potentially wouldn't have enough ventilators. But the way that you make sure you have enough ventilators is to decrease the number of people who need them by leaning into these aggressive mitigation methods that we're talking about. GAYLE KING: Doctor Adams, can we talk about people on the front lines? Just this morning in Washington State-- DR. JEROME ADAMS: Yes. GAYLE KING: --a doc-- emergency room doctor has tested positive. He is now in critical condition. What is your message to the-- to the health care workers who are on the front lines? DR. JEROME ADAMS: Well, I so much appreciate you asking that. We need to take care of the people who take care of the people. And I really feel like this weekend at the press conference when we announced our new-- our new testing strategy that we made a turning point on testing and you'll see that we prioritized among the groups to be tested, health care workers. We've got to make sure they are safe and that they feel safe. We've got to make sure they have the PPE they need. We've got to make sure we're not unnecessarily exposing them to potential coronavirus cases with elective procedures that could be delayed. GAYLE KING: PPE, what's that? DR. JEROME ADAMS: Personal protective equipment-- GAYLE KING: Okay. DR. JEROME ADAMS: --gloves, gowns-- GAYLE KING: All right. DR. JEROME ADAMS: --masks. GAYLE KING: Okay. DR. JEROME ADAMS: The things that we know keep people safe from coronavirus. GAYLE KING: All right. TONY DOKOUPIL: All right. Very good. Doctor Adams, we appreciate you being here. Hope you come back again soon. DR. JEROME ADAMS: Thank you. Coronavirus.gov or your state Department of Health website are great resources for people out there. TONY DOKOUPIL: All right. ANTHONY MASON: Thank you. TONY DOKOUPIL: Thank you very much. Many Americans are using the crisis to do good. Ahead, we'll show you some inspiring acts of kindness and generosity as people look to help each other out in these very uncertain times. But first, it is eight eleven, time to check your local weather. (LOCAL WEATHER BREAK) (ANNOUNCEMENTS) ANTHONY MASON: Ahead, the coronavirus has forced public schools to shut down across more than thirty states. What this means for parents and the many students who rely on school lunches. (ANNOUNCEMENTS) TONY DOKOUPIL: You're looking at a shot of New York City this morning, where there are very few cars on the street for this part of town. If you had a meeting today, you'd be able to get to it, but no one's got meetings-- GAYLE KING: Yes. TONY DOKOUPIL: --because you're working from home. GAYLE KING: Right. Yeah, right. END 
2020-03-16	GAYLE KING: Good morning to you, and welcome to CBS THIS MORNING. I am Gayle King with Anthony Mason and Tony Dokoupil. America at a standstill. Tens of millions of people stay home because of the coronavirus. Schools, businesses and public places are forced to shut down. We'll talk with the U.S. surgeon general about the government's response. ANTHONY MASON: Terminal turmoil. Travelers returning from Europe face massive crowds and long delays for health screenings. How airport crowding could help spread the virus? TONY DOKOUPIL: Interest rate slashed. Regulators cut rates to almost nothing to avert a potential economic recession caused by the virus. ANTHONY MASON: And life under quarantine. Our correspondent in Rome, Seth Doane, tests positive for the virus. He'll tell us how it feels and what isolation looks like. GAYLE KING: It's Monday, March 16, 2020. We'll have the latest updates on the coronavirus right after today's Eye Opener--your world in ninety seconds. SCOTT PELLEY (60 MINUTES): It's bound to get worse? ANDREW CUOMO (60 MINUTES): It will get worse. It will get much worse before it gets better. GAYLE KING: The coronavirus outbreak consumes America. MARGARET BRENNAN (FACE THE NATION): How much worse? DR. ANTHONY FAUCI (FACE THE NATION): Yeah. MARGARET BRENNAN: What are the numbers? DR. ANTHONY FAUCI: It's really going to depend on the effectiveness of our response. MAN #1: Shoppers, they've been going to the stores all weekend emptying out shelves, preparing for that big unknown. PRESIDENT DONALD TRUMP: They are buying more than they buy at Christmas. Relax. We're doing great. It all will pass. WOMAN #1: Former Vice President Joe Biden and Senator Bernie Sanders facing off one on one for the first time. Not surprisingly, the night's hot topic involved the coronavirus. FORMER VICE PRESIDENT JOE BIDEN: This is bigger than any individual. This is bigger than yourself. This is about America. This is about the world. WOMAN #2: A Canadian boy is going viral after a funny interview. MAN #2: The kid was looking forward to his family vacation at Disneyland, but the park was closed due to the coronavirus. ELIAS SHARF: It's closing for the whole month and we come from Canada, took a long trip to get here. GAYLE KING: All that-- WOMAN #3: Cincinnati Reds pitcher Trevor Bauer host a charity wiffle ball game to raise money for MLB staff affected by the coronavirus outbreak. (Crowd cheering) TREVOR BAUER: Let's go. GAYLE KING: --all that matters-- JOE MIHALICH: Cover your cough with your elbow like this. MAN #3: Any time Coach Joe speaks, it's hard not to listen. JOE MIHALICH: Of course, everyone has a role to play as we face this challenge together. GAYLE KING: --on CBS THIS MORNING. JOHN OLIVER (Last Week Tonight with John Oliver; HBO): Individuals have been doing their best to spread good information online, including a number of social media celebrities on TikTok, none more delightful than this one. MAN #4 (internet video): It's corona time. Hey, it's corona time right now. It's corona time. JOHN OLIVER: I mean, that is excellent. That TikTok hamster is now my favorite thing in the world. And, yes, I fully understand I have a wife and two children. But I'll say it again, that TikTok hamster is my favorite thing in the world. GAYLE KING: Yeah. It's good to have a little laugh. ANTHONY MASON: You've got to keep your sense of humor, right? TONY DOKOUPIL: Yeah. GAYLE KING: Something that's so serious. ANTHONY MASON: Yeah. TONY DOKOUPIL: A week unlike any other. GAYLE KING: I know. Because we're all waking up to a new normal. I keep hearing that the only thing we need to spread these days are humor, compassion and help. ANTHONY MASON: That's-- GAYLE KING I think that's a really good way to go. TONY DOKOUPIL: And we are open for business here although a little bit changed. GAYLE KING: Yes. ANTHONY MASON: Yeah. TONY DOKOUPIL: New seats, fewer people in the office. ANTHONY MASON: Yeah. GAYLE KING: Yes. We're practicing-- it's called self-distancing. ANTHONY MASON: Yes. GAYLE KING: Safe distancing. ANTHONY MASON: Right. GAYLE KING: We used to sit this way. I actually kind of like it. ANTHONY MASON: Yeah. And we have-- we have a-- GAYLE KING: I like it. ANTHONY MASON: We have a minimal staff. GAYLE KING: Yes. ANTHONY MASON: Virtually, almost all of CBS working-- working from home. GAYLE KING: Lot of people working at home. ANTHONY MASON: Like everyone else got there. GAYLE KING: Social distancing it is. And here we go. Welcome to CBS THIS MORNING. As we wake up to a new normal today and life is slowly grinding to a halt and America's governments from coast to coast ordered new restrictions in the fight against the coronavirus, Americans are buying all the food and supplies they can find, getting ready to stay at home for a long time. Business travel and even family relationships are all disrupted by this outbreak. Cities from New York to Los Angeles are shutting down schools, restaurants and large gatherings to stop the spread. The number of reported cases of the virus in the U.S. is now more than thirty-seven hundred. But the actual total number could be much higher. TONY DOKOUPIL: And we expect to hear more announcements from government officials at every level throughout the day responding to the newest developments in this crisis. But we begin our coverage of the new normal in America with Mola Lenghi at New York City's Grand Central Terminal, normally bustling at this hour. Mola, good morning. What are you seeing? MOLA LENGHI (CBS News Correspondent): Well, good morning, Tony. As you know, Grand Central station is typically one of the busiest stations, transit hubs in the country. But, of course, this is not a typical Monday morning. This is supposed to be the morning rush, but as you see behind me, not so much this morning. Schools are closed, businesses are following suit and more and more people are working from home, which is why Grand Central doesn't exactly look like Grand Central. (Begin VT) MOLA LENGHI: A not-so-familiar sight on Bourbon Street, late-night fun coming to a halt by New Orleans police, enforcing the city's new ban on large gatherings. But it's large gatherings converging on supermarkets across the country causing shelves to go empty and even hour-long waits at the stores. MAN: There is no more baby wipes, no more toilet paper, no more water. MOLA LENGHI: President Trump urged calm after holding a call with major retail and grocery executives. PRESIDENT DONALD TRUMP: You don't have to buy so much. Take it easy. Just relax. MOLA LENGHI: Across the country, services that millions of Americans rely on are shutting down, including restaurants, gyms and bars. Other states are following similar measures including Washington State, Massachusetts, Ohio, Illinois and New York. BILL DE BLASIO (New York City Mayor): It is quite clear that this crisis is growing intensely. MOLA LENGHI: After days of mounting pressure, New York City Mayor Bill de Blasio announced the nation's largest public school system would close for at least a month, possibly the rest of the school year, impacting more than a million children. In California, Governor Gavin Newsom is enacting aggressive measures to protect the state's most vulnerable. GOVERNOR GAVIN NEWSOM (D-California): We are calling for the isolation-- home isolation of all of those sixty-five years and older and those with chronic conditions. MOLA LENGHI: Though much of the country is being told to distance themselves, doctors and nurses are on the front lines. An emergency doctor in hard-hit Kirkland, Washington, is in critical condition after catching the virus. Michael Maron is president and CEO of Holy Name Medical Center in Teaneck, New Jersey, where all forty thousand residents have been asked to self-quarantine. MICHAEL MARON (Holy Name Medical Center President and CEO): It's part of why we're burning through it at the rate of about seven hundred to a thousand N-95 masks a day because we want to keep our personnel safe. MOLA LENGHI: The nation's top infectious disease expert is not ruling out a national lockdown. DR. ANTHONY FAUCI: Americans should be prepared that they are going to have to hunker down significantly more than we as a country are doing. (End VT) MOLA LENGHI: More and more businesses continue to shutter. Ski resorts across the country are following the lead of the cruise ship industry and shutting down their operations. And in Las Vegas, MGM announced the temporary shutdown of its hotels and casinos effective tomorrow. Anthony. ANTHONY MASON: All right. Mola, thank you. An experimental coronavirus vaccine moves into human testing today. It's part of the push by scientists to find treatments and preventive vaccines. Our Doctor David Agus joins us from Los Angeles. David, good morning. I know a vaccine is-- is at least a year away at this point. So, I want to get to the sort of more immediate concern, which is-- has been the lack of tests. Is the testing situation improving at all from what you've seen? DR. DAVID AGUS (CBS News Medical Contributor/USC Westside Cancer Center Director): You know, the good is there are more tests across the country. The tough part is there's not an infrastructure to run those tests, and some of the reagents are in short supply. So, the real answer is we're still testing a fraction of the people that need to be tested. And the tests many times can take three, four, five days until the results come back. ANTHONY MASON: So, David, does that limit our understanding of what we're dealing with at this point? DR. DAVID AGUS: You know, with knowledge is power, and right now we don't have that knowledge. So, it's very hard to do effective data-driven quarantines without the data of who's infected. I if I told you you're positive, you're going to stay home. GAYLE KING: Yeah. DR. DAVID AGUS: But now it's indeterminate, we don't know what to do. GAYLE KING: So, what are the numbers in other countries tell us about what we could face here? Does-- does that give us any clue? DR. DAVID AGUS: Yeah. No question about it. It's that we're scared. I mean, we're scared that the numbers are going to skyrocket that we're going to put in stricter measures. I'm proud of what America is doing. We are stepping up. Every single, you know, city is stepping up here. We may have to step up more, but it's certainly an amazing week. And look at what we've done as a country. TONY DOKOUPIL: Doctor, at the beginning of this month, we are at fewer than a hundred cases. Now, we're at thirty-seven hundred. And when you look at our trajectory, next to Italy and Iran, it seems frighteningly similar. Are we on the path of, say, Italy? DR. DAVID AGUS: You know, it's really hard to know is that certainly we have much better medical infrastructure than Italy does. The drugs that are going to be able to treat this disease are in development and look very, very encouraging. So, the hope is there's some really positive news there in the next week or two. Together with us expanding our medical infrastructure, we will not have what happened-- what happened in Italy. I think our leadership and our infrastructure is going to do much better. ANTHONY MASON: So, what do you think we're facing in-- in the weeks ahead, David? DR. DAVID AGUS: What I think is, you know, somewhat stricter measures about trying to slow the progress of the disease. That's the goal here. There's no panic. It is slowing the disease so that we can have our infrastructure in place. We have to protect our elderly. Below age sixty, the death rate is almost zero. Above age sixty, it starts to go up by decade. And so we as a country have to our protect elderly. We're all stepping up for people with medical issues and over the age of sixty to protect them. GAYLE KING: And if you test positive, David, what is the recovery rate? Do we know? DR. DAVID AGUS: Well, it depends how old you are. So, the-- the entry portal for the-- the virus goes up by decade. So if you test positive under the age of sixty, the recovery rate is over ninety-nine percent in countries like South Korea, and it will be the same here. Every decade above sixty that goes up until it's about, you know, seven or eight percent in the eighties. And so we have to protect people over the age of sixty. And that's what we're doing with these draconian measures that are growing in across the country. TONY DOKOUPIL: Doctor-- Doctor, there are some things that you want to spread at a time like this. And-- and that would be advice for what is effective treatment. So when people walk into a doctor's office, I'm curious, what-- what is working, what are folks like yourself talking about and sharing with one another about how to get people back on their feet? DR. DAVID AGUS: It's a great question. And so Right now there is no national database for what is working, how we all talk to each other in terms of treating this disease. That being said, there are some effective treatments that we think will work. The clinical trials are ongoing here in the United States and in China. But they certainly look encouraging. And we as physicians are allowed to use these drugs what we call off label. So we're using drugs that block the virus from replicating. TONY DOKOUPIL: Yeah. DR. DAVID AGUS: We're using drugs that tamper down inflammation, which is the main side effect of the virus, to hopefully make survival significantly higher than it's been seen before. TONY DOKOUPIL: All right. Doctor Agus, thank you very much. In the long term, of course, we do have hopes for a vaccine. Now to the economic health of the country. The Federal Reserve is taking sweeping action to try to protect the economy from the coronavirus. Fed Chairman Jerome Powell announced that interest rates will be drastically cut in one of the biggest Fed moves since the 2008 financial crisis. Weijia Jiang is at the White House for us, where President Trump applauded the reduction. Weijia, good morning. So what led to this decision? WEIJIA JIANG (CBS News White House Correspondent): Well, good morning, Tony. Chairman Powell stopped short of using the word "recession" to stop-- to describe what's ahead. But this surprise announcement is certainly a clear indication that the Fed is concerned about how the coronavirus is going to impact the global economy. The Fed cut its benchmark rate by a full percentage point to a range between zero and one-quarter percent. And starting today, the Fed will start buying five hundred billion dollars in treasury securities and two hundred billion in mortgage-backed securities in order to introduce money into the economy. Some economists expressed concerned that by using the biggest tool in its arsenal at this point, it will not be able to significantly affect the economy down the line. Of course, Congress also has a big role to play in dealing with the economic fallout of the virus. And today, the Senate is expected to take up a House bill that was passed on Saturday that would provide paid sick leave, help feeding families, and boost Medicaid funds. Gayle. GAYLE KING: Weijia, thank you very much. END 
2020-03-16	ANTHONY MASON: In Europe, three of the countries hardest hit by the coronavirus have each recorded their highest single-day death count. They are France, Spain and Italy, where the spike came despite a national lockdown. Over the weekend in Italy, obituaries for victims spanned ten pages of a local newspaper in Bergamo, a city in the northern part of the country. Imtiaz Tyab reports from London on how Europe is fighting to contain the spread. (Begin VT) IMTIAZ TYAB: Europe continues to convulse from the coronavirus outbreak. Cases in Spain are surging with reported infections over eight thousand. This woman just lost her husband to the virus. She, too, is infected but was denied treatment from doctors for not being sick enough. Desperate to console their mother, her children risking exposure to themselves. Across the continent, more than a hundred million people are now on lockdown. Police are even using drones to enforce it. Germany is the latest to slam its borders shut, while in France, cafes and bistros are closed despite local elections going ahead. The British government is now warning it, too, could ban public gatherings and also enforced months of isolation on the elderly. WOMAN: It's just scary. IMTIAZ TYAB: But it's Italy that continues to suffer the most with a record one-day death toll of three hundred and sixty-eight people on Sunday alone. Still, that didn't stop Pope Francis from walking the streets of an eerily empty Rome to pray for the sick. Prayers which may have been heard as signs of hope slowly start to emerge elsewhere like in China where this all started. And in South Korea, also with large outbreaks, the numbers of infected are at record lows. (Crowd singing) IMTIAZ TYAB: Inspiring some Italians to take to their balconies this weekend to sing songs of solidarity-- (Crowd singing) IMTIAZ TYAB: --including Puccini's classic, "Nessun Dorma." (Man singing) IMTIAZ TYAB: Vincero, he sings, "I will win." (Man singing) IMTIAZ TYAB: For CBS THIS MORNING, Imtiaz Tyab, London. (End VT) TONY DOKOUPIL: We're all smiling here in the studio. GAYLE KING: So beautiful. TONY DOKOUPIL: How about that for the human spirit, huh? GAYLE KING: Gave me goosebumps to hear that. Very nice. TONY DOKOUPIL: It's a beautiful thing. END 
2020-03-16	The coronavirus crisis is an opportunity for the travel industry to show how much it cares about you, its customer. But talk to travelers dealing with a coronavirus cancellation, and they'll tell you it's an opportunity the travel industry has missed ??at least so far. Tips for getting a refund during the coronavirus outbreak Ask your travel agent for help That's what Kristine Thorndyke did when she tried to cancel a trip to China. She'd purchased airline tickets through an online agency called Trip.com. "They were quick to acknowledge the coronavirus and processed two refund cancellations I made in February with no questions asked," she says. "I felt pretty lucky having booked it through Trip.com. Other people in similar situations were not able to get refunds for their tickets." Don't forget the rules The original terms of your purchase may give you a right to a refund. For example, if your flight's canceled, the Department of Transportation says you have the right to a full refund, even when there's no public health crisis causing worldwide havoc. Don't let your airline talk you into a ticket credit when you deserve all your money back. Details are in your ticket or in the online terms. Apply a little pressure I've heard from travelers who nudged travel companies to offer a refund with a polite but firm tweet or Facebook post. Don't call it social media shaming. Think of it as giving the company an opportunity to do the right thing ??publicly. Gianna Fornesi is among them. She prepaid her rooms at the Hilton San Jose for a conference in March. This week, organizers canceled the event. Santa Clara County is a coronavirus "hot zone" and banned gatherings of more than 1,000 attendees. Hilton refused to refund the room, she says. "Given the global pandemic that is happening right now, I think I should be entitled to a refund or a hotel credit at the very least," says Fornesi, a marketing director from San Francisco. Hilton has granted waivers of its refund policy for guests in China, South Korea, Italy and Saudi Arabia ??but not San Jose. That means Hilton gets to keep her $588. "That's a lot of money for me to lose," she says. "This is a moment where companies can take action to set new standards. But it's clear Hilton values profits over people's needs." Hilton did not respond to questions about Fornesi's refund. Coronavirus cancellation policies are all over the map The travel industry's refund policies change almost by the minute. Here's what they look like now: Airlines waive their change fees for flights in March and April. Cruise lines offer credit for sailings until the end of spring. Hotels loosen their cancellation policies for certain areas affected by the coronavirus outbreak. Though many companies have relaxed their refund rules, some have gone the other way. The industry's coronavirus policies show how it really feels about you. It's something to note for when you start traveling again. The best and worst refund policies Airline change policies are problematic. Air carriers first waived change fees for travelers buying new tickets, a move designed to encourage ticket sales. After intense pressure from passengers and Congress, the major carriers announced this week that they would allow travelers holding tickets to any destination for travel during March and April to change or cancel their flight without paying a change fee. United Airlines' attempted policy change was particularly troublesome. This month it quietly modified its rules for schedule changes. Under its old policy, if United changed your itinerary and couldn't get you to your destination within two hours of the original flight, it would offer a full refund. Now, your itinerary must change by more than 25 hours. Anything less and you get a ticket credit valid for a year from the date of your initial reservation. United appears to have backtracked and now allows for refunds when your schedule changes "significantly." Ironically, many of the companies trying to hold on to your money may end up asking Congress for tax breaks. If they're successful, then you'll subsidize their new refund policies when you pay your taxes. Lucky you! At the other end of the scale, some companies go above and beyond. Cruise lines such as Princess, which has had two ships quarantined since February, and Viking canceled their sailings for the next two months and offer full refunds. At Princess, all affected guests will have the option to transfer 100% of money paid to a future cruise of their choosing. The company said it will provide an additional "generous future cruise credit" to be used for cruise fare or onboard expenses. Viking offers customers the choice of a 125% voucher good for two years, and if it can't be used in that window, a refund will be issued after it expires. Airbnb's policy is also a standout. It classifies a coronavirus cancellation as an extenuating circumstance. Anyone who can't complete a trip because of official travel restrictions covered by the policy, medical or disease control duties, flight or ground transportation cancellation initiated by the provider because of coronavirus, or suspected or confirmed cases of coronavirus, can cancel and receive a full refund. You get what you negotiate When it comes to coronavirus cancellations, you get what you get ??unless you negotiate for better terms. Travel companies want to keep your money, but you can fight an unfair policy. That's what Chelsea Henderson did when she tried to cancel a hotel stay at the Marriott Rivercenter in San Antonio this week. Her trip, like Fornesi's, was supposed to be for a conference, but she decided to cancel. When she called the hotel, a representative cheerfully canceled her entire stay without telling her she'd have to pay a one-night penalty. Henderson, a consultant from Washington, appealed to Marriott's corporate office. "The woman I talked to there was sympathetic and said she thought I should be refunded, but they were letting the individual hotels make the call," she says. "Still, she took my case, and I was eventually refunded." Since refund policies can change by the minute, there's a lot of uncertainty ??if not flexibility ??in the customer service departments of the major airlines, cruise lines and hotels. Don't take "no" for an answer. But definitely take names. "Companies that tighten refund policies are only focusing on the short-term hits," says Marcia Flicker, an associate professor of marketing at the Center for Positive Marketing at Fordham University. "Travel brands that have loosened or eliminated refund restrictions are earning consumer trust and building positive relationships with their customers. They are telling current and future customers that the people who use their services matter more than immediate profits." In short, the coronavirus pandemic has brought out the best ??and the worst ??in travel companies. Their refund policies, and the speed with which they process your refund, are proof. All you have to do is pay attention to their behavior. Remember who treated you well and who didn't. 
2020-03-16	President Donald Trump and Vice President Mike Pence on Saturday said the government is considering domestic travel restrictions amid the coronavirus pandemic and added United Kingdom and Ireland to the Europe travel restrictions that went into effect late Friday. They did not offer specifics on domestic flight restrictions but Trump said last week that they would be considered if "an area gets a little bit out of control" in terms of coronavirus cases. Pence said at a White House news conference Saturday that a "broad range of measures" are under consideration. "But no decisions have been made yet," he said. Asked if people should be traveling, Trump recommended against it. "If you don't have to travel I wouldn't do it," he said. "We want this thing to end. We don't want a lot of people getting infected." Extensive domestic flight restrictions would further cripple an already struggling US airline industry and lead to more flight cuts. Southwest Airlines, the nation's largest domestic carrier, might face a disproportionate hit, though CEO Gary Kelly has said the airline has seen a "9/11-like" drop in bookings even without serving Asia or Europe. The talk of domestic travel restrictions comes as the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention on Wednesday issued an unusual advisory on travel within the United States on its website. The headline: "Should I travel within the United States?" The CDC said it doesn't generally issue advisories or restrictions for travel within the United States but is doing so because cases of COVID-19 have been reported in many states and some areas are experiencing community spread. "Crowded travel settings, like airports, may increase your risk of exposure to COVID-19, if there are other travelers with COVID-19. There are several things you should consider when deciding whether it is safe for you to travel." Travel guidelines and alerts are usually issued for international destinations. Shortly after the coronavirus outbreak made headlines in January, the CDC issued a level 3 travel health notice, its highest, advising against non-essential travel to China, and has since raised Europe, Iran, Europe and South Korea to those levels because of coronavirus spread. The CDC now rates the US and other most other countries a level 2 under a broad global coronoavirus travel advisory. A level 2 alert means "practice enhanced precautions." New United Kingdom and Ireland restrictions The United Kingdom and Ireland were excluded from the Europe travel ban announced last week but have been added because of a spike in cases there. The broadened ban means residents of the U.K. and Ireland will not be allowed to travel to the United States for 30 days beginning late Monday. U.S. residents won't be banned from flying to the United States but they will face airport screenings upon their return and will be asked to self quarantine for 14 days. Officials said U.S. citizens in the U.K. or Ireland do not need to rush home ahead of the deadline because the ban does not apply to them. "They will be allowed into the U.S.," Chad Wolf, acting secretary of the Department of Homeland Security said. In response to the broadened ban and the resulting falloff in travel demand, airlines are likely to sharply cut flights between the U.S. and London and Ireland. Delta and American Airlines, for example, suspended all flights between the United States and the 26 European countries covered by the initial ban. 
2020-03-16	The coronavirus pandemic is hammering the travel industry, leaving some of the United States' busiest airports eerily quiet. You can take masks, cleaning supplies and more sanitizer through security The TSA said it will allow passengers to bring liquid hand sanitizer containers up to 12 ounces in carry-on bags. "Passengers can expect that these containers larger than the standard allowance of 3.4 ounces of liquids permitted through a checkpoint will need to be screened separately, which will add some time," TSA said. TSA also shared a Twitter video Thursday detailing which sanitary items passengers can pack in their carry-on luggage to help them "stay healthy." In the video, a woman flashes carry-on-approved items like hand sanitizer and disinfectant wipes while yelling "yup!" "Now that I have your attention, let's have a serious conversation," the video says. "Yes, you can bring that hand sanitizer through the checkpoint, yes you can bring the individually wrapped hand wipes, and yes you can bring your travel-sized pack of hand wipes through the checkpoint. You can even bring the jumbo-sized if you like, and of course, tissues." The video adds that passengers can request that TSA officers change their gloves when inspecting items. If you are wearing a face mask, she says you should not to be alarmed if agents ask you to pull it down so they can make sure you match your ID. TSA agents still patting passengers down Passengers who do chose to fly will continue to interact with TSA agents throughout the airport, from those checking IDs to possible pat-downs at the security lines. TSA agents are being encouraged to regularly wash their hands, cover coughs and wear surgical masks if they wish to do so. Officers are also required to wear nitrile gloves, and swabs used to check passengers' luggage will not be reused. TSA has also directed officers to use a fresh swab for each passenger when testing for explosive material. Agents change their gloves as needed, but travelers may request that they change gloves prior to being screened. What about bins? The TSA says bins used in the security checkpoint are like any other piece of public property and should be treated as such. With hundreds of travelers going through airport security checkpoints each hour, TSA recommends travelers follow CDC guidelines and wash their hands before and after the security screening process. There are new recommendations centered on items that go in your pockets. TSA says not to place personal items such as wallets, keys or phone in a bin. Instead, secure those items in your carry-ons, which will be screened through the X-ray system. Be prepared to answer questions about your recent travel history Screeners will ask travelers if they've been to affected countries, such as China, South Korea and Italy. They will also ask passengers if they have any symptoms of acute respiratory illness and check their temperature. On Tuesday, the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and the Department of Health and Human Services revealed more details about the government's plans to expand coronavirus screening in the United States, with 20 participating airports. Travelers flying from China to one of the 20 airports will be asked to fill out a short questionnaire about their travel, any symptoms and contact information. CDC staff will also take travelers' temperatures with a handheld thermometer that doesn't touch the skin and watch for signs of a cough or difficulty breathing. In the case of travelers who appear sick, the CDC will evaluate them further to determine whether the passenger should be taken to a hospital for further care. However, the first two U.S. cases, in Seattle and Chicago, involved travelers who didn't show symptoms at the airport. For travelers without symptoms, the CDC is handing out health information cards with details on the symptoms they should look for up to two weeks after leaving China. Contributing: Joel Shannon, Joey Garrison, Nicquel Terry Ellis and Curtis Tate If you haven't stepped foot in an airport since the holidays, here's what to expect when you go through the Transportation Security Administration checkpoint, which ramped up protective measures in early February as the virus began to spread outside its epicenter in Wuhan, China. 
2020-03-13	TONY DOKOUPIL: Overseas, the wife of Canadian Prime Minister Justin Trudeau tested positive for the coronavirus. I should say just north, not overseas. Sophie Trudeau is said to be feeling well. The prime minister himself is not showing symptoms, but the two will remain in isolation for the next two weeks. Sophie had just returned from London, overseas, and Ian Lee is in London with how the British government is changing its approach to fighting this virush-- virus. IAN LEE (CBS News Correspondent): It's unclear if Mrs. Trudeau contracted the virus while she was here in London. The U.K. has seen a sharp rise in cases with more than six hundred confirmed, but health experts believe the actual number could be closer to ten thousand. (Begin VT) BORIS JOHNSON: This is the worst public health crisis for a generation. IAN LEE: British Prime Minister Boris Johnson warned the worst is yet to come. BORIS JOHNSON: I-- I must level with you, level with the-- the British public, more families, many more families are going to lose loved ones before their time. IAN LEE: Health experts predict the U.K. is four weeks from the infection levels of Italy. In that country, the death toll has hit more than one thousand. Facing a shortage of hospital beds, doctors are being forced to prioritize younger patients with a higher survival rate. A team of Chinese medical experts arrived in Rome overnight, bringing their experience in dealing with the outbreak. Meanwhile, there is confusion at airports across Europe after President Trump instituted a travel ban. MAN: And we woke up and actually spent forty-two hundred dollars to rebook flights and then got to the airport and found out that it wasn't really applicable to U.S. citizens. IAN LEE: But from Asia comes the promise of an end in sight. After months of being overwhelmed, empty hospital beds can now be seen in China. The country posted another record low for new cases at just eight, while more than sixty-four thousand people have been released from the hospital. Even South Korea is showing signs of improvement after achieving the milestone of more recoveries than new infections. While Down Under, Tom Hanks and wife Rita Wilson seem in good spirits after contracting the virus. During their quarantine, he told fans on Instagram they're taking it one day at a time. (End VT) IAN LEE: There's really been a dealer's choice of responses to the pandemic here in Europe. France, Belgium, Ireland, and Portugal have decided to shut down schools and cancel large events. Meanwhile, here in the U.K., they're asking people with symptoms to self-isolate, but schools remain open. Anthony. ANTHONY MASON: Ian Lee ion London. Thanks, Ian. Ahead, a plunge in ridership on transportation systems as the coronavirus crisis worsens. We'll look at whether it's safer to travel by train, plane, or bus. We'll be right back. (ANNOUNCEMENTS) END 
2020-03-13	Richie Williams' family in Charlotte, North Carolina, has "stepped up our sanitization game" and are wearing protective masks. Lisa Adolf of Everett, Washington, is taking care to have plenty of her daily prescriptions on hand at home. And Chris Zeiders of Mechanicsburg, Pennsylvania, isn't doing much differently from usual except for the occasional elbow bump in lieu of a handshake. An exclusive USA TODAY/Ipsos Poll taken Tuesday and Wednesday finds Americans are worried about the novel coronavirus and are beginning to see its effect on their daily lives. Many express greater concern about what the pandemic may mean for their financial well-being than for their health. "I'm more worried about my finances and the general economy than I am about the actual virus," Fallon Prigmore, 24, a retail worker from Auburn, Alabama, reported in the poll. "For me personally, this is a time where I wish my finances were more stable." Nearly half of those surveyed said the coronavirus, known as COVID-19, posed a high level of threat to the stock market and to the global economy. In contrast, just 15% said it was a high threat to them personally. More than a third, though, said they haven't made any of a series of changes in their daily lives because of the coronavirus, and almost a third said they don't plan to make any adjustments in the future. "The coronavirus outbreak is a fast-moving event and the American public is still learning what it means," said Chris Jackson of Ipsos. "This USA TODAY/Ipsos survey on coronavirus is a snapshot of a specific point in time, and with the relatively low levels of personal fear this looks like the calm before the storm. As more events occur ??like the new travel ban to Europe or the NBA suspending its season ??we should expect levels of concern to rise as well." The online poll of 1,005 adults has a credibility interval (akin to a margin of error) of plus or minus 3.5 percentage points. More than half of those surveyed said they have started washing their hands more frequently, a step that public health officials describe as an important line of defense. One in 5 decided against attending a social event to avoid exposure, and only 1 in 10 have canceled a personal trip. Thirteen percent said they would consider delaying making a major purchase, a dent in consumer confidence that could have an impact on the economy. Women were more likely to report washing their hands more often than men were, 58% compared with 50%. The gap was much larger between Democrats and Republicans: 63% of Democrats were washing their hands more often, but just 48% of Republicans were doing so. It's possible that double-digit partisan divide reflects President Donald Trump's assurances that most Americans have a very low risk of infection; his voice carries particular weight with his fellow Republicans. Lisa Adolf, 63, has had no trouble following the advice she has gotten: "Stay away from crowds and not worry too much." The retired clerical worker added, "I'm like that anyway." A decade ago, she contracted the H1N1 flu, a pandemic the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention says resulted in more than 12,000 deaths. That experience was particularly difficult because she didn't have health care coverage at the time, she said. But in the end, "I got over it just fine. I don't believe in panicking over these things." There were broad fears about what may be ahead, however. More than half were concerned that someone in their city or town would be diagnosed with the disease, or that their child's school would be closed. Close to half, 44%, worried that their local hospital won't have the resources to treat infected patients. A third were concerned that they wouldn't be able to go to work or that their retirement savings would lose money. "There's going to be a major economic impact," warned Zeiders, a financial adviser who said he has "run all the numbers myself" on the virus. "Once the panic is gone, my biggest concern is the trickle-down effect of supply lines." When it comes to what the government should be doing, nearly 9 of 10 said the diagnostic test for coronavirus should be widely available. Shortages of the tests have been a source of alarm for public health officials. "We're not getting the total accurate number of the cases or the exposure of the virus because the testing is limited right now," said Williams, an IT security worker. "That concerns me most." Three-fourths supported mandatory quarantines for people returning from high-risk countries such as China, South Korea, Iran and Italy and backed temporarily stopping immigration from those countries entirely. Nearly two-thirds supported passage of legislation to provide paid sick leave for workers. But Americans were split down the middle over whether to cancel large-scale events, a step some governors and mayors have taken: 39% supported the idea; 39% opposed it. The most trusted source was the CDC, trusted by 79% of Republicans and 86% of Democrats. But attitudes toward other sources of information reflected the country's partisan divide. While 72% of Republicans trusted Trump, for instance, just 14% of Democrats agreed. And while 56% of Democrats trusted the news media, just 23% of Republicans agreed. "It doesn't sound like preventative measures are going to do a whole lot, anyway," Zeiders said. "It's going to be bad this year. But should we all be changing everything about the way we do things?" Right now, he said, the answer for him is "no." 
2020-03-13	I study epidemics, and here are my thoughts on the new coronavirus. First of all, we are going to see a tremendous increase in the number of cases of COVID-19. This is not entirely because of some new pattern in the spread of the disease, but rather due to a major change in the requirements to be tested. Until recently, if you had a flu-like illness but had not recently traveled to China, Italy, South Korea or Iran, you could not be tested. Now, you can be tested if you are sick and have a doctor's order to be tested, so expect things to feel a lot more panicky all of a sudden. Is the panic legitimate? Sort of. But this is not the zombie apocalypse. The fatality rate of 30 deaths per 1,000 cases is probably a wild overestimate. (The denominator is almost certainly wrong because it is confirmed cases, and we only confirm cases when we test for them.) But even at 3 per 1,000 cases, this would be a big deal. By way of comparison, the death rate for seasonal influenza is between 1 and 2 in 1,000 cases. So, yeah, going from roughly 0x to 30x worse than a bad flu year? That's a problem. Unlike flu, COVID-19 is not particularly dangerous for children. It is dangerous for older adults and those with lung conditions. Our focus should be on slowing down the spread of this disease. Here is my advice: Wash your hands. I have started washing my hands each time I enter a new building and after being in shared spaces (classrooms especially), in addition to the standard practice of washing after using the bathroom and before eating. Use soap and water. Hand sanitizer also kills this virus, as does rubbing alcohol (the main ingredient in hand sanitizer). Don't pick your nose. Or put your fingers in your mouth, on your lips or in your eyes. Surface contact works like this: You touch something dirty -- like an elevator button. Virus sticks to your hands. Then you rub your eye. Then you touch your sandwich and put the sandwich in your mouth. Now there is virus in your eyes and mouth. You may be thinking, but I don't pick my nose because I am an adult. An observational study found that people working at a desk touched their eyes, nose or lips between three and 50 times an hour. If you're healthy, you don't need a face mask. Its function is to prevent spit from flying out of your mouth and landing on things when you cough or sneeze. Let the people who really need masks have them. Like doctors, nurses and people who are sick. The world is running low on masks. If everyone wants a mask so they can feel OK about keeping their Daytona Beach spring break plans and then hospitals in India can't buy them anymore, shame on us. Sanitize objects lots of people touch. Think door handles, keyboards and salad bar tongs. Best guesses are that the virus can live on surfaces for two to 48 hours, maybe even longer, depending on the surface, temperature and humidity. Many common household cleaning products will kill this virus. However, white vinegar solution does not. You can make your own inexpensive antimicrobial spray by mixing 1 part household bleach to 50 parts cold tap water. Spray this on surfaces and leave for 10-30 minutes. Note: This is bleach. It will ruin your sofa. Social distancing. Limit face-to-face meetings, especially large ones. Zoom is an excellent video conferencing option. Ask about the hygiene plan at your child's school. Keep your children home if they are sick. If you can telecommute, do that a little more. Avoid large gatherings of people if possible. If you attend group events and start to feel even a little bit sick within two to 14 days, you need to self-isolate immediately. If you are considering booking flights, get refundable tickets. Most trip insurance will not cover cancellations due to a pandemic. Look for "cancel for any reason" trip insurance. Considerations for risks related to the trip: How bad would it be if you got stuck where you are going for three to six weeks? How bad would it be to be isolated at home for two to three weeks upon your return? Do you have direct contact with people who are over 70 and/or have lung conditions? Are there cases in your area that you might be carrying to places and people? If you are sick, stay home. Your contributions to the world are really just not that important. If someone in your family gets sick, your family will almost certainly be isolated for two to three weeks. You could start stocking up essentials for that scenario, but don't run out and buy a years' worth of toilet paper. Again, not the apocalypse. Two weeks' worth of essential items is enough. Refill any prescriptions; check your supply of coffee, kitty litter and jigsaw puzzles. When public health works, the result is the least newsworthy thing ever: Nothing happens. If this all fizzles out and you start feeling like, "Wah, all that fuss for nothing?" -- send a thank you note to your department of public health officials for a job well done. They are working very, very hard right now. There are some positives here. All this hand-washing could stop flu season in its tracks! We have an opportunity to reduce our global carbon footprint by telecommuting more, flying less and understanding where our stuff comes from. We can use this outbreak to think about the problems with our health care system. There is a lot we don't yet know about this virus. It didn't even exist several months ago. Stay tuned; it is an evolving situation. May the force be with you. Malia Jones, assistant scientist at the Applied Population Laboratory at the University of Wisconsin-Madison, studies spatial patterns of infectious disease. This column first appeared in the Milwaukee Journal-Sentinel. 
2020-03-13	TONY DOKOUPIL: Let's talk about just how badly the markets were hammered yesterday. Take a look at this. The Dow hit a huge ten percent loss, the worst one-day plunge since the financial crisis of 1987. This-- what you're looking at there is a twenty-three hundred-point drop. That represents trillions of dollars in value and people's retirement accounts and elsewhere. President Trump asked Americans to be calm, saying the markets would recover. And his comments came as aides negotiated with House Speaker Nancy Pelosi on a plan to help people who have already taken a financial hit. Paula Reid is at the White House for us. Paula, good morning. A lot of people hoping this deal comes through. Do they have it yet? PAULA REID (CBS News White House Correspondent): We have some details from the House speaker. In a letter to her Democratic colleagues, Tony, she revealed that his deal will likely include free testing for the virus, paid emergency leave, enhanced unemployment insurance, and food assistance. All of this meant to provide immediate economic relief to those impacted by the virus and the House could vote on this bill as soon as today. (Begin VT) REPRESENTATIVE NANCY PELOSI: We've resolved most of our differences. And those we haven't, we'll continue to-- the conversation because there will obviously be other bills. PAULA REID: House Speaker Nancy Pelosi expressed optimism last night after an all-day negotiation with administration officials over legislation aimed at blunting widespread financial damage from coronavirus. REPRESENTATIVE NANCY PELOSI: It's about paid sick leave, it's about family medical leave, it's about unemployment insurance. PAULA REID: Pelosi has been working with Treasury Secretary Steve Mnuchin to hammer out the specifics, including paid sick leave. Yesterday, the President warned the Democrats may try to pack the bill with unrelated provisions though he didn't offer specifics. PRESIDENT DONALD TRUMP: There's not a way for them to get some of the goodies that they haven't been able to get for the last twenty-five years. PAULA REID: It's an accusation the Democrats rejected. SENATOR CHUCK SCHUMER: If giving infected workers paid sick leave is a goody, then God help those who think that. PRESIDENT DONALD TRUMP: Thank you all-- PAULA REID: The President's Oval Office address where he announced widespread travel restrictions on Europe along with economic aid proposals failed to boost chaotic financial markets. The Dow plunged more than two thousand points yesterday, the biggest one-day drop in over thirty years. PRESIDENT DONALD TRUMP: Market's going to be just fine. And that's why I made these decisions. PAULA REID: As the President sought to downplay the turmoil, the White House also said he will not be tested for coronavirus, days after coming into close contact with an aide to Brazil's president at Mar-a-Lago who later tested positive for the virus. PRESIDENT DONALD TRUMP: Let's put it this way, I'm not concerned. PAULA REID: But Senator Lindsey Graham who was also at Mar-a-Lago during that time announced yesterday that he is self-quarantining while he awaits the results of a virus test. (End VT) PAULA REID: And Graham is just one of several lawmakers close to the President who have self-quarantined after coming into contact with someone who tested positive for the virus. But the President has said he has no plans to do the same. And just this morning, we are learning that a senior Australian politician who tested positive for the virus was in Washington just last week where he met with Attorney General William Barr and the President's daughter Ivanka. We have reached out to their offices to see if they plan to take any precautions. Michelle. MICHELLE MILLER: Paula, we shall see. Perhaps news will be made. Ahead, our Doctor Jon LaPook addresses concerns over the national shortage of coronavirus tests. But first, it is seven nineteen, time to check your local weather. (LOCAL WEATHER BREAK) (ANNOUNCEMENTS) ANTHONY MASON: Ahead, Actor Tom Hanks and his wife Rita Wilson share an update after they both tested positive for the coronavirus. You're watching CBS THIS MORNING. (ANNOUNCEMENTS) (7:30 AM, EDT) ANTHONY MASON: Welcome back to CBS THIS MORNING from Washington. I'm Anthony Mason with Tony Dokoupil and Michelle Miller. Gayle King is off. We still do not have a full picture of the coronavirus outbreak in the U.S., in part because of a major shortage in testing supplies. Trump administration officials have promised millions of tests, but we've spoken to doctors and potential patients who say they're not getting them. MICHELLE MILLER: Joseph Lanza (ph) tried to get tested in hard-hit New Rochelle, north of New York City. JOSEPH LANZA: They pretty much asked me what I was feeling, which was scratchy throat, headache, achy bones, little bit of fever, but since I didn't have a hundred and two fever, they-- they didn't want to give me, like, the virus test. And I think they're short of the virus test. I'm not as-- as concerned about myself. It's-- it's the damage that my having the virus can do to the people around me. MICHELLE MILLER: Doctor Jon LaPook joins us from New York to help explain why this has been such a problem as this crisis unfolds. Good morning, Doctor LaPook. DR. JON LAPOOK (CBS News Chief Medical Correspondent): Good morning. Good morning, Michelle. MICHELLE MILLER: We just heard from Doctor Fauci in our last half hour that he's optimistic that we're going to get more tests out there to more people. But the question is, everyone wants to get tested now, if they have a sore throat, if they have a slight fever. DR. JON LAPOOK: Right. MICHELLE MILLER: Where do they go and what should they do? DR. JON LAPOOK: Well, what the-- yeah, they don't-- what-- what people don't want you to do is to just go into a doctor's office or go into a hospital emergency room unannounced, right, because you don't want to be infecting other people if you happen to have COVID-19. So, we're talking about triaging people from a distance. And that means being in your apartment or in your home and calling your doctor if you-- or a clinician. If you don't have one, there are hotlines. So, New York State Department of Health, for example, has one, check with the department of health or call the hospital. And then they'll triage you, they'll figure out what you should do from a distance. If they do decide you need testing, they can give you instructions. So, people are waiting for you, and it's safe. Everybody has protective gear when you do come in. ANTHONY MASON: How quickly the FDA, John, we talked about this earlier in the broadcast is to issue an emergency authorization for a test that can give results in about three and a half hours. How important is it to get tests that we can get results faster? DR. JON LAPOOK: Yeah. Anthony, that's huge, right? Because right now, there's such a bottleneck. What's happening in the trenches, and I've spoken to so many doctors is first of all, think about it, normally you go into doctor's office, you have a sore throat, you want to get a strep test. They can do it. No problem. They test it right there. Here you need special protective gear. So, a lot of offices aren't even set up for that. Then if they've got to send it to another lab that lab may or may not be set up to quickly process it. So, they may not have the technicians to do the test. And then after that, you know, it's very-- it's-- it's complicated. It's not simple to do. You have to extract the RNA, the genetic material and you have to do special stuff with special machines. And then it may take a long time to get the results. It could be a day. I'm hearing a day or two sometimes to get the results. So, it's a big deal. If you could do it rapidly, it would be even a bigger deal if you could do it in your own home. I hear the Gates Foundation and others are actually working on something like that. Wouldn't that be great? TONY DOKOUPIL: Doctor, maybe the phrase of the day if not the week has been flattening the curve, people are hearing it. Can you say what it is and how all these cancelations may help flatten that curve? DR. JON LAPOOK: Right. All right. People feel out of control right now, right? What can you do? And is it really worthwhile to do all of this social distancing and hand washing and all that stuff? And the answer is yes. I'm going to use a chalkboard right in front of me, right? Normally right now without any measures, the epidemic might go up and go down. That peak number of people who have the cases can overload the system. That's what people are worried about. There may not be enough doctors. The doctors may get sick, other clinicians, health professionals may get sick. You may not have enough ventilators, other medical equipment. It's a stress on the system. If you can do all of these measures and flatten out that curve so instead of a peak up and down it's sort of slowly going out, it's still going up and the epidemic may actually last longer, but it's not putting such a stress on the system at that moment. So that would be a very big deal. Does it work? Yes, it works. We saw in China the number of cases come down, new cases in South Korea where they did aggressive testing. It was so clever, right, they had drive-in, people were able to be tested in their cars. And we're seeing their cases go down. And in the 1918 flu epidemic-- in the pandemic we saw that social distancing worked. TONY DOKOUPIL: And so as-- as scary as some of these cancelations can be, as unnerving as they are, they do represent us confronting this disease, and if that curve flattens that's definitely good news. Doctor Jon LaPook, thank you very much. END 
2020-03-12	ANTHONY MASON: Good morning, and welcome to CBS THIS MORNING from Washington. I'm Anthony Mason with Tony Dokoupil. Gayle King is off, so CBS THIS MORNING: SATURDAY co-host Michelle Miller is with us. A nation on edge. In a prime time speech, President Trump says most European travelers will be banned from the U.S. in the scramble to fight the spread of the coronavirus. Health officials have declared the outbreak is now a pandemic. Vice President Mike Pence will join us. TONY DOKOUPIL: Season suspended. The NBA calls off all games until further notice after a player tests positive. Plus Oscar winner Tom Hanks says he and his wife Rita Wilson have the coronavirus. MICHELLE MILLER: Decades in prison. Convicted rapist Harvey Weinstein is sentenced to twenty-three years behind bars then rushed to the hospital with chest pains. Now, he faces another legal battle. ANTHONY MASON: And Maren's moment. We joined country star Maren Morris at the Houston Rodeo as she got ready for the biggest show of her career and prepares for the birth of her first child. TONY DOKOUPIL: It's Thursday, March 12, 2020. We'll have the latest updates on the coronavirus right after today's Eye Opener--your world in ninety seconds. PRESIDENT DONALD TRUMP: I will always put the well-being of America first. The virus will not have a chance against us. MAJOR GARRETT: This is a different crisis for this President and this presidency, and this entire administration. You can't give this a nickname. You cannot belittle the coronavirus. It is growing, it is spreading. NORAH O'DONNELL: As the World Health Organization has declared the coronavirus outbreak a pandemic, citing alarming levels of spread and activity of the virus. MAN #1: The NBA season placed on indefinite suspension over concerns of the coronavirus. MARK CUBAN: This is crazy. This can't be true. I mean it's not within the realm of possibilities. It just-- it seemed more like out of a movie. GLORIA ALLRED: Women are going to speak out and demand justice. WOMAN #1: Convicted rapist and sex offender Harvey Weinstein was sentenced to twenty-three years behind bars. SENATOR BERNIE SANDERS: Last night obviously was not a good night for our campaign. JAMES CORDEN: (INDISTINCT) six states voted yesterday in the Democratic primary and it turned in to another huge night for Joe Biden, or as Democrats are now calling it, look, fine, sure, if I have to vote for him, I will. STEPHEN COLBERT: The coronavirus is also affecting the 2020 presidential race. Last night, we found out that Sunday's debate between Joe Biden and Bernie Sanders in Phoenix will be held without an audience, which is why CNN's already redone the promos. Jim. MAN #2: Bernie versus Biden. Two old men, one silent room. Who will nod off first? STEPHEN COLBERT: I will watch it. I will watch that. Place your bets now. ANTHONY MASON: And welcome to CBS THIS MORNING from Washington. The coronavirus pandemic is starting to affect all aspects of American life, and that includes us here at CBS. CBS News has two known cases of coronavirus, so we have closed our New York broadcast center to clean and disinfect the premises. Like a lot of folks, we're not exactly working from home, but we're working from another home, though-- TONY DOKOUPIL: Yeah. ANTHONY MASON: --here in Washington at our bureau. And there is plenty of breaking news this morning. Let's right-- get right to it, beginning with an Oval Office announcement to the nation and reaching across the Atlantic Ocean. TONY DOKOUPIL: In a dramatic move to stop the spread of the coronavirus, President Trump has ordered an extensive travel ban. PRESIDENT DONALD TRUMP: We will be suspending all travel from Europe to the United States for the next thirty days. The new rules will go into effect Friday at midnight. These restrictions will be adjusted subject to conditions on the ground. TONY DOKOUPIL: The State Department also issued an alert last night urging Americans to reconsider any international travel plans. Paula Reid is at the White House for us. Paula, good morning. The reactions are coming in overnight. What are they? PAULA REID (CBS News White House Correspondent): Good morning, Tony. Well, the President's goal was to calm the markets and calm Americans. But investors were underwhelmed. U.S. stock futures tumbled sharply as the President concluded his speech. And Democrats criticized the President for not addressing the lack of testing kits. But a top White House adviser just responded to this criticism and he tells me that the President, quote, "signaled he is taking decisive actions for the American people based on sound science," and that we'll see more of this in the coming days. (Begin VT) PRESIDENT DONALD TRUMP: We made a life-saving move with early action on China. Now we must take the same action with Europe. PAULA REID: In one of his most sweeping measures to combat coronavirus, President Trump announced temporary travel restrictions on foreign nationals from several European countries and laid blame on the EU for not doing more to stem the spread of the virus. PRESIDENT DONALD TRUMP: The European Union failed to take the same precautions and restrict travel from China and other hotspots. As a result, a large number of new clusters in the United States were seeded by travelers from Europe. PAULA REID: The President said restrictions do not apply to the United Kingdom or Ireland and will have some exceptions for American travelers but didn't offer specifics. Some Democrats immediately expressed skepticism. REPRESENTATIVE ADAM SCHIFF (MSNBC): It applies to countries where there's less of a problem in Europe but not where there's more of a problem elsewhere like in South Korea. PAULA REID: The President also laid out a series of steps intended to blunt the economic impact of the virus, including low-interest loans for small businesses, deferred tax payments, and a proposed payroll tax cut. PRESIDENT DONALD TRUMP: My fellow Americans-- PAULA REID: President Trump's address marked a notable shift in tone from just one day earlier when he emerged from a meeting with Senate Republicans to downplay public fears. PRESIDENT DONALD TRUMP: It will go away. Just stay calm. PAULA REID: But the National Institute of Health's Doctor Anthony Fauci offered a grim prediction on Wednesday, warning of more cases to come. DR. ANTHONY FAUCI: We've got to assume that it's going to get worse and worse and worse. (End VT) PAULA REID: The President has said for days that he would not cancel his upcoming campaign events. But last night, the White House said it would be cancelling upcoming events in Colorado, Nevada, and Wisconsin, where the President would have been part of large public gatherings. The White House said they are doing this out of an abundance of caution. Tony. TONY DOKOUPIL: Caution is the word of the day. Paula, thank you very much. END 
2020-03-12	MICHELLE MILLER: The World Health Organization is pushing governments to take strong action after officially declaring the outbreak to be a pandemic yesterday. There are more than a hundred and twenty-six thousand cases worldwide. Restrictions in Italy, the hardest hit European country, are now tighter than ever. Elizabeth Palmer is in London with Europe's response to the U.S. travel ban. ELIZABETH PALMER (CBS News Senior Foreign Correspondent): Good morning. European leaders are clearly shocked by President Trump's travel announcements, and they're very worried now about the economic fallout. Meanwhile, at a global level, health leaders are concerned that some governments--and they wouldn't name names--aren't taking this pandemic seriously enough. (Begin VT) ELIZABETH PALMER: The World Health Organization read what amounts to the Riot Act to governments still doing little or nothing to slow coronavirus down. TEDROS ADHANOM GHEBREYESUS: And we are deeply concerned both by the alarming levels of spread and severity and by the alarming levels of inaction. ELIZABETH PALMER: Italy, where streets and shops are eerily quiet, has the highest number of cases in Europe, more than twelve thousand, with eight hundred and twenty-seven deaths--the vast majority elderly people. The government has closed shops, bars, and restaurants, and imposed travel restrictions. Banks, food stores, and pharmacies are open, though, as well as businesses where people can stay at least a yard apart. In the Middle East, Iran is worst hit. Alarmed citizens say the official response was too little and far too late. Many believe the government is hiding the true scale of the outbreak. Meanwhile, a vice president and two cabinet ministers have tested positive, and one MP has died. But there are signs of hope. This morning China reported a record low, just fifteen new cases. These nurses are celebrating the closing of one of Wuhan's makeshift hospitals after the last coronavirus patient was discharged. (Begin VT) ELIZABETH PALMER: Here in the U.K., there are now more than four hundred and fifty confirmed cases. The government's crisis team called Cobra is meeting this afternoon to decide what to do next to slow down the rate of infection. Measures could include closing some schools perhaps or limiting big public gatherings. Tony. TONY DOKOUPIL: Liz Palmer in London for us. Liz, thank you very much. Now to a story that caught a lot of people's attention. Actor Tom Hanks says he and his wife Rita Wilson have the coronavirus. Hanks was working on a film in Australia. He now says he and Wilson will stay in isolation for as long as public health and safety requires. ANTHONY MASON: He shared the news on Twitter, posting a photo of what looks like a glove in a trash can. Hanks said they both felt tired and that they had cold and body-aches. He also said Wilson had some slight fevers. TONY DOKOUPIL: Joining us from-- joining us now from Los Angeles is Doctor David Agus. David, good morning. So the Tom Hanks news really did make a lot of people sit up straight and say, okay, he's in Australia, but he's an American. This truly is a global virus right now. This is now a pandemic as the World Health Organization declared. That word scares a lot of people. What does it mean, and does it change anything about the global response? DR. DAVID AGUS (CBS News Medical Contributor): No question. I mean the world's friend, Tom Hanks, has this virus. You know, a pandemic means it's all over and it's sustained. The World Health Organization is the one organization that can make that declaration. And it made that declaration. We all knew it was coming. It was not an if but a when. And it doesn't really change how we approach it. But I think it makes and underscores the severity of what we're seeing now and really pushes all countries to act aggressively. They claim they did this because not all country were acting as aggressively as they should have. TONY DOKOUPIL: Doctor Anthony Fauci appeared to be leveling with the American people yesterday in testimony to Congress saying this could get worse and worse, millions could be infected. What should people know about their own risks and the need to self-quarantine if they come down with something? DR. DAVID AGUS: I don't think it could get worse, I think it will get worse. And I think we're going to see significant infections in this country. It's going to be manageable. We're all going to do fine, and we have to self-quarantine. The more we can keep the infections down and slow the rate of spread, the better we're going to be able to handle it as a country and the fewer casualties there will be from this. So, if you have any symptoms, if you have a fever, if you have a cough, if you have a runny nose, you need to stay home. And you need to stay home forty-eight hours after those symptoms abate, until that point. And the same thing with anybody who's been exposed to you. If you're a family, you should all stay home. We're going to be in this together. We are one community, and together we'll come through this. MICHELLE MILLER: Doctor Agus, China's national health commission says that the coronavirus is now past its peak in terms of the number of new infections. What does this tell us about how they have combated the disease there? MICHELLE MILLER: Well, if you look at what China did, what South Korea is doing, when you take aggressive actions and the-- the country works as a whole, you get good results. And we know how to fight these viral infections. And it requires doing things that are not, you know, positive to people. People are not happy that we've canceled the rest of the NBA season or suspended it. Kids are being sent home from college, schools are closing, people are working from home. This is a drastic change in our life. But at the same time, these are methodologies that work. When we social distance, that is we're not all together in one place, the virus stops spreading and so all of these are mechanisms to social distance. ANTHONY MASON: David, is-- is the President's ban on all travel from the eu-- European Union, is that a necessary measure to combat this? DR. DAVID AGUS: It's aggressive. You know, certainly when we look at what's going on now in the country, it is not, you know, EU or European Union spread here in the United States. It's spread within. And it's spreading from person to person within the United States. So I think it's an aggressive stand, really, you know, showing, hey, I'm going to do something and stand up here. And we'll see how long that lasts. I don't think that itself is going to stop the spread here in the United States. MICHELLE MILLER: All right. Doctor David Agus, we'll leave it at that. We'll see you a little bit later in our eight o'clock hour. END 
2020-03-12	ANTHONY MASON: Vice President Mike Pence is in charge of the White House's coronavirus task force, and he joins us from here in Washington. Mister Vice President, good morning. Thanks for being with us. MIKE PENCE: Good morning, all. ANTHONY MASON: Mister Vice President, the first-- the first-- as we mentioned-- as Paula mentioned, I want to get to the travel ban to begin with. The first confirmed case of coronavirus in this country was back in January, on the 21st. Why have we waited so long for a travel ban? MIKE PENCE: Well, as you-- you state, when the first case of coronavirus emerged in this country, it would be a little more than a week later that the President took the unprecedented step of suspending all travel from China, which was the-- the originating country of-- of this virus. We also established travel advisories, and-- and we've been screening passengers on all direct flights from South Korea and Italy. But with the epicenter of this epidemic now moving from China and South Korea to Europe, yesterday the President again took the unprecedented step of suspending all travel from Europe for the next thirty days, and-- and-- and that in combination with our strong mitigation efforts in communities that are experiencing what our experts call community spread, areas of California, Washington State, and New York, we're going to continue to put-- put every effort at home and with regard to these travel restrictions in place to protect the health and safety of the American people. TONY DOKOUPIL: Mister Vice President, the-- the President last night said that Europe has dramatically more cases of coronavirus than the United States. However, how do we know that when we have not been testing widely? MIKE PENCE: Well, every state lab in America is able to conduct tests. And we have three particular jurisdictions that we're tracking community spread. We've been flowing testing resources into those areas, and-- and-- and we'll continue to do that. But make no mistake about it. All the new cases in the world, this week, seventy percent of the new cases were in Europe. And-- and the increase has been dramatic. When-- when the President imposed the travel advisory and we began screening all flights, all passengers coming into the United States from Italy two weeks ago, there were roughly five hundred coronavirus cases. Now there's twelve thousand--about a thousand in Germany, about a thousand in France. That's the reason why the President essentially said full stop, we're going to suspend all travel, and that American citizens coming home and legal residents will be funneled through thirteen different airports. They'll get an initial health screening coming in, but we're also going to ask everyone returning to our country to self-quarantine for fourteen days. So testing is happening in every state lab in the country. Many university hospitals have taken the FDA test like the University of Washington is doing a great job expanding testing capabilities. But the biggest piece on the testing is that our commercial labs that the President brought in last week, companies like Quest and LabCorp, have already had approved a new test that they, several days ago, had begun to take to market which they can do in a vast and expansive way across the country. And literally in the days ahead, we're going to continue to see the availability of tests at your local doctor, ultimately at your local pharmacy. Continue to expand. ANTHONY MASON: Mister Vice President, the governor of New York who is, of course, dealing with a significant outbreak of cases said that there are-- MIKE PENCE: Right. ANTHONY MASON: --two ways to reduce this: Massive quarantines, massive testing, and he said we can't rely on the CDC or the FDA, that they've become a bottleneck and testing is taking too long. MIKE PENCE: Well, I spoke with Governor Cuomo last night in connection with some guidance that CDC just issued to New York and Washington State and California. We-- we put out very, very strong recommendations for social distancing, for large gatherings for schools. And we're working in very close cooperation with the state of New York. And-- and the governor and I also have talked about the-- the fact that we are-- we are working for the high volume testing to be approved. The state lab in New York State is already able to do that. As the governor and I discussed earlier this week, we're working to expand that to other state labs, and the American people can be confident we are going to continue to work in every way to clear out, as the President said, any red tape, any barriers to testing that might have existed at the FDA and make it possible for state labs, university hospitals, as well as these commercial laboratories. I can't emphasize enough-- TONY DOKOUPIL: Mister Vice-- MIKE PENCE: --if you go to the website-- TONY DOKOUPIL: Mister Vice President-- MIKE PENCE: --for the companies Quest or LabCorp, you can already see they're providing resources, information, where health care providers can obtain tests. TONY DOKOUPIL: And that's-- MIKE PENCE: And that will be literally expanding by the day. TONY DOKOUPIL: Mister Vice President, that's heartening news for many people, I'm sure. But just to put this all in context, China at this point had about three hundred thousand tests out there; South Korea, two hundred thousand tests. We have, on the official count, seventy-seven hundred. So why are we so far behind? Should we have begun testing earlier? Because if you don't test, you don't catch the milder cases, you can never contain this thing. MIKE PENCE: Well, I-- I think it is an issue since I was tapped to lead this effort two weeks ago by the President here at the White House that we've put real focus on. And the-- the fact is that every state laboratory in the country now for some time since the advent of the coronavirus in this country has been able to conduct their own coronavirus tests. But the truth is they are not required to report that testing to the CDC as you have to do in the case of-- of many diseases. And so it's a voluntary reporting right now. We're working to-- we're working to adjust that so that we're getting the full information from every state lab. But anyone-- anyone of your viewers this morning that might be concerned that they were exposed to the coronavirus or to someone who had it or if they have symptoms, they can call their doctor, their doctor can contact their state lab, and they'll be able to find out how they can obtain a test. in-- in all fifty states, tests are being conducted. And as I said-- MICHELLE MILLER: But-- MIKE PENCE: --at the President's direction, we're working to expand that very broadly all across the country in cooperation with our incredible commercial laboratories. MICHELLE MILLER: And the President has said that-- that every American who wants to get tested can get tested but-- MIKE PENCE: Right. MICHELLE MILLER: --that-- that's simply not true from what we're hearing from our own medical contributors. Health officials from New Jersey told Congress on Tuesday that the state of about nine million people has only received two test kits. So when will the states get these kits? MIKE PENCE: Well, I think what the President was referring to there was something that Governor Jay Inslee of Washington State called to our attention about two weeks ago. And that was that many health professionals interpreted CDC guidance to say that if you were only mildly symptomatic, that a doctor would not have the authority to recommend a coronavirus test. We changed that. CDC sent out very clear guidelines so that now if you call your doctor, regardless of your symptoms, a doctor can order without hesitation a test, they can contact the state laboratory. And as I said, we're-- we're continuing to expand the availability and literally we-- we're literally going to expand hundreds of thousands of more tests in the days and weeks ahead, all across the country. TONY DOKOUPIL: Mister Vice President-- MIKE PENCE: But the President's focus last night was to say we-- we need to suspend all travel from Europe because we do know now that the epicenter of the coronavirus is Europe. And that when we looked over the last thirty-six hours, of the thirty-five states yesterday early in the day that had coronavirus cases, thirty of those actually could be-- could be tied to contacts with Europe. So the President said full stop on any travel incoming from Europe-- TONY DOKOUPIL: Mister Vice President-- MIKE PENCE: --and-- but we're also marrying that to all of our mitigation efforts, particularly in the communities where we have community spread. TONY DOKOUPIL: All right. Mister Vice President-- MIKE PENCE: But make no mistake, every American can help by practicing common sense and good hygiene-- TONY DOKOUPIL: That's a good-- MIKE PENCE: --regardless of whether there's a coronavirus case in your community. TONY DOKOUPIL: Absolutely correct. That's a good note to end on. We've got to leave it there. Vice President Pence, thank you very much. We hope to talk to you again real soon. Ahead, we'll talk to our-- our Doctor David Agus with more on the spread of this virus and how to contain it. But first, it is eight-fourteen, time to check your local weather. (LOCAL WEATHER BREAK) (ANNOUNCEMENTS) ANTHONY MASON: We were with country star Maren Morris as she got ready for the biggest audience of her career and a new baby. Ahead, our conversation with Morris at the Houston Rodeo about charting her own path to success. You're watching CBS THIS MORNING. (ANNOUNCEMENTS) END 
2020-03-12	On a day when the coronavirus officially became a pandemic, Americans faced yet another phalanx of uncertainties Wednesday as communities throughout the U.S. reported rising death tolls, dozens of colleges suspended in-person classrooms, stocks plummeted again and the NCAA shut fans out of the upcoming March Madness tournament. The World Health Organization said early Wednesday that the time has finally come to call the virus what it is: a global threat, or pandemic. But it stressed that the outbreak is far from being out of control. "We have rung the alarm bell loud and clear," WHO Director-General Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus said at a news conference. "We cannot say this loudly enough, or clearly enough, or often enough: All countries can still change the course of this pandemic." Among the changes sweeping the United States: The NCAA took a bold step and announced that no fans would be allowed into arenas to watch the famous March Madness tournament. The decision will cost one of America's favorite sporting events tens of millions in lost revenue. The Dow dived another 1,465 points in what analysts say is likely to begin a bear market that could last weeks or months. The financial picture for Americans is getting so rough that the Trump administration is weighing extending this year's April 15 deadline for filing income taxes to soften the impact of the coronavirus outbreak on households and businesses. More than 100 colleges ??among them Harvard, Stanford, Princeton, Ohio State ??have suspended in-person classrooms in favor of remote learning. The global death toll rose above 4,500 and the number of confirmed cases exceeded 121,000. The U.S. death toll climbed to 31 and the number of cases rolled past 1,000, federal health officials said. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention Director Robert Redfield told a congressional committee that the virus has spread to at least 38 states. "Right now the epicenter ??the new China ??is Europe," Redfield said. "And there's a lot of people coming back and forth from Europe that are now starting to seed these communities." The worldwide outbreak is the first to have drawn a pandemic designation, Tedros said. For weeks he balked at calling the outbreak a pandemic, and Wednesday he noted that 81 nations have reported no cases of the virus. Another 57 have reported 10 cases or less. More than 90% of confirmed cases are in four countries, and two of them ??China and South Korea ??are seeing cases decline, he said. Containment remains as important as mass treatment of the infection, Tedros stressed. "Several countries have demonstrated that this virus can be suppressed and controlled," he said. "Even those countries with community transmission or large clusters can turn the tide." 'Bottom line: It's going to get worse,' Fauci says Dr. Anthony Fauci, director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, told lawmakers Wednesday that the United States has yet to see the worst of the outbreak.He explained that anytime there is an outbreak with enough cases of "community spread," which means the source of the infection is unknown, "you're not going to able to effectively and efficiently contain it." How much worse will depend on the ability of the U.S. to contain the influx of infected people from other countries and the ability to contain and mitigate the virus here. "Bottom line: It's going to get worse," he said. The new coronavirus, or COVID-19, causes only mild or moderate symptoms for most people, such as fever and cough, but can progress to serious illness including pneumonia, especially in older adults and people with existing health problems. WHO says mild cases last about two weeks, while most patients with serious illness recover in about three to six weeks. Seattle, San Francisco ban large gatherings Washington Gov. Jay Inslee announced a ban on gatherings and events of more than 250 people in the Seattle metropolitan area, where the virus has killed more than 20 people. "This is not just your ordinary flu," Inslee said in a news conference. "This is a virus that the experts tell us is at least 10 times more potentially fatal than the flu, and this demands a response consistent with the nature of the threat." San Francisco will also forbid large events, but with a cutoff of 1,000 people, Supervisor Matt Haney tweeted. He added that the ban would last two weeks and that, starting Thursday, the NBA's Golden State Warriors would play their home games during that stretch without fans. "Public health must be first priority," Haney wrote. Inslee said that as of Tuesday there had been 268 confirmed cases and 24 deaths in Washington state; 19 deaths are linked to one suburban Seattle nursing home. Authorities in King County believe the virus has spread to at least 10 long-term care facilities. The three counties affected by the ban, King, Pierce and Snohomish, are home to nearly 4 million people. The prohibition ??aimed at social, recreational and spiritual functions as well as community meetings but not businesses like supermarkets and restaurants ??will remain in place at least through the end of March. Inslee said it would probably be extended, and he suggested the federal government probably would follow suit in implementing "social distancing" measures in the coming weeks. Schools in the three counties were not ordered to close yet but were asked to make contingency plans. Later in the day, the Seattle school district announced a two-week closure beginning Thursday. Coronavirus cover-up in China 'cost the world community' National security adviser Robert O'Brien, who is a member of the coronavirus task force, accused Beijing of concealing the outbreak and hampering a faster response worldwide. "Unfortunately, rather than using best practices, this outbreak in Wuhan was covered up," he said, referring to doctors who were silenced while trying to sound alarm bells over the coronavirus. "It probably cost the global community two months to respond." Speaking at the conservative Heritage Foundation, O'Brien said that if teams from the WHO and CDC had earlier access on the ground in China, it would have "dramatically curtailed what happened in China and what's happening across the world." Massachusetts infections more than double Gov. Charlie Baker declared a state of emergency after state health officials said the number of presumptive positive cases of coronavirus in Massachusetts is now up to 92, more than doubling in one day. The state identified 51 new cases since Monday, Massachusetts Health Secretary Marylou Sudders said at a news conference with the governor. The vast majority, 70, are tied to a conference the biotech company Biogen held in Boston last month. Four are travel-related and 18 are under investigation. National Guard rolls out in New York City suburb The National Guard has been deployed to a New York suburb after Gov. Andrew Cuomo ordered schools, houses of worship and other large gathering places in a portion of New Rochelle to temporarily close. Cuomo announced a plan Tuesday to enforce a "containment area" of a 1-mile radius around the Young Israel synagogue at the center of the cluster, which includes part of the city of New Rochelle and stretches into the town of Eastchester, both of which are about 20 miles north of New York City in Westchester County. Any large gathering places within that containment area will be required to shut down through March 25, Cuomo said. Westchester remains at the epicenter of New York state's coronavirus outbreak, with more than 100 confirmed cases. The National Guard will help residents under precautionary quarantine and help disinfect public areas, Cuomo said. Italy's death toll surges, now second only to China's Italy remained in a nationwide lockdown as confirmed coronavirus cases jumped past 12,000. The death toll stood at 827, second only to China, and the numbers were rapidly increasing. Premier Giuseppe Conte said he would consider requests from Lombardy, Italy's hardest-hit region, for a shutdown of nonessential businesses and public transportation on top of travel and social restrictions already in force. German chancellor says 70% of the country could contract the coronavirus German Chancellor Angela Merkel said 60%-70% of her country's population could eventually become infected with the coronavirus and that the key was to slow the spread as much as possible. The government has recommended the cancellation of all events with more than 1,000 people, among other measures. Merkel said the focus should be on making sure the "health system not be overwhelmed," according to a translation from Deutsche Welle. "So, it's not the case that it doesn't matter what we do," she said. "First and foremost, it's about gaining time." Contributing: William Cummings, Jorge L. Ortiz, Courtney Subramanian, Jessica Menton, Jazmin Goodwin, Morgan Hines, David Oliver, Joey Garrison, Jon Campbell, Joseph Spector and Steve Kiggins, USA TODAY; Kristen Jordan Shamus, Detroit Free Press; The Associated Press 
2020-03-11	SCOTTSDALE, Ariz. ??In MLB clubhouses, there is more fear about the plunging stock market than contracting coronavirus (COVID-19). There is more dark humor about getting two weeks off from spring training if diagnosed with it than anyone worrying about becoming gravely ill. There are more jokes about the comfort of hanging out in a clubhouse without reporters than any seriousness about wanting them kicked out forever. "I think with the access you guys are given and how good it is for the game the stories you guys write, whether good or bad," Diamondbacks closer Archie Bradley said, "it keeps people informed. And to limit that, I think, is not good for the game, or you guys in general." Yet with the coronavirus spreading, MLB joined the NBA, NHL and MLS closing clubhouses to reporters and visitors. Late Tuesday afternoon, the Big West Conference announced that its men's and women's basketball tournaments would be played without spectators in Southern California. Not long later, the Mid-American Conference announced a "restricted" crowd policy with only family members and event personnel. Hours earlier, the Ivy League had canceled its tournaments. Tuesday was the first time the MLB policy was implemented throughout spring training camps in Arizona and Florida, with players talking to reporters only outside the clubhouse and advised to stand at least 6 feet away. "It's a little weird," Bradley said. "Less crowded for sure. It's one of those weird things where some of us are just now growing up and realizing what's happening." Several players said they would support the baseball writers' efforts to return to the clubhouse once things settle down. They prefer the locker room be open, knowing the interaction helps promote the sport, permitting fans to get to know them through the media. "I'd say a vast majority of the stories involve nuance, emotion, personal relations," Reds first baseman Joey Votto said. "Even if they're incorrect, a perception of how someone reacted or how a player reacted can be told through facial expressions, getting to know that person and tone. I think that if you don't have that on a daily basis, you don't get to share those insights. "Frankly, most fans don't care about the balls and strikes and runs they care about the person. They want to feel like they're close to the performer in any sport. I think everyone in the media is the bridge that connects the athlete with the public, and without that close proximity, I don't personally think you get the human component." Phillies outfielder Bryce Harper told reporters, "You guys have a job to do. We have to understand you have to do a job. We need to talk to you. ??I think we're all in uncharted territory. We've never seen this. We've never done this. I think everybody is trying to do what is right." The biggest nuisance with MLB's new policy, the players will tell you, is that their children also are prohibited from clubhouses. The biggest concern? Their stock market investments are taking a massive tumble. Their biggest fear? Playing games in empty stadiums, or having games canceled. The players can handle strange, even joking among themselves that it felt nice being able to suit up for games without a reporter asking a question. They just don't want calamity. "I think as long as this this doesn't progress and start to get worse," Bradley said, "all of us are like, 'All right, this is going to blow over and we'll get back to doing things normally the way we do.' But I think there is a, you know, a little bit of fear that this could progress and become something bigger." Said Rockies outfielder David Dahl: "This is a real thing that's happening. I feel bad for people that have gotten the virus, for people who have passed away from it. It's something where you have to take caution. It definitely sucks." The baseball games will go on. Well, at least, for now. It already has turned the sports world upside down. The professional baseball leagues in Japan and South Korea have been postponed until at least April. The pro tennis tournament in Palm Springs, California, was canceled. The NCAA women's basketball tournament at Stanford and three Sharks' NHL games are in jeopardy after Santa Clara County announced a ban of all gatherings of at least 1,000 people for the rest of the month. "You start to get a sense of how it's affecting the world," Bradley said, "and you just think about other things. You think about your job and baseball, but you also think about money. Is the season going to get shut down? I know that's a crazy thought, but I read something they're talking about canceling the Olympics. It starts affecting everyday life, not just baseball, but the whole world. "You look at what's happening in the stock market. Look what's happening with the trade overseas. And people not being able to travel. It kind of starts to affect everything you do. I think the biggest thing is to keep it in perspective, try to keep it as lighthearted as possible. And not panic, not freak out." 
2020-03-10	TONY DOKOUPIL: The CDC says older adults and people with chronic medical conditions are most at risk for the coronavirus. We've got our Doctor Tara Narula here to explain what precautions to take if you or your loved ones are vulnerable. So we keep talking about people who are vulnerable. What does that mean in practice? What conditions are most susceptible to the virus? DR. TARA NARULA (CBS News Medical Contributor/Lenox Hill Hospital-Northwell Health): Right. So when the CDC call yesterday that they gave as a briefing, they mentioned these conditions--cardiovascular disease, including things like hypertension, diabetes, if you have chronic lung disease. But also if you're immunosuppressed, you have cancer, some-- you're on some medication that is weakening your immune system. These are some of the conditions that we're talking about. TONY DOKOUPIL: We're-- we're familiar with talking about things that affect the young and the old. And usually those populations are both vulnerable. MICHELLE MILLER: Mm-Hm. DR. TARA NARULA: Right. ANTHONY MASON: Yeah. TONY DOKOUPIL: We only have the old vulnerable-- ANTHONY MASON: Right. TONY DOKOUPIL: --but children apparently not. Why? DR. TARA NARULA: It's so interesting. So, you're right. You usually see a U-shaped curve. We're at the tips of your U. The kids and the elderly, you're most vulnerable. With COVID-19, we're really seeing kids being spared from severe disease and the elderly being affected. When we talk about ages, we're talking about individuals over sixty but with risk really increasing the older you get over eighty being at the highest risk. Why might this be? Well, when you look at the elderly, they tend to have weaker immune systems. ANTHONY MASON: Mm-Hm. DR. TARA NARULA: They also have more of these chronic health conditions. And what we think is that their immune system reaction to the virus may be kind of dysregulated, overwhelming. So they developed what we call cytokine storm, you release all these inflammatory mediators that then damage the lungs. When you look at the kids on the other hand, what's kind of reassuring for parents is at least in China, the seventy thousand cases they looked at, less than two percent or in those individuals under the age of nineteen. No children died in South Korea or no-- anybody under thirty, there were no deaths. And no deaths under the age of nine in China. Again, how does this happening? You know, kids may have, for some reason, the virus may not replicate as easily. They may have less mature receptors in the lungs, we call the ACE receptors where the virus latches on to. MICHELLE MILLER: Mm-Hm. TONY DOKOUPIL: Mm-Hm. DR. TARA NARULA: And another theory is that as kids are exposed to all these other coronaviruses, not COVID-19-- ANTHONY MASON: Yeah. MICHELLE MILLER: Right. TONY DOKOUPIL: Yeah, yeah. TONY DOKOUPIL: --maybe you're developing antibodies that are cross-reactive. ANTHONY MASON: Tara, are pregnant women more vulnerable in this? DR. TARA NARULA: Another thing that a lot of women want to know. So we don't have a lot of data on this. So it's a data-free area. What is the effect on pregnant women on the fetus, on the infant? What we know is that during pregnancy, your immune system sort of down regulates so that you don't reject the baby and also your physiology changes. And this can set you up for being more vulnerable to respiratory viruses. When you look at SARS and MERS, we did see some cases where there was pregnancy loss or miscarriage. So far in a limited case series in China, we've not seen transmission from mother to baby in the newborns that were looked at and no evidence of virus in the amniotic fluid or breast milk. MICHELLE MILLER: What about smoking and vaping? DR. TARA NARULA: Yes. MICHELLE MILLER: How does that impact? DR. TARA NARULA: Well, if there was ever a reason to quit, here's another one. MICHELLE MILLER: Alrighty. ANTHONY MASON: Yeah. DR. TARA NARULA: Anything that's going to compromise your lungs is going to increase your risk of insusceptible, you know, that smoking decreases your ability really fight infection. And one other interesting thing is that in China, we see more men dying from COVID-19 than women. And one of the theories is that fifty percent of men in China smoke, less than two percent of women smoke. MICHELLE MILLER: Wow. DR. TARA NARULA: This smoking have a big impact. ANTHONY MASON: That-- that fact stunned-- MICHELLE MILLER: Yeah, it does. DR. TARA NARULA: Yes. ANTHONY MASON: --I have to say, yeah. DR. TARA NARULA: Yes. So-- TONY DOKOUPIL: So the CDC is now actively saying, avoid cruises if you're in this vulnerable population. Are there other precautions that you could say would be wise? DR. TARA NARULA: Right. So you saw Stephen Colbert, right? ANTHONY MASON: Yes, right. DR. TARA NARULA: Avoid-- avoid social gatherings. ANTHONY MASON: Crowds. DR. TARA NARULA: Yeah. So for a vulnerable populations, you really do want to try to stay home. Avoid situations where you're going to be in close contact with other people where there's a lack of real great ventilation, where you're going to be exposed to the droplets. And even non-essential long plane flights, you want to avoid. Stock up on important medications whether it's blood pressure medicine, diabetes meds, fever or pain meds that you might need, supplies. Avoid high touch surfaces, so handles, elevator buttons, anything where you could get exposed. And then this is really important, it's to make a plan with your caregiver. What's going to happen? Who is going to take care of me? What if my caregiver gets sick? TONY DOKOUPIL: Mm-Hm. DR. TARA NARULA: And then also, people don't like to discuss what they might want to happen in the event that they do decompensate. Do I want a breathing tube put in? TONY DOKOUPIL: Oh, yeah. DR. TARA NARULA: What is my end of life care look like? MICHELLE MILLER: Mm-Hm. ANTHONY MASON: Right. DR. TARA NARULA: And that-- these are hard discussions-- TONY DOKOUPIL: Yeah. DR. TARA NARULA: --but important discussions to have. MICHELLE MILLER: Oh, some tough decisions. Hopefully, people will begin to think about them-- TONY DOKOUPIL: Yeah. MICHELLE MILLER: --and talk about them. DR. TARA NARULA: Yes. MICHELLE MILLER: Thank you, Doctor Tara Narula. Well, the Democratic race for President could change drastically today. Six states are voting in primaries and caucuses with three hundred fifty-two delegates on the line including Washington, Idaho, North Dakota, Missouri, Michigan and Mississippi. Former Vice President Joe Biden and Senator Bernie Sanders have both been campaigning in Michigan which is the day's biggest prize. Sanders hopes to reclaim momentum after a disappointing Super Tuesday one week ago. And despite national concerns over the coronavirus, voting is already underway in some states. Both campaigns say they are taking precautions. ANTHONY MASON: Ahead, could anxieties over the coronavirus end Wall Street's record-breaking eleven-year bull run? Well, Jill Schlesinger is in our Toyota Greenroom with how you can protect your investments amid all this uncertainty. But first, it's eight-oh-nine, time to check your local weather. (LOCAL WEATHER BREAK) (ANNOUNCEMENTS) TONY DOKOUPIL: We have much more news ahead, including ways to cope with all the anxiety and stress you might be feeling because of the worsening coronavirus outbreak. And we'll talk with the authors of a new book that teaches young people about the roots of racism. Why they says it's important for children to learn about it. You're watching CBS THIS MORNING. (ANNOUNCEMENTS) END 
2020-03-10	ANTHONY MASON: Welcome back to CBS THIS MORNING. I am Anthony Mason with Tony Dokoupil. Gayle King is off, so CBS THIS MORNING: SATURDAY co-host Michelle Miller is with us. As anxiety about the coronavirus grows, President Trump drew criticism from some health experts for comparing the illness to the common flu. He tweeted yesterday, quote, "So last year, thirty-seven thousand Americans died from the common flu. At this moment, there are five hundred and forty-six confirmed cases of coronavirus with twenty-two deaths. Think about that." Our Doctor Jon LaPook is here to answer questions about the difference between the flu and the coronavirus. Jon, good morning. DR. JON LAPOOK (CBS News Chief Medical Correspondent): Good morning. ANTHONY MASON: Is it fair to compare the flu and the coronavirus? DR. JON LAPOOK: Well, there's no doubt that the flu is deadly. And how many times have I been there-- TONY DOKOUPIL: You've been right here, yeah. DR. JON LAPOOK: --with you? MICHELLE MILLER: Yes. ANTHONY MASON: Yes. DR. JON LAPOOK: Tens of millions of people get it every year. Tens of thousands of people die. Get the flu shot and do all the hygiene that we're talking about. This is on top of that. And we're talking about really different things. So here's the difference, the flu as bad as it is, as deadly as it is, comes spring, come rain or shine we know the season is going to start to go down and it's going to stop. There's a flu vaccine. There's treatment like Tamiflu. ANTHONY MASON: Yeah. DR. JON LAPOOK: With the coronavirus, it's a new novel coronavirus. So come warm weather, we don't know what's going to happen. It may die down, it may not. There's no vaccine. There's no treatment. And unlike the flu-- this is important, unlike the flu where from past seasons we may have a little bit of immunity left over, this is novel, it's new. Nobody has-- TONY DOKOUPIL: So the flu has been around. We know what it is. We've got some remedies. DR. JON LAPOOK: Yeah. TONY DOKOUPIL: The coronavirus is new, it's uncertain. DR. JON LAPOOK: It's uncertain. TONY DOKOUPIL: People are worried as a result. DR. JON LAPOOK: People hate and the stock market hates uncertainty. And people hate it. TONY DOKOUPIL: What do we-- what do we know about the death toll? It's-- it's not tens of thousands a year because it hasn't been around for a year, but where is it headed base on the mortality that we know? DR. JON LAPOOK: I think it's too early to tell that and I'll tell you why. We're seeing mortality rates that are going from very-- less than one percent in South Korea where they are testing a lot of people, all-- almost two hundred thousand to four percent, something like that in other areas. And I think a lot of it has to do with how extensive the testing is and where they are catching the people. If you catch the people, you're not doing a lot of testing and you catch them when they are coming and when they are sick. The mortality rate is going to be higher. If as appears to be happening in South Korea, you're testing hundreds of thousands of people and you're getting them when their symptoms are very, very low or maybe they don't even have symptoms, mortality rates going to be much lower, less than one percent in South Korea. MICHELLE MILLER: And for folks out there, I mean, someone coughs, someone sneezes, they are like coronavirus. So, how does a person know the difference between the flu and the symptoms of coronavirus? DR. JON LAPOOK: You know, they may not. They can overlap. So, you know, the flu that you have-- have you ever had the flu, Michelle? MICHELLE MILLER: Oh, yeah. DR. JON LAPOOK: I-- I had one time. MICHELLE MILLER: It's awful. DR. JON LAPOOK: Every muscle in my body ache. MICHELLE MILLER: Yeah. DR. JON LAPOOK: You have that muscle ache and you just-- you have high fever. But you can have some of the same symptoms. You can have a cough and you can certainly have fever, shortness of breath, you can have with both. So that's why these tests are so important. And we now are saying that we're being promised that millions of these are going to be here in the next few weeks. I think that's going to change things a lot. We're going to see-- and I want to immunize people about one thing about this new testing. ANTHONY MASON: Yeah. DR. JON LAPOOK: As we do more testing, you're going to see, you may likely see the numbers really dramatically rise in the United States. On the one hand, we don't want to see it widespread but it's very possible that that's what's going on. And when people see these higher numbers, then the mortality rate is going to drop, right, because you're going to have a lot of people who have minor symptoms and who-- TONY DOKOUPIL: So the drop in mortality rate might be reassuring. Don't be rattled by the higher numbers. DR. JON LAPOOK: Don't be rattled by the higher numbers. TONY DOKOUPIL: Yeah. ANTHONY MASON: Yeah. MICHELLE MILLER: Yeah. DR. JON LAPOOK: Which really I want to immunize people-- ANTHONY MASON: If the issue is we haven't-- we just haven't tested them, the people at all. DR. JON LAPOOK: We-- we don't know. And I-- it's-- you know, it's like-- it's like flying blind right now. For me as a doctor, people come in. I got-- I've had so many phone calls in the last couple of days about this. We need to test them. MICHELLE MILLER: Yeah. TONY DOKOUPIL: All right. Doctor Jon LaPook, thank you very much. Much appreciated. Ahead, how the coronavirus could change spring break. The growing concerns that the outbreak may ruin the party for businesses that depend on tourists. There are a lot of those businesses out there. And if you have to go, you can keep watching us live. Download the CBS app and subscribe to CBS All Access. You can also subscribe to CBS THIS MORNING: News on the-- on the Go. That will be on your favorite podcast platform. And we will be right back on this channel. (ANNOUNCEMENTS) END 
2020-03-09	JUAN WILLIAMS, FOX NEWS CHANNEL HOST: No. Well, let me just say that clearly, we knew about it way before that, Jesse, and we didn't take the action, because -- (CROSSTALK) JESSE WATTERS, FOX NEWS CHANNEL HOST: No, America was the most prepared and remains the best prepared, Juan. (CROSSTALK) WILLIAMS: No, I think that the president sees it as a political risk for him. GREG GUTFELD, FOX NEWS CHANNEL HOST: Set your DVRs, never miss an episode of THE FIVE. "SPECIAL REPORT", up next. Hello, Bret. BRET BAIER, FOX NEWS CHANNEL ANCHOR: Hello, Greg, from Dearborn, Michigan. GUTFELD: Thank you. BAIER: Good evening. I'm Bret Baier. "BREAKING TONIGHT", we're coming to you live from Dearborn. We're in 30 minutes, Martha MacCallum and I will host a Fox News town hall with Democratic presidential candidate Senator Bernie Sanders. Momentarily, however, we will take you to the White House briefing room, where President Trump will be talking about the coronavirus that just put the presidential seal there. Michigan, obviously, is one of six states holding primary season contest tomorrow, but much of the nation's attention tonight throughout the day really has been on New York City and Wall Street, where fears over the virus and a major drop in oil prices lead to a historic stoppage of trading on the New York Stock Exchange. Not just the wealthy, obviously, but everyday Americans with stocks and 401(k)s or pension plans are facing sometimes serious financial hits. The Dow ending the day, 2,014 points down. The S&P 500, hemorrhaging 226. The NASDAQ plummeting 625 today. We have "FOX TEAM COVERAGE". John Roberts is in the briefing room, awaiting President Trump's appearance. But we'll begin with Deirdre Bolton of Fox Business and she joins us from New York on a tough day there. Good evening, Deirdre. DEIRDRE BOLTON, FOX BUSINESS NETWORK ANCHOR: Good evening, Bret. Within the first five minutes of trade, markets fell so far so fast. There was that 15-minute trading halt now. Shortly thereafter, trading resumed. As you mentioned, the Dow fell more than 2,000 points, the worst one-day point drop ever. At the close of the session, the Dow, S&P 500, and the NASDAQ, all closed down more than seven percent. The three main indices logged their largest decline since 2008. All 11 sectors in the S&P 500 closed lower. Energy stocks were the worst weakest. Oil, down as much as 30 percent, as Russia and Saudi Arabia, kicked off an oil price war, talks between OPEC led by Saudi Arabia on one side. Russia on the other collapsed on Friday. Both sides refusing to cut supply in an effort to gain market share at the other's expense. Most energy analysts agree we are in an unprecedented situation in the energy markets. In fact, you have to go back to the start of the first Gulf War in 1991 to see prices this low. Both crude and Brent close around $ 30 a barrel. Low energy prices we can say can be helpful to the economy, but there is a tipping point where prices are too low and then can hurt. So, analysis shows that levels around $ 40 a barrel and after that below that American companies get hurt. So, after energy bank stocks fell the most, they loan money to those companies that produce shale oil such as Halliburton, Pioneer Natural, Diamondback Energy. The shale business takes a lot of infrastructure, it takes a lot of Investments. Financial institutions that have loaned to them will take a big hit if those shale companies don't pay the money that they borrowed back on time. Citigroup, Bank of America, J.P. Morgan Chase, all fell more than 10 percent. One trader told me, the coronavirus headlines had investors on edge for weeks. They show that the markets were fragile and could crack. And the hits that came from that energy market disruption caused the panic selling today. Bret, back to you. BAIER: Deirdre, thank you. President Trump and his administration continue to emphasize the coronavirus risk is low for the average American. But as the economic damage continues and the death toll inches up, the calls intensify for a greater government response. Chief White House correspondent John Roberts has that part of the story tonight inside the White House briefing room, waiting for the president. Good evening, John. JOHN ROBERTS, FOX NEWS CHIEF WHITE HOUSE CORRESPONDENT: Good evening to you, Bret. We are expecting the president was going to come out at any minute now. But we just heard over the overhead P.A. system that the briefing has now been pushed back to 6:30. But we are still expecting the president to lead it. This would be the president's first in-person comments in the past 48 hours on the coronavirus. Certainly, he has been very prolific on Twitter today, talking not just about the virus, but what's going on with the economy as well. (BEGIN VIDEOTAPE) ROBERTS: As concerned is the White House is about the medical implications of coronavirus, it is also focused on the economic impact. In the White House driveway today, the health secretary putting on his financial hat. ALEX AZAR, UNITED STATES SECRETARY OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES: The fundamentals in this economy are unbelievable, whether its employment, or wage growth, or productivity, or international trade deals. ROBERTS: President Trump looking at the bright side of the crash in oil prices, tweeting, good for the consumer, gasoline prices coming down. The president blame the argument between Russia and Saudi Arabia over oil flow for today's market drop. Democrats blame the president. REP. NANCY PELOSI, (D-CA): What we know about the Dow is that they want certainty. They would have confidence that there is a plan. And I think that what is happening there is a reflection of the lack of confidence. ROBERTS: The White House considering a number of measures to help address the economic impact, including deferred taxes for the hardest eight industries and an expansion of paid leave. In a joint statement, Democratic leaders Nancy Pelosi and Chuck Schumer, demanding everything from paid sick leave, to food security, to free coronavirus testing. Accusing the president of manufacturing, "needless chaos". The president and the administration are taking sustained fire for mixed messaging. The president this morning seeking to put coronavirus into perspective, tweeting, "So, last year, 37,000 Americans died from the common flu. It averages between 27,000 and 70,000 per year. Nothing is shut down, life and the economy go on. At this moment, there are 546 confirmed cases of coronavirus with 22 deaths. Think about that." Not long after, he's health secretary doing anything but playing down the threat. AZAR: Our biggest challenge right now is to ensure that we contain further spread into the United States. And make no mistake, this is a very serious health problem. Nobody is trying to minimize that. ROBERTS: Today, Republican Congressman Matt Gaetz of Florida and Doug Collins of Georgia became the latest members of Congress who attended the recent CPAC conference to self-quarantine. They joined Texas Senator Ted Cruz and Arizona Congressman Paul Gosar, all of whom had contact with a man from New Jersey, who has been hospitalized with coronavirus. But both Collins and Gaetz had been in proximity to President Trump in recent days. Collins, greeting the president in Atlanta on Friday for a tour of the CDC. Gaetz, today flying with the president aboard Air Force One. (END VIDEOTAPE) ROBERTS: It wasn't until Congressman Gaetz was actually aboard Air Force One that he discovered that he had been in proximity to that individual at the conference. That's when Gaetz, sat by himself in an unoccupied section of the aircraft. We'll hear from the president in just a little while this evening, on Wednesday, he plans to have Wall Street executives over here to the White House to see if he can talk them off the ledge and stop the bleeding in the markets. Bret. BAIER: John Roberts live in the White House briefing room. John, thank you. There are now more than 550 confirmed coronavirus cases in the U.S., encompassing at least 36 states and the District of Columbia. The death toll now stands at 26. This outbreak has been particularly hard on the cruise ship industry and obviously on passengers who found themselves in the wrong place at the wrong time. Correspondent Jonathan Serrie, reports tonight from Atlanta. (BEGIN VIDEOTAPE) JONATHAN SERRIE, FOX NEWS CORRESPONDENT: The Grand Princess arrived this afternoon at the Port of Oakland under strict federal quarantine protocols after, at least, 21 onboard tested positive for coronavirus. AZAR: They're going to be offloaded in a way that protects first and foremost the community. And secondly, protects those individuals. SERRIE: Two other cruise ships, the Regal Princess and Carnival Panorama returned to ports in Florida and California after tests came back negative. The State Department is warning Americans to avoid cruises because of the possibility of being quarantined in a foreign country. DR. ANTHONY FAUCI, DIRECTOR, NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF ALLERGY AND INFECTIOUS DISEASES: And if you are an individual who has an underlying condition, particularly an elderly person with down the line condition, right now, not wait, you should start to distance yourself from the risk. Crowds getting on a plane, on a long plane trip, and above all, don't get on a cruise ship. SERRIE: COVID-19 has claimed, at least, 26 lives in the U.S. Most of the fatalities connected to a nursing home near Seattle. New York State reports more than 140 people have become infected, including the executive director of the Port Authority. GOV. ANDREW CUOMO (D-NY): Rick Cotton does have -- has tested positive for the coronavirus. So, he is going to be on a quarantine, he'll be working at home. SERRIE: Washington, D.C.'s mayor announced the rector of Christchurch Georgetown tested positive for coronavirus. MURIEL BOWSER, MAYOR OF WASHINGTON, D.C.: D.C. health has been reaching out to known contacts to begin the process of self-quarantine. SERRIE: A U.S. Marine is undergoing treatment at Fort Belvoir after returning to Quantico, Virginia from official business overseas. And the army is restricting soldiers from traveling to or from South Korea and Italy. Italy has now surpassed South Korea as the country with the most coronavirus cases outside China. And is now restricting movement within the entire country except for work, health, or emergencies. TEDROS ADHANOM GHEBREYESUS, DIRECTOR-GENERAL, WORLD HEALTH ORGANIZATION: Now that the virus has a foothold in so many countries, the threat of a pandemic has become very real. (END VIDEOTAPE) SERRIE: And today, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention warn that many people here in the U.S. are likely to become infected over the course of this year and the next. And while the majority of those cases are expected to be mild, CDC officials say, it's important to look out for the elderly and those with underlying health conditions who are most at risk. And Bret, some breaking news to tell you about, organizers of the St. Patrick's Day event in Boston, say it has been canceled amid concerns of the coronavirus outbreak. Bret. BAIER: Yes, that's serious. I bet we'll hear more of that. Jonathan, thank you. As mentioned, we are here in Dearborn, Michigan for tonight's Fox News town hall with Democratic presidential candidate Senator Bernie Sanders. It begins at the bottom of the hour. Our meeting comes just hours ahead of voting in six states, as Democrats seek a nominee to go up against President Trump this fall. Correspondent Peter Doocy joins us here in Dearborn to tell us how the two rivals are getting ready. (BEGIN VIDEOTAPE) PETER DOOCY, FOX NEWS GENERAL ASSIGNMENT REPORTER: There's been a late addition to the Bernie Sanders' platform. SEN. BERNIE SANDERS (D-VT), PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATE: And Michigan is the most important state coming up on Tuesday. DOOCY: Now, he's no longer just promising free college for all or Medicare-for-all, but also, free coronavirus vaccines for all. SANDERS: Elected president, everybody in this country will get that vaccine absolutely free. DOOCY: Joe Biden is arguing promises like that would take too long to come together. JOE BIDEN (D), PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATE: Now, Senator Sanders is a good man. He's Medicare-for-all push would be a long and expensive slog if we can get done at all. DOOCY: The democratic front runner has different problems with Donald Trump's response to the coronavirus. BIDEN: I wish he would just be quiet. I really mean it. That's an awful thing to say about a president was he'd be quiet. Just let the experts speak and acknowledge whatever they suggest to him is what we should be doing. DOOCY: Former rivals continue lining up to back Biden to try to help him stop Sanders. Even the one who once said this -- SEN. CORY BOOKER (D-NJ): You're dipping into Kool-Aid and you don't even know the flavor. DOOCY: Is trying to help get the former V.P. elected. BOOKER: We have the potential to have a Joe Biden, who is truly the state's person in our party, who is truly the one that's calling us to stand together, not to fall apart. DOOCY: Kamala Harris had problems with Biden's past votes against busing. SEN. KAMALA HARRIS (D-CA): And that little girl was me. DOOCY: But now, she's on board. HARRIS: I believe in John. REP. ALEXANDRIA OCASIO-CORTEZ (D-NY): Bernie Sanders. DOOCY: But Sanders has a surrogate who generates as much if not more excitement than all the establishment candidates behind Biden put together. And more than 10,000 turned out to see her last night in Ann Arbor, Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez. OCASIO-CORTEZ: Are we ready to nominate and be on the road to nominate Bernie Sanders for President this Tuesday? (END VIDEOTAPE) DOOCY: Bernie Sanders is hoping to win his second Michigan primary in a row. He upset Hillary Clinton here in 2016. And now, in 2020, he is hoping to use this state's delegates to keep a Biden nomination from becoming inevitable. Bret. BAIER: All right, Peter, thank you. There are new problems tonight for Joe Biden involving a family member. It is not his son, Hunter. A published report reveals allegations of possible fraud involving James Biden, the candidate's younger brother. POLITICO reporting, James Biden's business with medical companies has led to allegations he potentially engaged in fraud and traded on his brother's name. He is facing a lawsuit from medical companies in Tennessee federal court. Biden and the other defendants deny any wrongdoing. Also tonight, Montana Democrat Governor Steve Bullock, who was a presidential contender will try to unseat first-term Republican Senator Steve Daines in November. Bullock's decision to run isn't a dropped about-face, made at the last minute for the two-term governor. Bullock ended his longshot bid for president in December and had repeatedly insisted he had no interest in running for the U.S. Senate. Today is the final day for candidates to register in Montana. Overseas now, two U.S. service members were killed by enemy forces while advising and accompanying Iraqi security forces yesterday. A senior U.S. defense official telling Fox News, the two were Marine Raiders, part of the special operations force still fighting ISIS in Iraq. Pentagon, saying they were on a mission to eliminate a stronghold for the Islamic State group in a mountainous area of north-central Iraq. They are the first U.S. troops killed in Iraq this year. The political situation in Afghanistan is in chaos tonight. The country's rival leaders were both sworn in as president today in competing ceremonies. This comes just one day before the peace talks with the Taliban were to begin. Correspondent Benjamin Hall tells us where things stand right now. (BEGIN VIDEOTAPE) BENJAMIN HALL, FOX NEWS FOREIGN AFFAIRS CORRESPONDENT: President Ashraf Ghani was defiant today as a rocket attack interrupted his inauguration. As people fled in panic, he barely flinched. This is not a shield. It's just cloths. The head of the country is ready to sacrifice for Afghanistan. But the attack which was claimed by ISIS with the least of his worries. In a neighboring palace, his rival, Abdullah Abdullah was also holding an inauguration. Claiming he had won last September's elections, which were marred by irregularities. ABDULLAH, ABDULLAH, AFGHAN SELF APPOINTED PRESIDENT (through translator): The priority of our government is to establish a political consensus and appointed delegation to negotiate with the Taliban. HALL: Just a week ago, the two was side by side as the U.S. peace deal was announced. But with just one day to go until talks with the Taliban are scheduled to start, the Afghan government remains deeply divided. Even the Taliban has urged them to put aside their differences. Their spokesman saying, "Instead of swearing-in, we want them to focus on intra-Afghan talks. We call upon them to leave the internal disagreements, stop the swearing, in and work for peace." There are other problems too. The Taliban have launched dozens of attacks since signing the deal. While many of the fine appoints are still being disputed. President Ghani has also refused to release 5,000 Taliban prisoners as agreed by the U.S. (END VIDEOTAPE) HALL: Despite these concerns, however, American troops are already leaving Afghanistan. The spokesman for U.S. forces in that country saying just today, that the drawdown to 8,600 troops over the next 135 days as agreed had begun. But also that the military maintain the means to achieve any objectives that were necessary. Bret. BAIER: Benjamin Hall in London. Benjamin, thank you. Up next the panel on what could be a maker break Tuesday in the Democratic presidential race, and what to expect from tonight's Bernie Sanders' town hall. First, "BEYOND OUR BORDERS" tonight, North Korea fire three short-range projectiles off its east coast today. That's according to South Korea's military. The action comes just two days after the North threatened to take what he called momentous action to protest outside condemnation over its earlier live-fire exercises. The trial of three Russians and a Ukrainian charge with the involvement of the downing of Malaysia Airlines flight began today, with a Dutch prosecutor reading aloud the names of all 298 people killed in the attack. None of the suspects was present and only one has appointed lawyers to represent him. That attack happening in 2014. Rallies and celebrations were held around the world on this International Women's Day. There were tensions at some gatherings, including one in Istanbul. Turkish riot police fired tear gas to disperse thousands of demonstrators who tried to defy a ban and march along the city's main pedestrian street. Just some of the other stories "BEYOND OUR BORDERS" tonight. We'll be right back to Dearborn, Michigan. ANNOUNCER: This program is brought to you Otezla. Learn more at Otezla.com. (COMMERCIAL BREAK) (BEGIN VIDEO CLIP) SANDERS: Joe Biden voted for the war in Iraq. Joe voted for disastrous trade agreements. My point here is to ask you to think that in a general election, which candidate can generate the enthusiasm and the excitement, and the voter turnout we need. BIDEN: Senator Sanders is a good man. He's Medicare-for-all push would be a long and expensive slog if we can get done at all. And the patients at Cherry Hill, they can't afford to wait for a revolution. They're looking for results. (END VIDEO CLIP) BAIER: Joe Biden and Bernie Sanders ahead of a big day tomorrow. The March 10th States. If you look at a Michigan the biggest prize, 125 pledged delegates. Washington, obviously at 89. You see the rest there. Here in Michigan, the RCP -- the Real Clear Politics average of polls has Joe Biden up big. The latest polls, even out today. Monmouth, really matches the RCP number, 55-32 or roughly about that, just one caveat. Last cycle, Bernie Sanders was down about 20 plus to Hillary Clinton. He ended up winning Michigan by 1.5. So, let's bring in our panel, Fox News senior political analyst Brit Hume, and former Tennessee congressman Harold Ford Jr., currently chairman of R.X. Saver. Brit, your thoughts as we head into this town hall tonight. We should point out, we're going to stream and also carry the president's remarks in Fox Business. We're going to keep our timeframe with the town hall and give you updates throughout. But before we hear from Senator Sanders, your thoughts. BRIT HUME, FOX NEWS SENIOR POLITICAL ANALYST: Well, I would say, Bret, that the -- that the polls are correct. And, of course, you've just pointed out one reason why we need to be skeptical. This could be a bad night for Bernie Sanders, and Michigan is the big prize of the three. And what he has to worry about it seems to me now is having happened to him kind of the same thing that happened back in 2004, you know, when Howard Dean was the front runner coming into -- it was Iowa that year. And, you know, trailing was John Kerry. And Kerry won the Iowa caucuses and never looked back. And, you know, I don't think there's any way to knock Bernie Sanders out of the race as long as he wants to continue because his bank of small donations will keep him going as long as he wants to go. But he could get into a situation where he simply is losing every week, or the delegate hall against him is piling up, and he's unable to stop it. So, it would be greatly helpful to him if he does well tomorrow night, even though the polling suggests he might have a rough night. BAIER: You know, Harold, there is this sense that he's really making a stand here in Michigan, doing a lot of events. He's getting somebody blows as far as taking some negative attacks on Joe Biden. HAROLD FORD J.R., FORMER REPRESENTATIVE, TENNESSEE: You know, Senator Sanders, routinely points out differentiation between his votes on big issues and Vice President Biden, he talks about the war and trade. But I think an issue that resonates with voters there in Michigan is the auto rescue fund, which he voted against, being senator Sanders voted against, and that now, he may have a good reason for having voted against it. But he holds -- Senator Sanders holds such grudges and grievances against people who vote against things he voted for over the years. It's interesting to see how he reconciles it. I agree with what Brit just said, but I would add one thing. The difference between what Daines and Kerry you saw on '04, you see Biden coming into Michigan with a lot of momentum. I know, Brit when disregard that, but I think as you get closer to this, and even if the outcome turns out to be what the polls suggest, I do agree it will be hard to get Sanders out. But I think the Democratic Party is now positioning itself around a candidate who has his own form of capitalism to go up against the incumbent, being President Trump's form of capitalism. And when you think about today, the news in Afghanistan, which you played Bret, you think about obviously the coronavirus, and the kind of leadership, I think, the country is looking for, you contrast those two clips you show one of Joe Biden, one of Bernie Sanders. BAIER: Yes. FORD: And you can see why Democrats are beginning to coalesce around Vice President Biden. BAIER: You know, Brit, speaking of the coronavirus, obviously a big topic with the markets dipping 2,000 points. We'll be asking about it tonight. It's on the minds of Michigan voters as well. Where are we at this point as far as how this country is dealing with it, how the leadership is dealing with it? BIDEN: Well, I'm kind of a microcosm of the whole thing, Bret is the fact that a great many -- you know, some of the good news is that a great many people who contract the coronavirus will have no symptoms. But that's also part of the bad news, because they may be carrying the disease, and they don't know it, and the people around them don't know it. So, it gives you an example of the uncertainty that prevails over this whole thing. And that I think is what's driving people's concerns about it, and was -- and is in part, what's driving this shocking downturn, really in the stock market. President's team, it seems to me that those surround him, vice president and the -- and Anthony Fauci and the others who've been -- who've been dominating the briefings, it seems to me, you've done a pretty good job. I haven't heard anything anywhere else that I haven't, you know, in warning about what to do, and so on, that I haven't heard from them. The president has, you know, with his characteristic imprecision, it says some things that people are mocking him for. BAIER: Yes. HUME: But I don't think that's his greatest worry. His greatest worry is that if the stock market downturn and the decline in business activity that may occur because of this. BAIER: Yes. HUME: Turns the economy south, that's a huge problem for him for reelection. BAIER: Thank you, gentlemen. And thank you for inviting us into your home tonight. That's it for the SPECIAL REPORT. Fair, balanced, and unafraid. Our town hall with Bernie Sanders continues after a short break. (COMMERCIAL BREAK) END 
2020-03-09	Disinfectant room sprayers. Commercial cleaning companies. Online learning programs. Rehydration beverages. INSIDE 'In God's hands' Catholics across the USA adjust their worship practices. 2A Sleepless in Seattle Businesses feeling the pinch. 1B While the spread of the coronavirus continues to unnerve Americans, some companies are experiencing a boom in business ??even if there's no guarantee their products will stop the spread of the virus. School leaders and parents have been particularly eager clients, especially for cleaning services and products. One Ohio school district recently spent $16,000 on room-cleaning machines. A Florida district spent $45,000 on disinfectants. Some Wisconsin districts have inquired about locally made machines that blast an aerosol fog to decontaminate rooms ??priced at $90,000 to $110,000 per unit. Given the concern over students' health, there has been little to dissuade such actions. The federal Centers for Disease Control and Prevention has issued only basic guidance to schools and day care facilities about the importance of washing hands, routinely cleaning surfaces, talking with local health departments and shutting down if they have a confirmed infection. Education Secretary Betsy DeVos was pressed by an Oregon lawmaker in a hearing Thursday about why the Education Department couldn't better advise schools when to shut down and how, exactly, the facilities should be cleaned. "We've had in the last five days a sixfold increase in cases," said Sen. Jeff Merkley, D-Ore. If the rapid pace of infections continues, he added, "schools are going to be affected, and they're all going to be asking the same questions, and you're in a position to help make sure they understand the answers." DeVos said her department is passing along information from the CDC. Schools seek a deep clean In a rapidly evolving landscape, anxious school leaders and parents have made all sorts of reflexive purchases. Amazon was sold out of hand sanitizer as of last week. Electrolyte beverage company SOS ??which recently targeted advertising to parent-focused websites about flu- and virus-induced dehydration ??has seen sales increase 23% in the past week, a spokeswoman said. Companies specializing in cleaning services or products that disinfect surfaces have become particularly visible ??despite the fact that the CDC believes COVID-19 is more readily spread person-to-person via respiratory droplets. Stratus Building Solutions, a commercial cleaning company with locations nationwide, said it has seen a spike in inquiries from schools in the Seattle area and in the Carolinas. North Carolina confirmed its first coronavirus case last week. A spokeswoman for Stratus said most of the new inquiries and clients are businesses, gyms and offices seeking deep-cleaning and disinfecting services. She said cleaning fees can range from $500 to $1,500 and up, depending on the size of the facility. The marketing for some products includes hard-to-verify claims. One manufacturer advertised its disinfectant in a news release as "a silver bullet against human coronavirus, common flu and other germs." The company said its PURE Hard Surface product is "powered by patented silver ion-citric acid molecules." The president of Altapure, a company in suburban Milwaukee that makes machines that spray a disinfecting fog into rooms, said facilities are right to consider paying six figures for his product. "I'm surprised school systems haven't taken greater steps to provide a safe place of employment, especially when dealing with germs and bugs that could kill you," said Carl L. Ricciardi, president of the company. Ricciardi said Altapure received inquiries from a school district, ambulance company and a hospital last week ??and that was just over the lunch hour. The company sells primarily to hospitals, he said. Experts have been reluctant to weigh in on the effectiveness of certain products. Lawrence Muscarella, president of LFM Healthcare Solutions, an independent health care safety company, said customers should ask manufacturers if their products have been proven to kill COVID-19, the new strain of the virus. "You'd want a label claim from the manufacturer that says 'Kills COVID-19,'" Muscarella said. "If it just says 'kills coronavirus,' ask if that includes COVID-19." In addition, Muscarella echoed the CDC, stressing that people should follow the cleaning product's directions for use. The agency has linked to a list of cleaning products approved by the Environmental Protection Agency for use against COVID-19. Jonah Berger, a marketing professor at the University of Pennsylvania and author of the 2013 book "Contagious: Why Things Catch On," said people probably are purchasing a lot of unnecessary items. "Fear and anxiety cause us to take actions, like sharing news and buying products, even if those actions aren't always useful," Berger said. "What's tough in this case is that there's a lot of political pressure on the CDC to either say or not say certain things. I wish it was all just based on science, but it's not." Taking the classroom online With millions of schoolchildren around the world holed up at home because of the outbreak and an increasing number of schools closed in the U.S., online education companies have also received a surge of new inquiries. A spokesperson for University of the People, an online nonprofit university, said the company has seen a 200% increase in applicants from China compared with the previous term and thousands more website visitors from Japan, South Korea and Italy since the coronavirus outbreak was first reported. Online education behemoth K12 ??which powers the platform used by many of the country's online charter schools ??has offered free help to school districts that need to move their instruction online because of coronavirus-related shutdowns. As of this week, K12 had received inquiries from school districts in Michigan and central California, said Scott Durand, senior vice president for learning solutions. Durand said their intent is not to start marketing to traditional schools "or to drive growth because of something awful." But he said K12 would be well-positioned to help districts move their instruction online for a few weeks or a month. "We're not interested in taking advantage of anything," he said. "It's an option. You don't have to take it, but we're here. "We are legitimately trying to do the right thing for students." Contributing: Jayne O'Donnell, USA TODAY; Max Londberg, Cincinnati Enquirer; Mark Johnson and Joe Taschler, Milwaukee Journal Sentinel Education coverage at USA TODAY is made possible in part by a grant from the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation. The Gates Foundation does not provide editorial input. 
2020-03-06	ANTHONY MASON: First on CBS THIS MORNING, the families of two Florida teenagers killed in a car wreck are now suing after they say their grief was made even worse by incompetence. Fifteen-year-old Samara Cooks and eighteen-year-old Deleigha Gibson were apparently misidentified after the crash near Pensacola last July. The mistake was not caught until just before a wake and not until after organs had been taken from the wrong body. Manuel Bojorquez is in Pensacola. Manuel, how did this happen? MANUEL BOJORQUEZ (CBS News National Correspondent): Well, the families say they simply are not sure, and that's why they have filed a lawsuit to try to get more answers. The Florida Highway Patrol, the county medical examiner's office and two funeral homes are listed in the suit after each family says they almost buried the wrong person. (Begin VT) RANADA COOKS (Samara Cooks' Mother): I'm not at peace. I'm not at peace. I'm not at peace. I feel like I haven't had a chance to mourn. MANUEL BOJORQUEZ: It's been nearly eight months since Renade Cooks lost her only daughter, fifteen-year-old Samara. The pain only compounded by what happened when she asked the funeral home to see her before the wake. RANADA COOKS: That's when I noticed that it was not Samara and it was a mix-up. I was thinking, well, maybe there's a chance that she's still, you know, alive. MANUEL BOJORQUEZ: Give you a little hope. RANADA COOKS: It gave me a little hope. It did. MANUEL BOJORQUEZ: The teen was instead eighteen-year-old Deleigha Gibson, a friend of Samara's who was killed in the same crash last July. Deleigha's parents, Tammy and Demetrius Gibson, claim the director at another funeral home tried to switch the bodies back without their knowing. TAMMY GIBSON (Deleigha Gibson's Mother): Tracy was like, I need to talk to you all, and then she called us into the office and told us that the bodies were switched. MANUEL BOJORQUEZ: What was that like for you? DEMETRIUS GIBSON (Deleigha Gibson's Father): Just heart-dropping. MANUEL BOJORQUEZ: In their lawsuits, the families allege Florida Highway Patrol officers incorrectly tagged the victims at the crash site, that Escambia County's former medical examiner did not enforce appropriate policies and procedures and that the medical examiner's office extracted several organs from the body of Samara Cooks, who was not an organ donor. Both families also claim the county medical examiner told them it was against policy to view the bodies. And it wasn't until preparations for their daughter's wakes were underway that the families discovered the mix-up. RANADA COOKS: I don't sleep. I think about what happened or I try to put the puzzles together. DEMETRIUS GIBSON: It's just like you don't have any closure. RANADA COOKS: Oh, no closure. DEMETRIUS GIBSON: And didn't get the joy of laying her to rest the way we really wanted to. DEMETRIUS GIBSON: Right. MANUEL BOJORQUEZ: In a statement to CBS News, the Florida Highway Patrol said in part, "due to the nature of this crash involving multiple ejections, positive identifications at the scene were not made." Now, these parents say they won't stop pushing for more answers. RANADA COOKS: I don't want that-- this to ever happen to any other parents. No one should-- no one should go through this. (End VT) MANUEL BOJORQUEZ: The Florida Highway Patrol said a further review of the case is ongoing to try to verify additional information. We reached out to the funeral homes but so far they have not commented, and the medical examiner's office told us, quote, "our sympathies and support remain with the families." Tony. TONY DOKOUPIL: All right. Manny, thank you very much. It seems like a lack of a verification process at the beginning-- ANTHONY MASON: Yeah. TONY DOKOUPIL: --is what got us into this situation. ANTHONY MASON: So deeply upsetting for those families. TONY DOKOUPIL: Oh, yeah. GAYLE KING: You can certainly see why they're not at peace. ANTHONY MASON: Yeah. GAYLE KING: You'd be haunted by something Ike that. TONY DOKOUPIL: Absolutely. All right. Manny, thank you very much. Vlad Duthiers is looking at the stories you'll be talking about today. Vlad, what have you got? VLADIMIR DUTHIERS: Hey, Tony. So, former President Bill Clinton is getting candid about his affair with Monica Lewinsky. Ahead, what he says in a new docuseries about the sex scandal that led to his impeachment. TONY DOKOUPIL: All right. Thank you, Vlad. We'll see in a few minutes. But first, it is seven forty-four, time to check your local weather. (LOCAL WEATHER BREAK) (ANNOUNCEMENTS) TONY DOKOUPIL: Joy it is. Keep sipping that immune booster at home, we've got a news booster here, Mister Vlad Duthiers. VLADIMIR DUTHIERS: Immune booster. Emergen B. GAYLE KING: You are a joy booster. TONY DOKOUPIL: Emergen B. VLADIMIR DUTHIERS: Emergen B. ANTHONY MASON: I like that. VLADIMIR DUTHIERS: Good to see you. Happy Friday everybody. Here are a few stories we think you'll be talking about today. Former President Bill Clinton is addressing the affair he had with Monica Lewinsky twenty-five years ago. The revelations are part of a new Hulu docuseries out today titled Hillary. In it, Mister Clinton acknowledges the relationship he had with Lewinsky was out of line. Take a listen. PRESIDENT BILL CLINTON (Hillary; Hulu): Everybody's life has pressures and disappointments and terrors, fears of whatever, things I did to manage my anxieties for years, I'm a different-- totally different person than I was. VLADIMIR DUTHIERS: He goes on to say it's not a defense for the affair. It's an explanation. ANTHONY MASON: Still no apology, though, is there in that documentary? VLADIMIR DUTHIERS: He says he feels terrible but no apology. GAYLE KING: But he said it was something about handling his anxiety? TONY DOKOUPIL: Yeah. GAYLE KING: I'm just, number one, I'm sorry to hear that. Because I-- I just think that kind of thing should have been reserved for your closest friends. And for me my heart goes out to Monica Lewinsky again-- TONY DOKOUPIL: Yeah. GAYLE KING: --I mean, she was twenty-one, twenty-two. She's now forty-something. She's smart. She's funny. She's kind. She's lovely, but she still has this baggage-- ANTHONY MASON: Yeah. GAYLE KING: --that is tied to her while everyone else has sort of tiptoed through the tulips-- ANTHONY MASON: Yeah. GAYLE KING: --she's still stuck with this. TONY DOKOUPIL: Yeah. GAYLE KING: And It just seems so unfair to me about her. ANTHONY MASON: And when I said no apology, I meant no apology to Monica Lewinsky. GAYLE KING: To Monica. TONY DOKOUPIL: Yeah. VLADIMIR DUTHIERS: Yes. TONY DOKOUPIL: And-- and not addressing the-- GAYLE KING: Yeah. TONY DOKOUPIL: --and not addressing the fundamental power imbalance-- VLADIMIR DUTHIERS: Right. TONY DOKOUPIL: I mean, the President of the United States and-- ANTHONY MASON: And a twenty-- twenty-one-year-old. GAYLE KING: Yeah. Intern. ANTHONY MASON: Yeah. VLADIMIR DUTHIERS: Regardless of anxiety or the stress that you feel because you hold that office-- GAYLE KING: Yes. VLADIMIR DUTHIERS: --a twenty-two-year-old intern-- GAYLE KING: Yes. VLADIMIR DUTHIERS: --and no apology. GAYLE KING: And once again, minimizes, marginalizes her. It was wrong on all parts but it just-- I hear that and my heart goes out to her. VLADIMIR DUTHIERS: Indeed. Indeed. All right. Now we have an update to a story we told you about yesterday. Remember this, guys, NASA's newest Mars rover officially has a name, and it is full of grit. Take a listen. MAN: Perseverance. VLADIMIR DUTHIERS: Perseverance prevailed as the winning name in a nationwide contest for students. Seventh-grader Alexander Mather came up with it, beating twenty-eight thousand other entries. He'll be invited to watch the spacecraft's launch this July. Perseverance is slated to land on the red planet next February. And did you read his essay? ANTHONY MASON: Yes. GAYLE KING: Yes. ANTHONY MASON: Really eloquent, I love it. GAYLE KING: Yeah. VLADIMIR DUTHIERS: Right. Because you hear Perseverance and you're like, okay. That makes sense. But when you read what he writes about it, Curiosity, Insight, Spirit, Opportunity, if you think about it all these names of past Mars rovers are qualities we possess. He goes on to say Perseverance is the quality that defines us as a race. GAYLE KING: I like that he's in eighth grade. VLADIMIR DUTHIERS: know. GAYLE KING: Wow. ANTHONY MASON: I don't have any essays in my class. VLADIMIR DUTHIERS: I can barely do it now. GAYLE KING: None that I'd want to share. VLADIMIR DUTHIERS: Exactly. All right. GAYLE KING: Good job. VLADIMIR DUTHIERS: Heartwarming story for you guys to end on your Friday. A little boy in Arkansas is making everybody's hearts melt after dressing up as his school security officer. That is kindergartner Easton Blocker. He wanted to look just like Officer Jeffrey Cross for dress as your favorite person day at school on Wednesday. So, Easton's mom made him his own very own yellow and black junior security shirt. There it is. Look at that. The five-year-old calls Officer Cross not only his hero but best friend. TONY DOKOUPIL: That's great. VLADIMIR DUTHIERS: Easton's mom says her son tells her almost every day Officer Cross, quote, "keeps us safe from the bad guys." How adorable. ANTHONY MASON: Yeah. It's really awesome. VLADIMIR DUTHIERS: His best friend. ANTHONY MASON: All right. Thanks, Vlad. GAYLE KING: I love that story. ANTHONY MASON: Coming up, stay with us. Our one-hour special on the Coronavirus outbreak is ahead. You're watching CBS THIS MORNING. (ANNOUNCEMENTS) (8:00 AM, EDT) GAYLE KING: It's Friday, March 6, 2020. Welcome back to CBS THIS MORNING. I'm Gayle King with Anthony Mason, and Tony Dokoupil. As the coronavirus spreads across the country and around the world, we are dedicating this hour to the deadly outbreak. Now, the goal of our special, we're calling it Coronavirus: The Race to Respond, is to provide critical information on how the virus is being tracked and treated. We'll answer your pressing questions and let you know how to protect yourself and your family. ANTHONY MASON: We have a team of reporters around the world. They'll share the latest on infection numbers, supply shortages, and the economic impact. TONY DOKOUPIL: We also have a panel of health experts who will be answering your questions. But first, a look at how we got here in a special Eye Opener @8. GAYLE KING: We've got breaking news from China where the coronavirus outbreak took a very frightening turn. ANTHONY MASON: Ramy Inocencio left Wuhan, the epicenter of this outbreak. RAMY INOCENCIO (Wuhan, China, January 23rd): We got out earlier to take a look, and an officer ordered, really yelled at us to leave. GAYLE KING: Two hundred and forty Americans have left the epicenter of China's coronavirus outbreak. CARTER EVANS (Moreno Valley, California, January 29th): A lot of people actually scared, mistakenly thinking that this flight was arriving full of sick people. DR. JON LAPOOK (January 31st): Remember, right now there's no vaccine in the near future, and there's no medication. DEBORA PATTA (Yokohama, Japan, February 16th): The situation on the Diamond Princess deteriorated. MAN (Yokohama, Japan, February 7th): Frankly, I have to tell you, now we're becoming quite afraid. PRESIDENT DONALD TRUMP (February 29th): Unfortunately, one person passed away overnight. ALEX AZAR (March 1st): We cannot make predictions as to how many cases, but we will have more. JONATHAN VIGLIOTTI (Kirkland, Washington, March 2nd): The possible outbreak of this virus is not happening in a major city, instead in this leafy suburb. DR. TARA NARULA (March 3rd): We are definitely going to see more cases. We have not been testing as they have in other parts of the world. GAYLE KING: I went to see Tara in the Greenroom. Do you have your stethoscope in your purse? Could you feel my forehead? VLADIMIR DUTHIERS (March 4th): Vietnam is out with an insanely catchy PSA to spread awareness about the coronavirus. GAYLE KING: Isn't that what's great about music, guys? Even when you don't know the words-- VLADIMIR DUTHIERS: Yes. GAYLE KING: --you hear the tune and it's catchy. ANTHONY MASON: And it makes this whole scary thing a little lighter to deal with. GAYLE KING: Welcome back to CBS this hour. This is a special hour for us, because we begin with what we know about the coronavirus. Coronaviruses attack the respiratory system, and this-- this coronavirus causes a disease called COVID-19. Now, most cases are mild and similar to the flu or a cold. The symptoms can include a fever, coughing, and shortness of breath. They can appear two days or even two weeks after you are exposed. ANTHONY MASON: In just over two months, more than ninety-eight thousand cases have been reported worldwide. The virus has killed more than thirty-three hundred people, but more than fifty-five thousand patients who had the virus have now recovered. The most severe cases have been in older people and patients with pre-existing medical conditions. Right now scientists believe the virus spreads between people in close contact. That's within about six feet of one another, public spaces are being sanitized in hopes of containing the virus. You can get it from an infected person's cough or sneeze or possibly by touching something with the virus on it, like a door handle and then touching your face. TONY DOKOUPIL: The coronavirus has spread to six continents in just three months. It was first detected in December in Wuhan, China, where it had previously only been discovered in animals but jumped to people. From there the virus spread quickly, infecting dozens and forcing the Chinese government to publicly declare an outbreak, and that outbreak soon stretched across all of mainland China and then spread to neighboring countries including Japan, Thailand and South Korea. Across the Pacific, on that very same day, it appeared in Washington State. That is the first known case in the United States. By February 5th, the virus was on board the Diamond Princess cruise ship docked at the time in Yokohama, Japan. Of the thirty-seven hundred passengers on board that ship, the virus infected seven hundred and six of them. Eventually American passengers were brought home to military bases here in the U.S., and the virus unfortunately hitched a ride with at least forty-six of them. Meanwhile, the virus landed in Iran. No clue as to how it got there. It also exploded in Italy, one hundred and twenty-four cases became eight hundred and eighty-eight cases. That is the largest outbreak to date outside of Asia. Germany, Britain, Croatia, France, and Spain have also reported cases, all out-- all throughout Europe, and then also in the Southern Hemisphere--Brazil, Nigeria, Ecuador, and South Africa, cases there. All told, eighty-nine countries worldwide are now reporting cases. And here in the United States, there are twenty-one states reporting at least one case of the coronavirus, and that leads us to today. ANTHONY MASON: One of those states is New York. Meg Oliver is in one of the nation's busiest transportation hubs, New York City's Penn Station. Meg, computer-- commuters there seem concerned? MEG OLIVER (CBS News Correspondent): Anthony, good morning. They tell me that they are definitely thinking about it, but as you can see, they're still going about their daily routine. I commute an hour a day by bus and subway, and I can tell you that I have seen more people using hand sanitizer. Here in Penn Station, more than six hundred and fifty thousand people pass through here every day. That's a lot of people in packed quarters as coronavirus fears spread. Cases doubled to twenty-two in New York State Thursday, and more than twenty-seven hundred people are being monitored. Now, nationwide there are at least two hundred and thirty confirmed cases of coronavirus, at least twelve deaths, eleven of those in Washington State. Now those fears are creating a rush on hand sanitizers, masks and cleaning supplies, sending sales up an estimated eight hundred and seventeen percent. Store shelves are empty across the country. We went to a supply company in New Jersey where employees are working overtime to keep up with demand. The company's owner says it's hard to restock because many of the products are made in China. Cargo ships aren't the only ones being kept from our shores. Now, for all of these people traveling by rail, Amtrak tells us they are cleaning more trains and stations and using more disinfectant. Gayle. GAYLE KING: All right. Meg, thank you very much. END 
2020-03-06	GAYLE KING: Our Asia correspondent Ramy Inocencio has reported on this outbreak from across the region. First in January from the virus epicenter in Wuhan, China, then from South Korea, that was in February, now in March he's in Japan. Ramy, Tokyo, let's talk about that first. It's usually a bustling city. What's it like now? RAMY INOCENCIO (CBS News Asia Correspondent): Gayle, good morning. I am at the famous Shibuya Crossing, think of it as Tokyo's version of Times Square, really one of the world's busiest intersections right behind me. Now up to two thousand five hundred people cross this thoroughfare every single time these lights change, and if you can believe it, this Friday night right here, this is actually relatively peaceful. Now, here in Japan, more than three hundred people have been confirmed to have coronavirus. Unfortunately, at least six people have now died. But the interesting thing is that only about nine hundred people each day actually get tested for the virus. Now, that really, truly pales in comparison to the country just west of us. That of course is South Korea where about ten thousand people, that's right, ten thousand people get tested every single day there. So far South Korea has more than six thousand confirmed cases. That's the most for any country outside of China, but the death rate, get this, is relatively lower at only about .7 percent. Now, that could be thanks to innovative measures like drive-thru testing. You heard that right, where medical workers decked out in protective clothing actually screen drivers who get to stay behind the wheels of their cars. Now, earlier I spoke to Sharon Crawford. She's an American teacher in Daegu where most of South Korea's infections are happening. She told me she actually feels safer there than the United States. What can the U.S. learn from what's happening where you are? SHARON CRAWFORD: I think transparency is a huge deal. I think having-- being-- being more prepared for potential outbreaks. I don't think America is prepared. RAMY INOCENCIO: And Japan now says that starting this Monday, they are going to be quarantining any traveler coming from China or South Korea for the fourteen days that they are still in this country. And, of course, looking ahead to this summer, don't forget Tokyo is host of the Summer Olympics. That starts in July, just about three and a half months from now. They say that preparations are still continuing, at least for now. Tony. TONY DOKOUPIL: For now it is. Ramy Inocencio in Tokyo for us. Ramy, thank you very much. Italy was the first European country to ban flights from China, but that did not stop the virus from ballooning out of control there. Charlie D'Agata is in Rome for us where the Italian government faces a massive challenge. CHARLIE D'AGATA (CBS News Foreign Correspondent): Okay. Right away, let's get to those numbers. Overnight, largest single day increase since this outbreak began. There are now nearly thirty-nine hundred cases, a hundred and forty-eight people have died. We're outside Italy's number one hospital for infectious diseases and you might just be able to make out those silver tents behind me. That's essentially a triage, and you see them outside hospitals, especially in the north, which has been hardest hit. And this is where people that may have the infection can be treated and looked after without spreading the virus to the rest of the hospital. Across the country, schools and universities have been closed. Italians have actually been urged to keep some distance from one another, which obviously doesn't come naturally in a country like this. This is also home to Europe's oldest population. The elderly have been advised to stay indoors for now. What you don't see out on the streets is a bunch of tourists. Across the globe, hotel cancellations are up to more than seventy percent and Italy is at the top of that table. Gayle. GAYLE KING: All right. Charlie D'Agata reporting from Rome. Thank you. Our Doctor Tara Narula is here with the lessons that the U.S. can learn from how other countries are responding to this outbreak. Tara, good morning. DR. TARA NARULA (CBS News Medical Contributor): Good morning. GAYLE KING: Sometimes I wonder do they know something we don't when we see they shut down their whole schools, their restaurants are empty. But let's talk about that drive-by program. What can we learn from that? What impact does it really have? DR. TARA NARULA: So this was really ingenious and so creative. And, you know, South Korea took a lesson from what happened with their experience with MERS back in 2015 where they really were not prepared. And so in-- in this you're able to basically drive up, have a sample taken within ten minutes, you're not exposing others to potential infection. ANTHONY MASON: Right. DR. TARA NARULA: And this gives you really a broad, big picture of the disease, and that's what you need. You're picking up a lot more cases. And what that allows you to do is get a more accurate case fatality rate, so you're screening more people. In addition, it allows you to really isolate where the infection is coming from so you can better control it. And it also allows you to get treatment to people faster. So that broad-based screening is a really big deal. GAYLE KING: Mm-Hm. ANTHONY MASON: We don't have enough test kits, according to Vice President Pence. How do we learn from other countries to better manage our response here? DR. TARA NARULA: Well, we need to start learning from other countries. GAYLE KING: Yeah. DR. TARA NARULA: And really speed is the critical thing. You know, we know that even in general medicine, the quicker you pick up on a disease, the quicker you can treat it and deal with it. And that is also the case with epidemics and pandemics. And so one of the other things that other countries have done a good job at is this concept of social distancing, so not congregating in mass areas where you could potentially get exposed. You know, in South Korea they have a marketing campaign out where they're saying, you know, hold on, let's not get social, you know? GAYLE KING: Mm-Hm. Mm-Hm. DR. TARA NARULA: So we have a lot to learn. ANTHONY MASON: All right. Tara, thanks. Coming up, Tara will be back with our panel of health experts. But first, it's eight-twelve, time to check your local weather. (LOCAL WEATHER BREAK) (ANNOUNCEMENTS) TONY DOKOUPIL: Ahead, the growing economic toll of the coronavirus. We go to the country's largest port to find out how a dramatic decline in cargo ship arrivals could affect the whole United States. And Jill Schlesinger will talk about recession concerns and what you should do. (ANNOUNCEMENTS) END 
2020-03-06	(8:30 AM, EDT) GAYLE KING: Welcome back to CBS THIS MORNING in our special hour, Coronavirus: The Race to Respond. So, our goal this morning is this, to inform you about what we know, where we're headed and how to protect yourself and your family. As the virus spreads, we are starting to hear firsthand accounts of people directly affected, including passengers who were quarantined on the Diamond Princess cruise ship. MAN #1: For me the virus felt like a common cold. My wife and I did Valentine's Day quarantined on the Diamond Princess together. I'm feeling fine. I had a high fever of a hundred and three plus. I've had a dry cough. If I wasn't contagious, I would have been back at work the next day. MAN #2: The coronavirus swept through the ship. I ended up testing positive relatively early on in the quarantines, and I was removed from the ship and-- and placed in a hospital in downtown Tokyo where I spent exactly three weeks. WOMAN: My experience was thankfully very mild. There's no reason to panic. It's just a sickness, and it will run its course. GAYLE KING: As the virus spreads here in the U.S., we brought together a panel of health experts to answer your questions. CBS News medical contributor, you know her well, Doctor Tara Narula is back with us. We're also joined by Michael Osterholm, director of the Center for Infectious Disease Research and Policy at the University of Minnesota. He knows a lot. And Doctor. Vin Gupta, he's a respiratory specialist and global health policy expert. Welcome, doctors. I want to start with you, Michael, can we just talk about the ship for a second? What do you think when you see that? MICHAEL OSTERHOLM (University of Minnesota Center for Infectious Disease Research and Policy Director): It is a cruel human experiment. GAYLE KING: Why? MICHAEL OSTERHOLM: We know that cruise ships facilitate transmission just by the air circulation in the inner cabins and the Prince-- the Diamond Princess was proof and pudding of that. And every cruise ship where we have this, where you keep people out to see, it's just a matter of time before many of them get ill. We've got to get them off the ship, get them on land. You can quarantine them there if you want to do that. But get them off the ship. GAYLE KING: Let's talk about the rest of us who aren't on ships. Because I'm wondering how scared you should be. I had always thought, many people think if you haven't been to Italy, China, South Korea, Italy or any of the infected countries and you haven't come in contact with any of those people, that you're-- you're pretty okay? MICHAEL OSTERHOLM: You know, right now we have pretty much a homogeneous viral reactor around the world. GAYLE KING: So you're not okay. MICHAEL OSTERHOLM: Meaning, but-- basically it's not. It's-- it's what we knew would happen. We predicted a month ago that we would suddenly see activity pick up in the United States. Today Seattle has as many cases as many of the other countries that we've mentioned they're having a problem. And we're going to have more Seattles around the country in just the next few days to weeks. So it's-- you have to now, just like seasonal influenza, you have to assume that this any-- is everywhere right now and anyone could potentially be infected that way. TONY DOKOUPIL: So, Tara, in terms of testing, should you only get tested if you have symptoms? Should everybody be tested? What's-- what's-- what are the parameters here? DR. TARA NARULA (CBS News Medical Contributor): Yeah. I think it's an interesting question. An certainly this-- there was a change this past week. And so basically that change said that anyone can get tested with the permission of their doctor. But what we're looking at are people who have the symptoms we know are associated with COVID-19, which is fever, shortness of breath, cough. In that if you have those symptoms, you should speak to your doctor and let the doctor really get an assessment of your clinical picture, what your travel history or exposure history might be, and then make a decision as to whether you should be tested. And at that point, you know, you will be either sent to a-- a hospital or, you know, at some point have it done in the clinic when those lab tests become available. ANTHONY MASON: Doctor Gupta, what-- what does the coronavirus actually do to your body? DR. VIN GUPTA (Respiratory Specialist and Global Health Policy Expert): There's any point of entry to the body, the sinuses, the oropharynx, your gastrointestinal tract. What it does is it invades the lining of those cavities. ANTHONY MASON: Mm-Hm. DR. VIN GUPTA: Causes local inflammation, and that's when you have symptoms. That's when you have shortness of breath, that's when you have cough, you have a runny nose, that-- those are-- and we are also seeing-- sometimes have GI symptoms as well. And so that is-- that is what's happening at the cellular level. ANTHONY MASON: How is it-- GAYLE KING: Do you always have symptoms? Do you always have symptoms? DR. VIN GUPTA: So one of the-- one of the interesting dynamics here is that we're seeing potentially asymptomatic transmission here where people are not actually demonstrating classic symptoms of cough, shortness of breath, fever-- TONY DOKOUPIL: Right. DR. VIN GUPTA: --but they're able to transmit the disease. I will say one thing on testing, one of the struggles we have and everything Tara said is absolutely correct, is we don't have-- we don't know these emergency tests that are coming, that are just cleared by the FDA, who knows how they function in the field. We have no idea. We don't-- ANTHONY MASON: We don't know if they're going to work, you're saying? DR. VIN GUPTA: Well, we hope they do. And I hope they're better than what was initially deployed four weeks ago to the states. But who's to say how they're going to actually function in the field. Are they going to be highly sensitive enough? We hope. That's the key piece, that's the unknown. ANTHONY MASON: Michael, are we prepared for this to spread across the country? MICHAEL OSTERHOLM: Well, we're prepared in the sense that we know it's coming, and we know that our health care facilities are going to have a major increase in load. We-- that's not an issue of debate. What is a concern is how prepared are we at the health care level in particular. ANTHONY MASON: Are we prepared? MICHAEL OSTERHOLM: We're not. We-- we have forty-five thousand beds in this country for intensive care medicine on any one given day they're filled. We have-- GAYLE KING: Can you-- can you get this-- and you get-- can you get this, not know you have it, and recover without being treated? MICHAEL OSTERHOLM: Yes. GAYLE KING: When? MICHAEL OSTERHOLM: In fact, the vast majority-- what we now know is is that in the first day of your infection where you're actually putting virus out, you may not even have symptoms as we just heard from Doctor Gupta. But then we know that over the next three to five days you have this res-- upper respiratory infection just like the flu type of picture. For some reason a large risk is there for people who are over age fifty-five, sixty, who have underlying health problems for the virus then getting into the lungs and then causing the additional problems. The vast majority of people will never experience that. They're just going to have those first couple of days of respiratory symptoms-- GAYLE KING: And they can get through it. MICHAEL OSTERHOLM: And they won't-- they won't even be treated and they'll be fine. TONY DOKOUPIL: But they might affect-- infect others. Doctor Gupta, we have a question from a viewer in Minnesota, Laurie (ph). Let's listen to that. LAURIE: I would like to know how long the virus lives on the various surfaces. TONY DOKOUPIL: That's a good question. Yeah. GAYLE KING: Good question, Laurie. DR. VIN GUPTA: It's such a-- it's such good question. GAYLE KING: Yeah. DR. VIN GUPTA: And I think what we-- what we know now, we have studies that show-- show it depends on ambient temperature, number one, and then on the surface. And so depending on the temperature, if it's, say, seventy degrees, you can see-- you can see fomites, basically the-- the virus particles live on surfaces like paper or steel up to-- up to anywhere from two hours to nine days, but if it's-- TONY DOKOUPIL: Wow. DR. VIN GUPTA: --ambient, if it's, say, sixty to seventy degrees longer life span, if it's hotter or colder, shorter live span. GAYLE KING: Michael, another viewer asked a question. Should we be limiting our air travel and gatherings of large numbers of people? South by Southwest is scheduled for next week. Right now it's still on, those kind of gatherings. MICHAEL OSTERHOLM: You know, today if you're someone who is over age fifty-five, you're someone who has underlying health problems, I would say don't put yourself at risk and being in those large gatherings. Younger age populations have seen very little serious illness. In fact, no one in Korea under age thirty has died. In China, only 2.1 percent of the cases were in people nineteen years of age or younger. So again, I think we have to start looking carefully. One of the areas that we're very concerned about is school closings. Mostly today the illness is going to be in adults. And if it's not in kids, should we be closing schools? Well, maybe, yes, if they're shedding the virus. If they're getting sick-- I mean, getting infected, not sick, and shedding the virus, we should. So, yeah, at this point distancing for people with underlying health problems is always a real I think important issue. ANTHONY MASON: Tara, we want to do a quick reality check on-- on some of the things that we've been hearing about. First, facemasks, which are getting a lot of attention. Do facemasks actually protect you from the virus? DR. TARA NARULA: No. Right? And we've been trying to make this point loud and clear. The surgeon general tried to make this point--stop buying facemasks. So the surgical masks that you see everybody walking around with are not able to prevent those viral particles from getting to you. They can go around. They're not, you know, fitted to your face appropriately. The N95 respirator masks that the health care professionals use are meant to keep out ninety-five percent of very small particles. TONY DOKOUPIL: We should save them for the health care workers. DR. TARA NARULA: We should, yes. TONY DOKOUPIL: Michael, is this more or less contagious than the traditional flu? MICHAEL OSTERHOLM: You know, this is just like influenza in every way possible. And I-- the way I describe it is like trying to control the wind, you know. We-- and anyone that would suggest trying to stop seasonal flu year by trying to control it somehow, it would be laughed out of the room. It's really about either vaccine for flu. This one we don't have a vaccine so we're pretty much at the whims of this kind of respiratory transmission. TONY DOKOUPIL: Doctor Gupta, we've been talking about people, but what about pets? I mean, this came from an animal-- ANTHONY MASON: Yeah. TONY DOKOUPIL: --can it go back to an animal-- GAYLE KING: A lot of people asking about pets, yeah. ANTHONY MASON: Yeah. TONY DOKOUPIL: Yeah. DR. VIN GUPTA: There's case of the-- of the dog in Hong Kong, I believe, that tested weakly positive for the virus. What I can say and the evidence that exists today suggests no. You cannot actually acquire coronavirus from a pet. I think we'll wait-- it's a wait-and-see approach, though, is we just don't know enough information. But right now the evidence suggests no. ANTHONY MASON: A lot of hand-- GAYLE KING: What products should we use? ANTHONY MASON: --a lot of hand sa-- sanitizer being sold. GAYLE KING: Yeah, are everywhere. TONY DOKOUPIL: Yeah. ANTHONY MASON: What products should we be using, if any? GAYLE KING: Yeah. MICHAEL OSTERHOLM: Any alcohol-based hand rub, which, you know, the one that we all talk about is Purell. There are a number of them on the market. And they do help. TONY DOKOUPIL: Yeah. MICHAEL OSTERHOLM: And they not only help with this, but we have a lot other infectious diseases the three of us are worried about besides influenza. ANTHONY MASON: Yeah. MICHAEL OSTERHOLM: And that helps a lot with those, too. TONY DOKOUPIL: Yeah. What about the liquor cabinet at home? It is a Friday. Will that wash anything away? MICHAEL OSTERHOLM: Yeah. The great public health message on alcohol that way is-- lots of alcohol in moderation. TONY DOKOUPIL: Right. GAYLE KING: Somebody said Lysol, too, Tara. DR. TARA NARULA: Right. So the EPA just released a five-page letter that lists all the potential products that can be used against COVID-19 and they've been shown to be effective against viruses that are even harder to kill than COVID-19. Lysol is one of those products listed-- ANTHONY MASON: Clorox. DR. TARA NARULA: --also Clorox, exactly. We know that the COVID-19 virus is surrounded, it's an enveloped virus by a fatty layer that can be broken down easily by these disinfectants. ANTHONY MASON: All right. TONY DOKOUPIL: All right. ANTHONY MASON: Tara, Vin, and Michael-- GAYLE KING: Thank you, doctors. ANTHONY MASON: --thank you all very much. Very helpful. Fear about the coronavirus is hurting some Asian-American businesses including restaurants. Ahead, we look into the discrimination. But first, a check of your local weather. (LOCAL WEATHER BREAK) (ANNOUNCEMENTS) END 
2020-03-05	MARTHA MACCALLUM, FOX NEWS ANCHOR: After a stunning Super Tuesday, it appears the race for president is down to three. (BEGIN VIDEO CLIP) JOSEPH BIDEN (D), PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATE: Make no mistake about it. This campaign will send Donald Trump packing. (CHEERING AND APPLAUSE) SEN. BERNIE SANDERS (I-VT), DEMOCRATIC PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATE: It's our campaign, our movement which is best positioned to defeat Trump. (CHEERING AND APPLAUSE) DONALD TRUMP, PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES: Some of Joe's handlers are further left than Bernie. That's pretty scary. (END VIDEO CLIP) BRET BAIER, FOX NEWS ANCHOR: President Trump fighting for another four years in the White House, and wasting no time trying to convince voters to keep him there. (BEGIN VIDEO CLIP) TRUMP: We must devote everything we have toward victory in November, November 3rd, to be exact. (CHEERING AND APPLAUSE) (END VIDEO CLIP) MACCALLUM: The president betting on a strong economy to win him a second term. (BEGIN VIDEO CLIP) TRUMP: With the help of everyone here tonight, America has now become the hottest economy anywhere on the planet Earth. (END VIDEO CLIP) BAIER: Tonight, President Donald Trump comes to the boyhood home of his Democratic rival, Joe Biden, for his first town hall of the 2020 campaign, on FOX News. (CHEERING AND APPLAUSE) BAIER: Good evening from the Scranton Cultural Center in Scranton, Pennsylvania. Tonight, the battle for the White House comes to the Keystone State. Good evening. I'm Bret Baier. MACCALLUM: And I'm Martha MacCallum. Great to be here tonight. Pennsylvania, of course, was critical in securing President Trump's victory in 2016. And it is a state that he may need again this November. BAIER: This comes as the Democratic field hoping to challenge him is narrowing. Only two major candidates remain, former Vice President Joe Biden and Vermont Senator Bernie Sanders. MACCALLUM: President Trump has already held rallies across the country, touting record jobs, new trade deals, and an overall strong economy. BAIER: So, will that message resonate here, as he looks to become the first Republican since Ronald Reagan to win Pennsylvania twice? MACCALLUM: Ladies and gentlemen, President Donald Trump. (CHEERING AND APPLAUSE) TRUMP: Thank you. (CHEERING AND APPLAUSE) TRUMP: Thank you. (CHEERING AND APPLAUSE) TRUMP: Thank you very much. (CHEERING AND APPLAUSE) TRUMP: Whoa! (CHEERING AND APPLAUSE) TRUMP: Thank you. Thank you very much. (CHEERING AND APPLAUSE) TRUMP: Thank you very much. (CHEERING AND APPLAUSE) TRUMP: Thank you. (CHEERING AND APPLAUSE) TRUMP: Hi, Bret. BAIER: Mr. President, thanks for being here. TRUMP: Nice to be invited. (CROSSTALK) BAIER: Nice to see you again. MACCALLUM: Thank you for being here. TRUMP: Great. BAIER: Thank you. MACCALLUM: Great to have you. (CHEERING AND APPLAUSE) TRUMP: Thank you. Thank you. (CHEERING AND APPLAUSE) TRUMP: Whoa. (CHEERING AND APPLAUSE) TRUMP: Thank you. (CHEERING AND APPLAUSE) TRUMP: So great. MACCALLUM: Well, you got a great crowd here. TRUMP: Nice audience. BAIER: Nice crowd. (CHEERING AND APPLAUSE) TRUMP: Thank you. MACCALLUM: Terrific crowd here tonight. Thank you so much, everybody. BAIER: We would love to get into a lot of questions tonight. TRUMP: Good. BAIER: And there are a lot of good questions from residents here in Scranton, who will want to talk about big issues. MACCALLUM: So, we are going to jump right in with the first questioner from our audience. Thank you again, Mr. President, for being here tonight. TRUMP: Thank you. Thank you very much. MACCALLUM: Katherine Pugh is joining us. She's an undecided voter. And she has a question for President Trump. Katherine? QUESTION: Mr. President, at the outset of the coronavirus, your administration's response seemed to some as being confusing or minimizing. What plans are being considered on a federal level for the possibility of a long-term disruption from the novel coronavirus? TRUMP: Well, actually, we are giving -- I think really given tremendous marks -- you look at Gallup poll, you look at other polls, for the way we have handled it. And one of the things I did is, I closed down the borders to China and to other areas that are very badly affected, and really having a lot of troubles, I mean, countries and areas of countries that have had a lot of problem. And I closed them down very early, against the advice of almost everybody. And we have been given rave reviews. And that's why we have only right now 11 -- it's a lot of people, but it's still 11 people, versus tremendous numbers of thousands of people that have died all over the world. We have 11. We have 149 cases as of this moment. This morning, it was 129. And I just see you -- right now, it's about 149 cases. There are 100,000 cases all over the world. So we're really given tremendous marks for having made the decision. And that was a decision I made to close down the borders, so that people from China, where we take in thousands and thousands of people a day, they stopped coming in very early, weeks ahead of where they normally would have been stopped. Thank you. BAIER: Mr. President, you have said you want to take politics out of dealing with this crisis. TRUMP: Right. BAIER: But in the White House yesterday, you said that about the testing kits and the delay, you blamed President Obama. TRUMP: Well, I don't blame anybody. I want to get everybody to understand, they made some decisions which were not good decisions. We inherited decisions that they made. And that's fine. BAIER: As far as regulations? TRUMP: We undid -- yes. We undid some of the regulations that were made that made it very difficult. But I'm not blaming anybody. It just seems that the Democrats, some of them, I must say -- and you know it better than anybody, Bret -- it's become much better. But some of the Democrats have said, no matter what -- if we found a cure, and everybody's better tomorrow morning at nine o'clock, they would say, he's done a terrible job. It's just automatic. How is the president doing? Oh, terrible, terrible. They don't mean it. And we have done a great job. Again, we have gotten the highest poll numbers of anybody for this kind of a thing. And it's -- and the other thing, I'm working with phenomenal people, with CDC and all of the people involved. Mike Pence is doing a fantastic job. I mean, Mike Pence is working 20 hours a day or more on this, and really doing a fantastic job. BAIER: I guess the critics say that, why wait until the testing issue became a crisis before dealing with it? If you wanted to change the regulations, why not change them either when you took office or when you first learned of the virus in January? For example, South Korea really got their act together right away. That's what they say. TRUMP: Well, when you say take office, we just learned about this a very short while ago. BAIER: Sure, but -- or when you learned about the virus in January. TRUMP: I know, but you're not going to be thinking -- I'm thinking about a lot of other things too, like... BAIER: Sure, yes, yes. TRUMP: ... like trade and millions of other things. I mean, we are doing some job with the economy and all. So, I'm not thinking about this. But as soon as I heard that China had a problem, I said, what's going on with China? How many people are coming in? Nobody but me asked that question. And you know better than -- again, you know, you both know that I closed the borders very early. And we were given A-pluses for that. BAIER: And you were given applause for that. TRUMP: Yes, saved a lot of lives. BAIER: But I'm just talking about the testing -- the testing kits. TRUMP: Well, the testing, we did it -- as soon as we found out that it was a problem, we did it. It's not the kind of a thing you say, gee, I just got elected. Let's do some testing on this. They had some bad decisions. Some bad decisions were made. We corrected those decisions. MACCALLUM: So, obviously, you care a lot about the economy. And we are seeing some impacts. It is kind of surprising how many conferences are being shut down, and meetings are being canceled, and flights. A lot of flights have been canceled. Even the James Bond movie, they're delaying because of coronavirus. I'm wondering what you think is the long-term -- over the course of the year, Wall Street says that they don't expect U.S. companies to have any growth in 2020, which is pretty surprising. What's the impact on the economy and also potentially on your reelection? TRUMP: Well, I think people are viewing us as having done a very good job. What we have to do is do a very professional job. Nobody is blaming us for the virus, nobody. I mean, I haven't heard that, even from some of the so-called enemies or whatever you want to call them. They're not blaming us. MACCALLUM: No. TRUMP: This started in China. How it started, there is question, but thousands and thousands of cases in China. And it infiltrated to almost 100 countries right now. MACCALLUM: But I'm not talking about the handling of it. TRUMP: Nobody is blaming me. MACCALLUM: Excuse me. I don't mean to interrupt. But I'm just asking about in terms of things you can't control, right, the impact on the economy, and that potentially that could -- if people feel like the economy is turning around, that that could be an election issue as you go into it. TRUMP: Well, look, we were set to hit 30,000 on the Dow. This is a number that nobody ever even came close to. And, already, we have the number. And even though it's down 10 or 11 percent, it's still the highest it's ever been by far. It certainly might have an impact. At the same time, I have to say, people are now staying in the United States, spending their money in the U.S. And I like that. I have been after that for a long time. You know that. I have been saying, let's stay in the U.S., spend your money here. And they're doing that. They sort of enforced doing that. We met with the airline companies yesterday. They're doing a fantastic job. And they are just not flying to areas that have a big problem. So it's going to all work out. Everybody has to be calm. It's all going to work out. BAIER: But, to Katherine's original question, there is a long-term plan if it lasts longer than we think? TRUMP: Sure. We could have a very long-term plan. We hope that doesn't happen. But we're -- we have plans for every single possibility. And I think that's what we have to do. We hope it doesn't last too long. BAIER: We want to get to audience questions. Robert is a Trump supporter. He does have a question about rhetoric here in the campaign. Robert. QUESTION: Mr. President, thank you so much for returning back to Northeastern Pennsylvania. TRUMP: Good. Thank you. QUESTION: I have been a big supporter of you for the duration. TRUMP: Thank you. QUESTION: And you every -- for everything that you have done for this country and continue to do for this country. TRUMP: Thank you very much. QUESTION: Unfortunately, insult politics have become a staple of this political environment. TRUMP: Yes. QUESTION: Joe Biden has suggested to take you out back behind the gym and fight you. Maxine Waters has a low I.Q. Could there be a way that we can deliver your message without the controversial rhetoric, in efforts to reunite this country during these divisive times? TRUMP: Well, I have to tell you, I think -- I appreciate the question. I think the country is far more united than people think. And, ultimately, what is uniting the country is success. And we're having more success than we have ever had. We got hit with the virus really three weeks ago, if you think about it, I guess. That's when we first started really to see some possible effects. But even despite that, the country, we are having the greatest year. We had -- last year was the greatest year we have ever had economically. And I think the way we unite is really through success. But when they hit us, we have to hit back. I feel that. I mean, there's two ways of doing it, turning your cheek. But I wouldn't be sitting up here if I turned my cheek. If I said, OK, let them just keep hitting at me, and I won't do it, they're not interviewing me right now. They're interviewing somebody else. Maybe they won't even be doing that, because if they don't get ratings, they don't interview anybody. (LAUGHTER) TRUMP: That, I have learned. (LAUGHTER) (APPLAUSE) TRUMP: But you know what? You can't turn your cheek. I mean, we get hit. (APPLAUSE) TRUMP: Thank you. (APPLAUSE) (CROSSTALK) TRUMP: We get hit so hard. And we have a media that is, I say, to a large extent, it's a part of the Democrat Party. It really is. It's terrible. It's unfair. I call it fake news. I have used that. And people are using that, I guess, all over the world right now. And that's the way it is. We have to fight back. If we don't fight back, you won't be a fan of mine very long. But I appreciate the question. Thank you. (APPLAUSE) MACCALLUM: All right. TRUMP: Thank you. (APPLAUSE) MACCALLUM: So, I -- speaking -- speaking of rhetoric, I want you -- to ask you to listen to this. (BEGIN VIDEO CLIP) SEN. CHARLES SCHUMER (D-NY): I want to tell you, Gorsuch, I want to tell you, Kavanaugh, you have released the whirlwind, and you will pay the price. (CHEERING AND APPLAUSE) Now, I should not have used the words I used yesterday. They didn't come out the way I intended to. (END VIDEO CLIP) MACCALLUM: So, going over some of the response to all of that, President Trump, some of your critics are saying, well, President Trump has also gone after liberal judges, and that Chuck Schumer... TRUMP: You mean they're blaming me for Schumer? MACCALLUM: No. (LAUGHTER) MACCALLUM: Well, they're saying that, then he came out... (CHEERING AND APPLAUSE) MACCALLUM: So, he made sort of an apology there. (CHEERING AND APPLAUSE) MACCALLUM: Do you ever -- do you think that you should make any apology for your -- what you have said about liberal judges, or not? TRUMP: Well, look, I mean, we had a justice come out and criticize me badly. And I just responded to what she said. I had it twice. And when you look at -- I had a very harsh criticism, as you know, Justice Ginsburg, during the -- just before a debate during the election, as I was getting elected. She came out. She had to apologize. It was a terrible thing she said. She should have never been allowed to say it. But if they say something to me, I'm not allowed to say back? You had another justice say something that was somewhat derogatory. And all I did was respond. But I didn't respond like Schumer. Schumer, that was a physical thing, in my opinion. He tried to say, oh, well, that has to do with the election. That had nothing to do with the election, the way he said, we're going to hit back, like you have never seen before? That was a real intimidation. And the best you can say is, they're trying to intimidate, so that the judges vote -- so the justices vote their way. That's no good either. But that was a physical -- that was really -- if a Republican did what Schumer did, they'd be in jail right now, I'll tell you right now. (APPLAUSE) BAIER: Mr. President, just follow up on that really quickly. Chief Justice Roberts obviously put out a statement and really rebuked Senator Schumer for those words. The last time he put out one of these rare statements, it was about you and the federal judge that you called an Obama judge. So, to Martha's question, is there something about apologies on both sides when dealing with justices or judges? TRUMP: Well, look, I have to state the facts. I'm not threatening anybody physically. But if we have an Obama judge, we don't do very well. Now, we have appointed 220 federal judges, the most, I think, in history. It's a record. It's a record. (CHEERING AND APPLAUSE) TRUMP: Because -- because, number one, Mitch McConnell did a great job, but the Republicans did a great job. But the bottom line is, President Obama gave me 142 openings when I first got there. Normally, you would have -- there's never been anything like that. Normally, you would have no opening. Now, you say he's a great president. The most important thing you have to do, I say, is the military, but a lot of people say is judges and justices of the Supreme Court. President Obama gave us 142. It's unheard of. If you have one, it's like you got lucky -- had (ph) 142. We're up to 220 federal judges and court of appeals judges, two Supreme Court justices. I mean, it's incredible. But we were going -- if you go to the Ninth Circuit, if you go certain places, it's almost impossible to win. So, I was surprised at Justice Roberts. And I have a lot of respect for him. I like him personally. I have a lot of respect. But I think that could have been left unsaid, because a lot of people, a lot of very top legal minds disagreed with him when he said it. Now I'm just talking about the facts. I'm talking about sort of the facts of life, that's the way it is. BAIER: Well let's get back to our questions, our next question is from David Hines, he's a Democrat who decided to vote for you in 2016. TRUMP: Good. QUESTION: Mr. President, welcome back to Scranton. TRUMP: Thank you, David. QUESTION: Everyone supports protecting the environment, but the EPA seems too focused on complex regulations, fines, fees, and lawsuits. What can you do to lead the EPA to focus more on proactive compliance instead of punitive enforcement to protect the environment? TRUMP: David, I love the question because our EPA is much different. We're very tough, but we get things done, and we're taking regulations off like nobody's ever seen. And I say very simply, I want to have the cleanest air on the planet. I want to have the most crystal clear beautiful water on the planet. And our conditions now are much better than they were three years ago. But you know very well David, because you're into the world of regulation -- I think it was maybe one of the biggest things we've done. I've cut regulations more than any president -- whether they're eight years, four years or one case quite a bit more than eight years. I cut more than any other president in the history of our country, and I did it in less than three years. So it's a great question. The EPA was -- this is why I was able to get the country going, because so many jobs were stopped, by not only EPA, so many other agencies where you'd have to go get 11 different permits for essentially the same thing. I opened up LNG plants in Louisiana where they were for years -- for 10, 12, 14 years and longer trying to get permits -- they couldn't get permits. I got them built. A $ 10 billion plant in Louisiana. They Keystone XL pipeline, I gave it -- in my first week I got approval. The Dakota Access pipeline, I got the approval -- 48,000 jobs. And frankly, it's more environmentally -- you know, it's better than having the train going up and down tracks, and you don't know what happens with the train -- plenty of bad things happen with those trains. Here you're underground, environmentally better. So I think it's a great question. We're really -- one of the reasons the economy is so strong is because of what we did with regulations. If the other side -- we'll call it the other side, affectionately, got in they would have made regulations much, much tougher. Thank you. BAIER: Well that's it, we're going to. MACCALLUM: I want to ask him. BAIER: Oh, thank you. They're talking about the rain tax here in Pennsylvania. MACCALLUM: I want to ask David, actually a follow-up question, because you are really the typical voter, I think you were -- you were a lifelong Democrat who crossed over and voted for President Trump in 2016 in areas like we are in right now in Lackawanna County. So you know, obviously now Joe Biden or Bernie Sanders -- whoever it is, is going to try to get your vote back. So I'm just -- I am curious, is there anything or any issue that they could answer for you that would change your mind, do you think? QUESTION: I'm focused on the economy, and on regulation and deregulation, and I like what's happened in the country in the last four years. TRUMP: Thank you. QUESTION: .and I'm thankful for your efforts, sir. TRUMP: Thank you, David. QUESTION: .and I hope we can continue on that. (APPLAUSE) MACCALLUM: Thank you. So the answer would be no, nothing would change your mind? No -- he's shaking his head, no, nothing. TRUMP: I think they thought you were going to give them a different answer. MACCALLUM: No, I wanted to hear because I do think it's very, I mean he is. TRUMP: That sounded like a setup question -- no, no, no David, you're my man. David's my man, I like that guy. MACCALLUM: No, I wanted -- you know what, I love that too. TRUMP: I like that guy. MACCALLUM: I said, I'm very interested in voter (ph), because we want to know what -- you know, how voters like you are going to vote next time around because we love to follow the story of the movement of the electoral. And I think it's fascinating that you -- you know, answered as you did. TRUMP: Well Martha, this area of Pennsylvania, and Pennsylvania itself has the best numbers it's ever had. It's got the best economy it's ever had -- has the best unemployment numbers it's ever had. And Scranton has the lowest and best unemployment numbers they've -- and employment numbers too -- that they've ever had by far. So you know, we're very happy about the job (ph) -- the people in Pennsylvania they're very happy with the job. You know, it was 30 years since a Republican won Pennsylvania, and based on results, I think we'll win it again very easily. MACCALLUM: Yeah. I mentioned. (APPLAUSE) MACCALLUM: President Trump, I mentioned Joe Biden and Bernie Sanders because Elizabeth Warren dropped out today, and I want to know what your reaction to that was? TRUMP: Well, look, if she's a true progressive, which probably she is -- she should have dropped out three days ago. It would have been a whole different race. Texas was close, she got votes -- she didn't do well, but she got a lot of votes -- far more than the difference. I think about Maine. Maine was almost a tie. They had to wait a day and a half before they could even call it, it was so close. She, I guess, came in third, and it was, you know, a very distant third. But she got a lot of votes. Maine would have gone to -- I think he would have gotten everything, right? Bernie Sanders would have won five, six, seven states -- would have won Minnesota, would have won at least another two or three states. So when you look at it, she did him no favors. That was not a good friendship. That was -- we started to see that during the debates, by the way, that one became unhinged. MACCALLUM: Yeah. TRUMP: But you know, if she would have gone out -- she didn't even have to endorse him. If she weren't -- if she just dropped out of the race without an endorsement, he would have won a tremendous number of states that he lost. You know, he lost states by not very much. And she got enough votes that it would have made a big difference. I think he would be leading by a lot right now, had she not been in the race. BAIER: You know, tonight you're in the boyhood home, obviously of Joe Biden, who is sort of like a phoenix from the ashes in this Democratic race. And tonight looks likely that he could get the Democratic nomination. Now Democrats insist that you were impeached because you were trying to damage Joe Biden, were you? TRUMP: So, it was a fake impeachment. (APPLAUSE) TRUMP: We had 100 -- think of it, of (ph) the Republicans in the House. We had 107 -- 196 votes in favor, zero from the Republicans, zero against. We picked up three Democrat votes on top of that. And we had one Democrat -- was so angry by it that he left the party, became a Republican, which I think is a first time because he left a majority and went in to a minority. Van Drew. And it was a whole fake deal. And everybody knows that. I made a phone call, it was a perfect phone call, there was nothing wrong with it. And they said, let's impeach. Now the real back story is when the phony whistleblower - who's a total phony -- he heard the call supposedly, you know, through somebody -- through the informant. You notice the way everybody disappeared once -- thank goodness I had a transcriber -- we had more than one. Thank goodness we had that call transcribed, because the transcripts of the call reveal that it was a perfect call. By that time they were already talking about impeachment, and they were going by a phony whistleblower rendition of a call that didn't exist. Just like Adam Schiff, he goes before Congress and he starts talking about eight quid pro quos, and don't call me I'll call you. Well that's a mob expression. Don't call me, I'll -- and everybody's saying that's a terrible call. He made it up -- it was totally made up. And I said, oh good, we'll sue him, we'll take him down. And then I find out he's got immunity because he made it in Congress. It should almost be the opposite. You should almost have to be more honest if you're in Congress. (APPLAUSE) BAIER: Do you think Biden is damaged? Do you think he's damaged? TRUMP: I think that Biden has been damaged, yeah. A lot of people -- I saw a couple of statements, very strong statements by very respected people in your world saying they aimed at Trump, but they took Biden down. And really that's what happened, when you think. Because you look at the son -- here's a guy, didn't have a job, was unfortunately, sadly -- the military was a very sad experience for him. He goes out, he gets $ 3 million plus $ 183,000 a month to be a board member of a company that a lot of people said was corrupt. Worse -- just as bad, China -- I just made a great China deal. China is paying us billions and billions of dollars because of what I did to them with tariffs. Billions of dollars -- I mean, to a point where my farmers are in love with me because I took some of that money, gave it to them. (APPLAUSE) TRUMP: But his son walks out of China with a billion and a half dollars for a fund. Now a billion and a half dollars for a fund, meaning he's going to make hundreds of thousands of dollars a year and much more than that. BAIER: So you want to face Joe Biden or Bernie Sanders, that's my question? TRUMP: I'll tell you, I was all set for Bernie, because I thought it was going to happen. And you know how we get ready for things, right? So mentally I'm all set for Bernie -- communist, I had everything down, he's a -- I was all set. (APPLAUSE) TRUMP: And then we have this crazy thing that happened, right? On Tuesday which he thought was Thursday. (LAUGHTER) TRUMP: But he also said 150 million people were killed with guns, and he was running for the United States Senate. Support me, I'm running for the United States -- there's something going on there. But I was all set -- I was all set. And, you know, when I focus and we all focus, sometimes you do well and some people choke. I watched mini Mike choke. When mini Mike was hit by a very mean woman, he said get me off this stage -- just get me off. And that wasn't a pretty sight to be -- but I was all set to take on Bernie. I was ready, and then all of a sudden they say, guess what. I went to the first lady, who people love. I go in to the first lady -- (APPLAUSE) TRUMP: -- and I said -- I said, he just won Texas, he just won, you know, et cetera, et cetera. And by the way, so close. It was a whole different thing because of her. So now I'm ready for Bernie, and now all of a sudden I have a whole different -- you know, it's a whole different deal -- two very different people. I think in a certain way Bernie would be tougher, because he's got a base. It's a much smaller base than my base. I think a lot of my people are here because -- and I did nothing to do that -- but we have a lot of support in Pennsylvania. And I think we have a lot of support everywhere, look at the rallies -- look at the rallies. (APPLAUSE) TRUMP: But I was all set -- I was all set for Bernie, I was ready to go. And then I say, you know, I don't think I'm running against Bernie, I think it's going to be very hard for him to come back. BAIER: We'll cover it. Many more questions to come -- healthcare, also the economy, immigration. Please stay with us on this special town hall. MACCALLUM: We'll be right back. (COMMERCIAL BREAK) MACCALLUM: Welcome back everybody to our town hall with President Trump. Let's go right to Audrey who has a question for President Trump. Audrey? Right here -- here we go, hi Audrey. QUESTION: Mr. President, thank you -- Pennsylvania thanks you, Bucks County thanks you for everything you're doing for our country. TRUMP: Thank you very much. QUESTION: We look at your energy, and it makes me get up and say, if he can do it, I can definitely get up and do everything I've got to do. TRUMP: Thank you very much. QUESTION: I want to say, Republicans have failed to come up with an alternative plan to Obamacare, how do you plan to rally the Republicans around a plan, and what would be included in that? TRUMP: Thank you very much, that's a great question and very important -- healthcare, and I think it's probably the thing that I'm most disappointed that I haven't been able to say what a good job we've done. I haven't been able to tell (ph) what a great job we've done. First of all, I got rid of the individual mandate which was the worst part -- END 
2020-03-05	JEANINE PIRRO, FOX NEWS HOST: And the box says, my name is Iggy, and I'm three. I live at Niagara SPCA. I'd like to live with you. Is that talking -- GREG GUTFELD, FOX NEWS HOST: No dog wants to live with you, Judge. JESSE WATTERS, FOX NEWS HOST: All right, thanks -- (CROSSTALK) PIRRO: Yes, yes, I only have dogs live with me. WATTERS: Set your DVRs. That's another story. PIRRO: What? WATTERS: Never miss an episode of THE FIVE. And please tune in next for Trump's 2020 town hall. "SPECIAL REPORT", up next. Hey, Bret. BRET BAIER, FOX NEWS ANCHOR: Hey, Jesse. Thank you. Good evening. I'm Bret Baier. We are coming to you tonight from Scranton, Pennsylvania, wherein 30 minutes, we will have a Fox News special town hall with President Trump. It's his first such event of the campaign season, we will talk about the 2020 race, where the economy is going, and of course, the coronavirus. Earlier today, another death reported in Washington State. Back in Washington, D.C., the Senate followed the House in approving an $ 8.3 billion funding bill but now goes to President Trump. Well, Wall Street followed up Wednesday's big gains with big losses today. The Dow sank 970 points. The S&P 500 lost 106. The NASDAQ fell 279. We'll have a report live on that a bit later. The president continues to insist, he and his team are on top of this and doing a good job containing the outbreak. Chief White House correspondent John Roberts is here with us in Pennsylvania tonight, the site of a major victory, of course, for then-candidate Trump, four years ago. Good evening, John. JOHN ROBERTS, FOX NEWS CHIEF WHITE HOUSE CORRESPONDENT: It certainly was. Good evening to you, Bret. And the setting for tonight's town hall has taken on extra significance after the big Super Tuesday win for Joe Biden because after all, Scranton, Pennsylvania is the place where Joe Biden was born. And from the coronavirus to bread and butter issues and the economy, President Trump is going to have to have good answers to a lot of pressing questions tonight if he hopes for a repeat of what he did here back in 2016. (BEGIN VIDEOTAPE) DONALD TRUMP, PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES: In one day, one day, we are going to win the great state of Pennsylvania and we are going to take back the White House. ROBERTS: As that optimistic proclamation aside in 2016, President Trump surprised even himself, winning Pennsylvania by 44,000 votes. Though he lost Scranton's county, Lackawanna by three points to Hillary Clinton. Tonight's town hall marks the president's first visit of 2020 to this battleground state he hopes to win again, with his focus on blue-collar jobs, energy, and an America First policy. What are voters hoping to learn from him tonight? UNIDENTIFIED FEMALE: I'm hoping the president is going to mention some more about immigration. UNIDENTIFIED MALE: I'd like to know what Mr. Trump's plans are with pre-existing conditions. UNIDENTIFIED MALE: How he's going to beat the Democratic candidate come November, and most importantly, the economy. ROBERTS: The White House response to coronavirus will feature prominently tonight. Democrats charging President Trump has mishandled the crisis. The President insisting on "HANNITY" last night, the Democrats are only trying to score political points. TRUMP: The Democrats weaponized the virus against the Trump administration. They weaponized anything we do. And yet, if they did it, they'd be, you know, hailing it. Or they'll just say, even though they have no facts, they just say, Oh, we don't like the job they're doing. ROBERTS: The latest volley, Democrats taking aim at the president's claim that some people infected go to work and get better. TRUMP: We have thousands or hundreds of thousands of people that get better. Just by, you know, sitting around and even going to work. Some of them go to work, but they get better. REP. NANCY PELOSI, (D-CA): And when the president said good work, no, there are other guidelines that should be out there. ROBERTS: President Trump firing back on Twitter. "I never said people that are feeling sick should go to work. This is just more fake news and disinformation put out by the Democrats. In Minneapolis, this afternoon, Vice President Pence, meeting with the CEO of 3M, a major manufacturer of protective masks as the White House seeks to ramp up production. MIKE PENCE, VICE PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES: We couldn't be more grateful for the efforts of American business leaders and companies like 3M, who are coming alongside and ensuring that our nation has the resources, has the support to be able to deal with the coronavirus. ROBERTS: President Trump touting what he says is a robust response to the outbreak, tweeting, "With approximately 100,000 coronavirus cases worldwide and 3,280 deaths, the United States, because of quick action on closing our borders, has, as of now, only 129 cases. 40 Americans brought in and 11 deaths. We are working very hard to keep these numbers as low as possible." (END VIDEOTAPE) ROBERTS: The president earlier this afternoon also taking on another potent election-year issue inviting Lindsey Graham and other Republican senators to the White House to talk about immigration, specifically what to do about the dreamers if the Supreme Court overturns protections for them. I'm told there was a lot of talk today, but nothing actionable, but I'm sure we'll hear more about all of that in the town hall tonight. Bret. BAIER: I'm sure we will. John, thanks. Let's get some insight into what's happening on Wall Street. Kristina Partsinevelos of the Fox Business Network joins us live from New York. Good evening, Kristina. KRISTINA PARTSINEVELOS, FOX BUSINESS NETWORK CORRESPONDENT: Good evening, Bret. Much has changed in just two weeks when we hit market record highs. Today, we came close to another 1,000 point loss with all major averages and lower as markets remain incredibly volatile in the face of the fast-spreading coronavirus. The Dow closing down over 900 points. The S&P down 105 with all sectors in the red. And the NASDAQ down 279 points, with many investors actually moving their money into safer bets like gold and government bonds. One sector getting hit hard is airlines. Today the International Airline Transportation Association predicts the impact of the coronavirus will cause a loss of $ 113 billion in revenue. This comes as airlines like United warm they will cut international flights by 20 percent and domestic flights by 10 percent by this April as they cope with weaker demand. And the cruise industry is also taking a beating. Bookings are down 40 percent with some crew socks tumbling 50 percent this year already. In fact, a new survey from Go Banking Rates shows that nearly two-thirds of Americans would turn down a completely free cruise if they were offered one because of the fears of the coronavirus. And companies across all sectors are coping with supply chain issues. Apple warned its retail employees they could face shortages of iPhones as well as replacement parts, as many are sourced in China. And Bret, I've been reporting actually from the floor of the New York Stock Exchange all week and traders have been telling me the swings might become the new norm, especially as the impact of the virus may take months to dissipate. BAIER: Wow, it's tough to follow. Kristina, thanks. The U.S. death toll from the coronavirus has risen by one to 12 tonight, all but one of those in Washington State. We're learning new details of how the virus is spreading outside of China. Correspondent Jonathan Serrie has the latest tonight from Atlanta. (BEGIN VIDEOTAPE) TEDROS ADHANOM GHEBREYESUS, DIRECTOR-GENERAL, WORLD HEALTH ORGANIZATION: this epidemic is a threat for every country, rich and poor. JONATHAN SERRIE, FOX NEWS CORRESPONDENT: The World Health Organization says the number of new COVID-19 infections is 17 times greater outside China than in it, with major outbreaks growing in South Korea, Italy, and Iran. Here in the U.S., public health officials are still trying to contain the virus as new cases continue to crop up. The death of a 71-year-old man who recently traveled aboard the Grand Princess has prompted California officials to fly test kids to the cruise ship out at sea. DR. AIMEE SISSON, PUBLIC HEALTH OFFICER, PLACER COUNTY, CALIFORNIA: While the vast majority of cases of COVID-19 worldwide have been mild, older persons and persons with underlying medical conditions are at increased risk of serious disease. SERRIE: The case marks the first U.S. coronavirus death outside Washington State, where COVID-19 is already claimed 11 lives. Most of the fatalities involve residents of the Life Care Center nursing home in the Seattle suburb of Kirkland, where the CDC is investigating infection control protocols at the facility. Facebook has temporarily closed one of its offices after one employee tested positive. And Microsoft is advising all employees to work from home until March 25. Following guidance from King County officials. DOW CONSTANTINE, EXECUTIVE, KING COUNTY: We are encouraging employers to maximize telecommuting. SERRIE: Today, New York City reported two new cases of community transmission. A man in his 40s and a woman in her 80s with no travel to high-risk countries and no connection to other confirm cases in the city. By mid-afternoon, the number of cases statewide had reached 22, doubling the count from yesterday. And today, Tennessee announced its first coronavirus case, a man who recently returned from travel outside the state. DR. LISA PIERCEY, COMMISSIONER, TENNESSEE DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH: He is currently isolated at home with mild symptoms. His household contacts are quarantined. They are at home and are in the process of being monitored and evaluated for COVID-19. (END VIDEOTAPE) SERRIE: And after scaling back its international schedule amid coronavirus concerns, United Airlines plans to cut domestic flights by 10 percent in April. A company memo cites lower demand among U.S. travelers and offers some employees the option for voluntary unpaid leaves of absence or reduced schedules. Bret. BAIER: Jonathan Serrie, live in Atlanta. Jonathan, thank you. "BREAKING TONIGHT", a federal judge has denying a request by the Justice Department to dismiss a lawsuit seeking the public release of the full unredacted Mueller report on Russian interference in the 2016 election. The action is being brought by the Electronic Privacy Center, Judge Reggie Walton, who was appointed by then-President George W. Bush, also a former FISA court judge. Also says, Attorney General William Barr's decision to conduct a press conference and issue a letter immediately prior to releasing the redacted version causes the court concern. He's also saying that Barr's lack of candor calls his credibility into question. We'll follow this story. Overseas, Secretary of State Mike Pompeo, says violence from the Taliban is not acceptable. Pompeo, telling workers at the State Department today, he expected renewed conflict with the Taliban in Afghanistan following Saturday's peace agreement. The U.S. stage the drone strike against the terror group this week, following an uptick in Taliban attacks against Afghan forces. Pompeo, says the violence must be reduced immediately for the peace process to move forward. Turkey, says it will deploy Special Forces along its land border with Greece to prevent Greek authorities from pushing back people trying to cross into Europe. This comes after Turkey declared a previously guarded -- its previous and guarded gateways to Europe open. Thousands of refugees and other migrants have tried to cross into Greece from the Turkish land and sea border in the past week. Greek police fired tear gas, stun grenades, and water cannons to repel thousands of people trying to breach the border. Greek authorities say Turkish police have also fired tear gas at them to disperse border guards. In tonight's "DEMOCRACY 2020" report, Massachusetts Senator Elizabeth Warren is no longer running for president. The woman who claimed she had a plan for everything, apparently did not plan to finish third in her own state and in the primary there to end what was once considered a very promising campaign. Correspondent Doug McKelway has details tonight. (BEGIN VIDEOTAPE) DOUG MCKELWAY, FOX NEWS CORRESPONDENT: Calling it the honor of a lifetime, Massachusetts Senator Elizabeth Warren, stepped out of Cambridge, Massachusetts house and stepped down from the race. But she left unanswered who she might support. SEN. ELIZABETH WARREN (D-MA): Let's take a deep breath and spend a little on that. We don't have to decide that this minute. MCKELWAY: Asked last night if he'd consider Warren as his running mate, Sanders was non-committal. SEN. BERNIE SANDERS (D-VT), PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATE: It's too early to talk about that. MCKELWAY: Today, he said he'd welcome her supporters and tour into a favorite target he shares with Warren, Wall Street. And what he says are its links to his primary opponents. SANDERS: Right now, what you're seeing is Wall Street opening up its checkbook to Joe Biden. MCKELWAY: Biden, today, attributed his resurgence, not to Wall Street, but to Democratic constituencies, Sanders has not winning over. JOE BIDEN (D), PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATE: Bernie, you got beaten by overwhelming support I have from the African American community. Bernie, you got beaten because of suburban women. MCKELWAY: Like Sanders, Biden also wants Warren's supporters but steered clear of any offers tweeting, "We needed her voice in this race, and we need her continued work in the Senate." Both candidates could use Warren's take no prisoners style, as in this NBC debate that helped bring down Mike Bloomberg. WARREN: A billionaire who calls women fat broads, and horse-faced lesbians. MCKELWAY: It's a style that might help bring down another billionaire, the president, who tweeted today that Warren quit three days too late. "She cost crazy Bernie, at least, Massachusetts, Minnesota, and Texas." No one is counting Sanders out. He's flush with cash-raising $ 46.5 million in February. And of the two septuagenarians, Biden seems more prone to gaffes. BIDEN: My name is Joe Biden. I'm a Democratic candidate for the United States Senate. MCKELWAY: Many seniors can relate to gaffes like that. They also happen to be the most reliable voters. The youth who show up at Sanders rallies are less reliable voters and pose a problem for the social Democrat. SANDERS: Why are young people not voting? This is tough stuff. (END VIDEOTAPE) MCKELWAY: The mano a mano match picks up in advance of the next contest, March 10th in Idaho, Michigan, Mississippi, Missouri, North Dakota, and Washington State. Bret. BAIER: Doug, thank you. Senate Minority Leader Chuck Schumer is in full damage control mode tonight. Schumer's getting hammered over comments he made that seemed to threaten a pair of U.S. Supreme Court justices. Chief congressional correspondent Mike Emanuel shows us from Washington. (BEGIN VIDEOTAPE) SEN. MITCH MCCONNELL (R-KY): The minority leader of the United States Senate threatened two associate justices of the U.S. Supreme Court, period. MIKE EMANUEL, FOX NEWS CHIEF CONGRESSIONAL CORRESPONDENT: Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell blasted Senate Democratic Leader Chuck Schumer for these controversial comments. SEN. CHUCK SCHUMER (D-NY): I want to tell you, Gorsuch. I want to tell you, Kavanaugh. You have released the whirlwind and you will pay the price. EMANUEL: President Trump weighed in on Twitter. "Schumer has brought great danger to the steps of the United States Supreme Court." Schumer tried to clean things up this morning. SCHUMER: I'm from Brooklyn. We speak in strong language. I shouldn't have used the words I did, but in no way was I making a threat. EMANUEL: Missouri Republican Senator Josh Hawley is called for Schumer to be censured, arguing it was no slip of the tongue. SEN. JOSH HAWLEY R-MO): It was a direct personal threat. And he did it again, did it deliberately. Senator Schumer is not a dumb guy. He did this very deliberately. EMANUEL: The controversy had Chief Justice John Roberts defending his colleagues, Brett Kavanaugh and Neil Gorsuch. But it's not the first time. Justices have been under political attack. President Trump famously criticized what he called Obama judges and received a public rebuke from Roberts. And the president last month criticized liberal Justices Ruth Bader Ginsburg and Sonia Sotomayor. TRUMP: I just don't know how they cannot recuse themselves for anything having to do with Trump or Trump-related. EMANUEL: But no response on that from the chief justice. Today, some Democrats expressed relief that Schumer has backed-off. SEN. JOE MANCHIN (D-WV): I'm very pleased and very happy that it didn't put shut down to the level where the president will never back off or never apologize. So, we've got to rise above this. (END VIDEOTAPE) EMANUEL: This flare up was regarding an abortion case in Louisiana. Next up is a politically charged hearing over President Trump's financial records later this month, with Roberts potentially the deciding vote as the Supreme Court is caught in the middle of election-year politics. Bret. BAIER: One to watch. Mike, thanks. Up next, the panel on the rapidly shrinking Democratic presidential field. First, here is with some of our Fox affiliates around the country are covering tonight. Fox 17 in Nashville, as Tennessee Governor Bill Lee, asks President Trump to expedite declaring a major disaster in several counties after destructive tornadoes killed at least 24 people and destroyed homes and businesses. Officials in Putnam County, say all people have been accounted for there, following reports of 77 missing. President Trump will visit the region tomorrow. Fox two in Detroit as federal prosecutors charged the former president of the United Auto Workers with corruption. They say Gary Jones conspired with others at the union to embezzle more than a million dollars. Jones resigned in November. And this is live look at Chicago from our affiliate Fox 32 out there. One of the big stories there tonight. R&B singer, R. Kelly pleads not guilty to a 13 count federal indictment that includes sex abuse allegations involving a new accuser. Kelly faces several dozen counts of state and federal sexual misconduct charges in Illinois, in Minnesota, and New York. He's denied abusing anyone. That's tonight's live look "OUTSIDE THE BELTWAY". But before we head to break, some sad news, some family news. Longtime Fox white house correspondent Wendell Goler, died this week. Wendell joined Fox News in 1996 as a correspondent. He worked his way to senior White House foreign affairs correspondent. Wendell covered five presidents over 28 years at the White House during a storied career. And he always covered the stories in his unique way. (BEGIN VIDEO CLIP) WENDELL GOLER, FORMER FOX NEWS CORRESPONDENT: The president, says profits where he'll spend the rest of his life once he leaves the White House, not to mention spending a lot of time here while he's in office. And the folks in Crawford say they're happy to have him. And they'd be happy to have you if you want to come for a visit. So, you all come on down here. In the meantime, I've got some more stories to cover. With the president in Crawford, Texas, Wendell Goler, Fox News. (END VIDEO CLIP) BAIER: He did have stories to cover. Wendell retired in 2014. The apparent cause of death, kidney failure. Our sincere condolences to Wendell's family he will be sorely missed. Our friend and colleague, Wendell Goler was 70. (COMMERCIAL BREAK) (BEGIN VIDEO CLIP) WARREN: I will not be running for president in 2020. UNIDENTIFIED FEMALE: Well, will you be making an endorsement today? WARREN: Not today. Not today. I need some space around this. UNIDENTIFIED MALE: Senator -- TRUMP: Bernie Sanders had he was -- if he were able to convince Elizabeth Warren to endorse him, or even to just drop out, because she's doing terribly, he would have won a large number of the states that he lost last night. UNIDENTIFIED MALE: Three, two -- (END VIDEO CLIP) BAIER: Senator Elizabeth Warren dropping out of the race, changing the dynamic of the Democratic race, the delegates now with the head to head to Joe Biden and Bernie Sanders, 602 to 538. Again, 1,991 needed to win. The nomination will start there as we get ready for this town hall. Let's bring in our panel, Jonathan Swan, national political reporter for Axios and Susan Ferruccio, chief congressional correspondent for The Washington Examiner. Susan, your thoughts on Warren. Obviously, the president loves to get in there and have his thoughts about the Democratic race. But he made you write that had she endorsed Bernie Sanders and would have made a difference in several of those states he lost. SUSAN FERRUCCIO, CHIEF CONGRESSIONAL CORRESPONDENT, WASHINGTON EXAMINER: You know, I'm not entirely sure about that. I think by -- I think Warren's backers, some of them would go for Sanders, but some of them wouldn't. And that's shown in some of the polling where you see who their second choice might be. And I think you'll see that going forward who are all Warren's voters going to go for? And I think Sanders will definitely get some of them. But I think Biden will too. And so I don't see her voters as a definite vote for the liberal lane here as we're discussing it. But I think for Warren know, she had a lot of issues. It wasn't that she was a woman. I know a lot of people are, are saying that I think she had some issues with explaining how her various plans would work. I think she had a credibility issue, a likeability issue, and that's pretty much the reason why she didn't win. BAIER: Yes. Jonathan, what about the lack of an endorsement? The fact that she didn't come out for either Biden or Sanders? What does it say? And is it harm to either one of them? JONATHAN SWAN, NATIONAL POLITICAL REPORTER, AXIOS: Well, yes. I mean, by not making a decision, she made a decision that was very important. We've seen from what happened with Joe Biden after he won South Carolina, how important momentum is and earned media. And boy this Bernie Sanders need earned media and momentum right now. And this could have in a moment to give him that. And the jolt in the arm that he needs heading into next week's primary. So, it hurts him substantially. And, you know, we've seen this incredible comeback from Joe Biden. I still think people haven't really dwelled on how profound a comeback. This was over two days after winning South Carolina from a guy who'd been completely written off to coming back. And the problem that Bernie Sanders has right now is the Super Tuesday results. Joe Biden wasn't even competing in those states. He had no ground operation. He spent no money. This was pure momentum and earned media and the light deciding voters, he crushed it with them. They all went to Biden. So, the momentum is everything right now and it's with Joe Biden. And boy did this Bernie Sanders need that Warren endorsement. BAIER: Yes, Town Hall warming up here behind me. (CROSSTALK) SWAN: They cheering you -- BAIER: Well take a listen to Bernie Sanders -- maybe so. Yes, let's take a listen to Bernie Sanders and Joe Biden. (BEGIN VIDEO CLIP) SANDERS: Joe Biden is a very strong opponent. People have all of the corporate world behind him, will have the political world behind him. BIDEN: Bernie, you got beaten by overwhelming support I have in the African American community. Bernie, you got beaten because of suburban women. Bernie, you got beaten because middle-class hard-working folks out there, Bernie. (END VIDEO CLIP) BAIER: We're long way, Susan, from this race wrapping up, but clearly, the Trump campaign is looking. They chose Scranton, P.A. for a reason. This is the boyhood home of Joe Biden. And Pennsylvania, very, very important. FERRUCCIO: Extremely important, almost ground zero, really for where the battle for the White House is going to begin for the general election. Trump needs to win those states again. That pushed him over the top in 2016. And this is going to be one of the most important states. And again, I think Biden would be the stronger candidate there and not only because he was born there, and considered this his second home, but because the Sanders' campaign would push policies that I don't think are going to go over too well, in Pennsylvania. BAIER: Yes. FERRUCCIO: The Green New Deal being one of them. BAIER: All right. Jonathan, thoughts before this town hall tonight. His first -- president's first, the 2020 cycle. SWAN: I would watch the Trump -- President Trump to promote the chaos that already exists in the Democratic primary. And what he's trying to do is promote the idea that this has been stolen from Bernie Sanders that it's being rigged. And that's to depress Bernie Sanders supporters who already feel these suspicions towards the party. Donald Trump wants to promote that, he wants to take some of these Bernie Sanders supporters, disaffected supporters and have them vote for him like some of them did in 2016. BAIER: All right, Susan, Jonathan, thank you so much. SWAN: Thank you. BAIER: Coming up, the town hall. Thanks for inviting us into your home tonight. That is it for this SPECIAL REPORT. Fair, balanced, and still unafraid. You don't want to miss this. Our town hall in Scranton, Pennsylvania with President Trump. His first of the campaign season begins after a quick break. (COMMERCIAL BREAK) 
2020-03-05	As the coronavirus outbreak spreads across Europe, Americans might be asking if they should make plans to travel there or cancel plans they've already made. At this early stage, though, even travel medicine specialists don't have a clear answer as they work toward better understanding the scope of the outbreak. Little is known about the novel coronavirus, officially known as COVID-19. There is no vaccine or treatment, and public health officials are still learning how it spreads. Those whose expertise focuses on Europe aren't sure how the continent will manage the threat, especially with its porous borders. The best advice travel medicine professionals can give is to take precautions, avoid areas where the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention warns against travel, and avoid travel if you have underlying health conditions that could make you more vulnerable to infection. "Everybody needs to have a plan on how they're going to deal with this," said Ruth Carrico, a travel medicine specialist at the University of Louisville Vaccine and International Travel Center. Carrico said travelers should be prepared to make adjustments as more becomes known about how widespread the infections are. "It's a moving target," she said. "We're at a point where we don't have enough information to help people make an accurate assessment." Universities and companies aren't taking any chances. Many universities have canceled study abroad programs and asked students and employees overseas to return home. Large corporations have issued a moratorium on international travel and conferences, and some are even asking people to work from home. Airlines have been canceling flights in anticipation of reduced demand and waiving the customary change and cancellation fees. Carrico said her office's travel consultations have increased from one hour to an hour and a half or two hours. "Stay tuned, and be prepared to change your mind," she said. "The impact of this is going to be felt for a long time." In 2018, according to the Commerce Department's National Travel and Tourism Office, 17.7 million U.S. citizens took flights to European countries, up 12% from 2017. Italy, France and Germany are the top destinations for U.S. travelers, according to European Union statistics. As of Wednesday, Italy had more than 2,500 cases of coronavirus, concentrated in the northern Lombardy region, and 79 people in the country have died. That was enough for the CDC to raise its guidance for Italy to the highest level ??3, "avoid nonessential travel" ??late Friday. Still, that's far fewer than the 80,000 cases in China, where 2,871 have died, or the 5,600 cases in South Korea, where 28 have died, and the 2,900 cases in Iran, where 92 have died. The CDC earlier last week advised Americans to avoid nonessential travel to South Korea, its highest warning level. A similar warning has been in place for China since early January. The State Department has South Korea and Italy at level 3 travel advisories, which is not the highest, but does advise Americans to "reconsider travel" to both countries. The department has France, Germany and Spain at level 2 ??"exercise increased caution" ??though due to factors other than coronavirus. France has 212 cases, Germany has 244 and Spain has 193. U.S. officials have not issued any warnings for those countries, or any others in Europe. The United States has 128 cases, and nine people have died. There are only scattered cases of coronavirus in other European countries. But Europe's free-flowing nature could spread infections beyond Italy and its neighbors. The Schengen Area, created in 1985, eliminated internal borders within Europe and today includes 26 countries. "European countries are choosing to keep the internal borders open," said Heather Conley, director of the Europe Program at the Center for Strategic and International Studies in Washington. Conley said the outbreak in Italy seems to be contained at the moment. But she worries more about the potential for an even larger outbreak in Germany, Europe's largest economy. She noted cities such as Frankfurt and Munich are global transportation hubs. "These are not just portals into Europe," Conley said. "These are major portals to the rest of the world." Conley said the last big disruption to European air travel was the volcano eruption in Iceland in 2010. It essentially shut down Europe's aviation system for a week and disrupted travel for 10 million passengers. A pan-European coronavirus outbreak could have an even greater and longer-lasting impact, though Conley said it's too early to tell how much. Seth Chandler, who teaches health law at the University of Houston, said the infection rate in China at the time the U.S. imposed travel restrictions on China a month ago is the same rate as in South Korea and Italy now. "I suspect the situation is going to get worse before it gets better," Chandler said. "There will be heightened pressure for intra-Europe restrictions." 
2020-03-05	The only thing spreading faster than the new coronavirus itself is the travel anxiety associated with it. Thousands of cases have popped up around the world, and while they are primarily in China, everyone is on high alert from South Korea to Italy to the United State. What are everyday people doing in the face of such unprecedented anxiety? The USA TODAY Travel team spoke with people who planned ??and in some cases, are still planning ??to travel to Asia and beyond as the outbreak continues. As of Wednesday, there were more than 94,000 cases worldwide, most of which are in Asia. But the number of cases in Europe and the Middle East has recently surged, and the Caribbean, too, has its first cases. If these travelers' stories are any indication, this is just the beginning of the impact the coronavirus will have for all travelers in 2020. Are people still going to see Japan's cherry blossoms? Amanda Anderson and her friends wanted to experience cherry blossom season and celebrate a friend's milestone birthday in Japan this spring. Then they heard more about the new coronavirus, and their anxiety festered about their late March excursion. "Someone in our group works in medicine and the more that continued to come out about the coronavirus, the more hesitation she felt, and ultimately we all felt," the Charlotte, North Carolina-based Anderson, 32, told USA TODAY. The group pored over medical articles to make an educated decision. The cherry blossoms are a popular tourist attraction, bringing reportedly more than 60 million people to and within Japan every year. The best viewing period for 2020 across much of the country is late March through early April, according to forecasts. Anderson and her friends were able to cancel their Japan Airlines flights, which were booked through JAL partner American Airlines and use the credit toward other trips, though they aren't rescheduling their Japan plans. Still, Japan's tourist organization remains optimistic in the wake of the coronavirus. "The cherry blossoms will certainly be blossoming this spring, and we expect there will continue to be great interest amongst American travelers in coming to see them," Keiko Matsuura of the Japan National Tourism Organization told USA TODAY. Disappointment has set in as no one in Anderson's group had visited Japan before. But they haven't given up on traveling to Asia just yet. "Many Asian countries are on our 'to-visit' list, so we'll likely reconsider a trip to the region in six to 12 months," Anderson said. For now, the group is looking into a weekend trip to the Caribbean instead. 'Don't want to be quarantined': Tokyo Olympics ??to go or not Coronavirus fears are making people second-guess their travel plans for the Olympics. Kendall Taylor, a 24-year-old real estate agent in New York, said he and his cousin canceled their trip after seeing headlines about the virus pick up. "We're not two guys that are afraid to go anywhere, but when you hear these cases ??we don't want to put ourselves in the environment that we could get it or possibly get it," he told USA TODAY, adding that he felt he was at a higher risk because he planned to travel to multiple areas in Japan during his 15-day journey. Though Taylor was able to get most of his money back from his $1,100 Air Canada flight thanks to purchasing travel insurance, he and his cousin suffered a "huge loss" over his accommodations to the tune of $500 per person. The decision was especially hard for the pair, who had always dreamed of going to the Olympics after growing up watching the games on TV, said Taylor, who had not yet purchased tickets to any Olympic events. He said it hurts to cancel his trip, which he started planning in December, but he knew it was the best option for him. "I don't want to be in a situation where we get there and we get stuck or we get there and we can't come back to America because it's broken out bigger," he said. The fate of this year's Olympic Games themselves is still being weighed. Japan's Olympic minister Seiko Hashimoto told the country's upper house of parliament that the contract for the Tokyo Games stipulates only that the event be held at some point during the calendar year, leaving open the possibility that it could be postponed to later in 2020. The Olympics are scheduled to run from July 24 through Aug. 9. 'We never considered canceling': Europe trip still a go for Tennessee woman Grace Boerger arrived in Germany on Saturday for her first European vacation and already is on Plan C. Her son and daughter-in-law surprised her with a two-week vacation for her birthday last fall and the trio was due to visit Milan, Florence, Cinque Terre and Verona. They switched to Plan B a week ago after her daughter-in-law texted her with news of lockdowns in northern Italy because of coronavirus. The number of cases in the country surged to 1,694 Monday. The revised itinerary had the trio visiting southern Italy instead, with stops in Rome, Naples, Sorrento and Capri. But the day they landed in Germany, where they were starting the trip to visit with relatives there, the U.S. State Department changed its alert level for northern Italy to its highest level so the family decided to skip Italy altogether. On the agenda now: driving through Germany, Austria, Switzerland and France and a possible trip to Belgium. One upside to the repeated change in itinerary: She might get two trips to Europe. "We are making plans to come back next year sometime and do all of Italy LOL," she said via Facebook Messenger on Monday. The 49-year-old medical assistant said the family never discussed ditching the trip to Europe. "We never considered canceling," she said. "It's not that I'm not worried, but you practice flu and cold protocols, make sure you wash your hands, use hand sanitizer." Cruises and coronavirus Cruisers around the world have watched and listened as passengers have found themselves stuck on board ships in limbo or in quarantine thanks to coronavirus fears or the virus itself. What effect is uncertainty having on cruisers? Are they hesitant to schedule trips going forward? Are they canceling sailings they've already booked? When the outbreak began in early February, frequent cruisers were already weighing the risks that come with the spread of coronavirus. Their reactions to the news were mixed. Carole Jones, 47, from Minnesota, finished a cruise with Carnival Cruise Line last month. Jones has six children, and on past cruises, her children have contracted norovirus. It changed the way they approached later cruises but hasn't stopped them. With the confined space of a cruise ship, Jones said she understands how viruses like coronavirus or norovirus can get out of hand quickly. Now, they take wipes to sanitize their cabin, don't eat at any buffets and try not to use any public restrooms on board. "We were on the (Carnival) ship when first quarantine happened overseas," she told USA TODAY, referring to the Diamond Princess being placed under quarantine in Japan from Feb. 5-19. "It definitely made us nervous." Jones' family has another cruise scheduled in a few months that leaves from California and sails down the coast of Mexico. At this point, they aren't planning to cancel. But they also aren't committed to going. "We have not (put) more money towards the cruise, either. We have kept it at the standard $150 deposit," she said Friday. Carnival Cruise Line, she added, requires a deposit and they typically pay off their cruises month by month. Now though, they're holding off until the final fee deadline. Others are determined to not let the virus keep them from their plans. Sylvain Plasse, an actor from Toronto and frequent cruiser who has completed more than 100 sailings, told USA TODAY in a message that "we have to continue living." He had no plans to stop cruising but is taking precautions. "(Coronavirus) definitely will not deter me from cruising; however I am avoiding Asia at all costs," he said. Many cruise lines, including Royal Caribbean and Norwegian Cruise Line, have canceled or changed their Asia itineraries. John and Melanie Haering, who experienced the Diamond Princess quarantine firsthand ??which landed John in a hospital in Japan with coronavirus ??say that they would go on another cruise again. "Absolutely and even on Princess," Melanie told USA TODAY. "We have been through a horrific experience, we could have potentially died, we were separated, we felt fear, we shed lots of tears," John told USA TODAY Thursday. "If we let that bad experience shape how we live the rest of our lives then that is a bigger tragedy. One bad cruise does not make them all bad." Contributing: The Associated Press 
2020-03-05	Studying abroad is supposed to be a life-changing, illuminating experience. But for hundreds of U.S. students, the experience has turned into a nightmare as the new coronavirus spreads around the world. The University of Maryland, Arizona State University, Elon University and schools across Wisconsin discontinued study-abroad programs in countries including China, Italy and South Korea. Agnes Scott College's Hannah Williams didn't get to go to South Korea. "To be two weeks from the experience of a lifetime and have it canceled was one of the most heartbreaking experiences of my life, as studying abroad was the one thing I knew for sure I wanted to do in college," she told USA TODAY. Leave the country, and soon On Feb. 25, students gathered outside at Syracuse University's campus in Florence, Italy, expecting university officials would host a Q&A about the coronavirus situation. Instead, they were told to leave the country. Many started crying, called their parents and panicked, said junior bioengineering major Sammi Abate, 21, of New York. Abate had never been to Europe before and planned to take all her nonengineering courses during the semester. Syracuse's Florence program included 342 students. Some students opted to stay in Europe while others headed home; classes will resume online after spring break. Students aren't allowed back in any university building or facility for two weeks after their return to the USA, consistent with guidelines from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, according to Sarah Scalese, Syracuse's senior associate vice president for communication. Abate chose to go home, making a pit stop in London to visit friends. It was a tough choice, and she wondered, "Am I gonna regret this the second I get back and have nothing to do while everyone's still in Europe?" Student booking agent Advantage Travel paid for her flight rebooking. Scalese said the school covers change fees associated with the quick departures from Italy. 'It's hard to feel optimistic' Lizze Heintz, a journalism major from Emerson College, is one of about 580 students with Semester at Sea. Students embark (and disembark) on a floating cruise ship campus around the world. The semester began in Ensenada, Mexico, on Jan. 4. On its way across the Pacific, it stopped in Hawaii on Jan. 12 and Japan on Jan. 24 to Jan. 28. Students heard about the virus before stopping in Japan. The ship was supposed to disembark in China next, but concerns grew because of the virus, which originated in Wuhan, a city in China's Hubei province. Students on the ship have limited internet access, and most of the information they receive is directly from the captain and deans on board. The next two scheduled stops in Malaysia and India were canceled. Seychelles, East Africa, barred the ship because of coronavirus concerns, "regardless of proof that we did not have any passengers on board with it," Heintz said. "We had been at sea 11 days, but the captain offered to sail around for three additional days, so we met the incubation period. "They still refused." Mauritius, an island nation in East Africa, granted the ship safe harbor Feb.29, though not before medical screenings, including a temperature scan, for those on board. It's unclear whether future ports will let them in, including Cape Town, South Africa, a stop scheduled for mid-March. "It's hard to feel optimistic knowing they could turn us away at any point," Heintz said. "I didn't think the outbreak would ever get so bad to a point where we'd be turned away like in Seychelles. It caught us all really off-guard." A last-minute, one-way flight Amanda Walencewicz, 24, a student at Johns Hopkins University-Nanjing University Center's graduate certificate program in Chinese and American studies, had been studying in Nanjing, China, since September. She was on a six-week break for the Chinese New Year in Japan when she found out her return to campus was delayed ??then canceled. She's in her second week of online classes using Zoom conference calls from her home in Detroit. "As a student on financial aid, trying to book a last-minute, one-way flight back to Detroit was kind of a nightmare," she told USA TODAY. 'If I could, I would 100% still go' Hannah Williams was set to arrive Feb. 25 in South Korea to spend the semester. Her host, Ewha Woman's University, pushed the start date back a few weeks because of coronavirus concerns. International Student Exchange Programs canceled the program entirely once the outbreak began. "Of course, I was devastated, disappointed and worried because now I am stuck figuring out how to replace the classes I would have taken abroad for my majors so that I can still graduate on time," Williams said. If it were up to Williams, she'd be in South Korea despite the outbreak. "If I could, I would 100% still go, even knowing the risk of going to South Korea," Williams said. Not easy for universities, either Peyton Olechna, a finance and marketing double major, arrived in Florence, Italy, on Jan. 29 and was just getting used to her program at Florence University of the Arts when she found out Fairfield University in Connecticut canceled it. She said the university wants to bring students back March 16 and have them take online or accelerated classes. She said the university wants them to stay on campus through the summer, even though that would be a hassle for those with internships and jobs. Some students may decide to take summer online courses, at no cost to them, to stay on track to graduate, though those are individual cases, said Jen Anderson, vice president for marketing and communication at Fairfield. Bringing the 142 students home was an important factor to keep students on track for their graduation dates, Anderson told USA TODAY. The university is working to help students come to campus to finish their semester, setting up online and hybrid courses and working through free on-campus housing logistics. "It's very unorganized right now," Olechna said. Booking agent STA Travel absorbed the cost of her flight back to the USA. Anderson noted that the work universities face is no easy task, making sure students don't lose their credits, financial aid and more. "People always focus on the students and the (study-abroad) experience, which I think is a very, very large part of it," Anderson said. "But I also think when you think about the footprint of campuses and the fluctuation of students in and out, that's an important component of it, too." 
2020-03-04	Doctors are bracing for a rapid rise in U.S. coronavirus cases this week as state and local public health labs ramp up testing after weeks of delays because of a flawed test by the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. The number of confirmed U.S. cases topped 100 Tuesday, including nine deaths in Washington. A Seattle-area researcher said his genetic analysis shows the virus probably circulated undetected in the state for six weeks. That means more people in the community, even those who have not traveled to endemic regions, might face risk of exposure. The CDC initially developed and mailed testing kits with three components, or reagents, to detect the COVID-19 virus. Some states had trouble validating one of three components in the kits. Friday, a CDC official said the agency reviewed the glitch and determined using two components accurately will detect coronavirus. CDC officials said all state and local public health labs and qualified private labs should be able to test by the end of this week. The agency relaxed its strict testing guidelines. The combination of functioning testing kits and robust testing capacity at state and local labs should give public health officials and doctors this week a better idea on the scope of the virus' spread in the USA and focus how to marshal limited resources. Dr. Amesh Adalja, a senior scholar at Johns Hopkins Center for Health Security, said the testing glitch "left the United States without adequate testing capacity longer than it should have." He said widespread testing is important because it can pick up mild cases of coronavirus, not just more severe examples of people needing hospital care. He cited the example of a Snohomish County, Washington, high school student with flu-like symptoms who had not traveled but became ill with coronavirus. The student stayed home from school and sought medical care before returning to school Friday because he felt better. Later that day, he learned tests from earlier that week revealed coronavirus. Such testing showed the virus appears to circulate among nontravelers. It also showed people might have a mild form of the respiratory disease. "People are going to panic when they see the number of cases go up," Adalja said. "But it's important to remember we expect it to go up. People shouldn't panic even when they find cases in their state or in their city, because (cases) are likely everywhere." Former CDC Director Tom Frieden agreed the priority is to get tests to communities and detect the virus and prevent its spread. "There's clearly been a glitch in that process with a problem with some of the tests," said Frieden, who heads a group called Resolve to Save Lives. "The point now is to get the test kits and test capacity out as widely as possible." He said it's important that the federal government reviews the delayed test kit rollout to address any problems. "I think it will be important when things quiet down (and) there is time, to have an after-action review and see what went wrong and see how that can be prevented in the future," he said. Robert Murphy, executive director of the Institute for Global Health at Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine, said federal health officials should have tested more aggressively to better track cases. By detecting cases through more widespread testing, they could have slowed community spread. "The opportunity was missed," Murphy said. "There were delays, and now there are going to be more cases." The CDC announced it would begin testing people with flu-like symptoms in Chicago, Los Angeles, New York, San Francisco and Seattle to detect possible spread of coronavirus. Such testing should begin this week, and there are plans to expand surveillance to all 50 states, Nancy Messonnier, director of the CDC's National Center for Immunization and Respiratory Diseases, said Friday. Widespread testing can help public health officials learn how lethal the virus might be. In China, where more than 80,000 people have been infected, the fatality rate exceeds 2%, but that rate is much lower outside China. South Korea's aggressive testing identified more than 5,000 cases ??the world's second-highest total ??but the nation's 28 deaths give it a fatality rate of about 0.5%, according to figures on Johns Hopkins' coronavirus tracker. Adalja said more robust testing will reveal more cases and will give scientists a better idea about the severity of the outbreak. More cases, particularly mild cases, might unmask the virus as far less lethal than feared and allow the public to "breathe a sigh of relief," he said. "That will decrease the angst some people have over the severity of what's going to happen," Adalja said. "We're in the beginning stages of a pandemic. So it's coming. It's really important we right-size the response by knowing what the true severity is." He suggested more testing might inform public health officials how to respond. That might include investing more on testing and ensuring hospitals are prepared while spending less on labor-intensive measures such as tracing the contacts of infected people and monitoring travel restrictions. Members of Congress seek answers about the nation's testing capacity and delays in getting working kits to public health labs. Rep Mark Pocan, D-Wis., sent a letter Monday to the CDC raising questions about the agency's response and how it publicly discloses testing cases. 
2020-03-03	Keep calm and stop hoarding. The spread of coronavirus in the U.S. won't wipe out our toilet paper supply. Or supplies of hand sanitizer, bottled water and ramen. That is, unless the frenzied stampedes for hand sanitizer and bottled water continue. Anticipating a potential quarantine, some shoppers ran out this weekend to buy food, water and other staples so they could avoid exposing themselves and their families. But others, alarmed by the rising death count and number of confirmed cases in the U.S., went on unnecessary buying binges, stripping store shelves. "Panic buying is a self-fulfilling prophecy," says Karan Girotra, professor of operations at Cornell University. "If everyone thinks things are going to run out, they go and buy out things and they do run out." No question the pandemic, which continues to spread rapidly in Korea, Japan and Europe is testing complex global supply chains that tend to run lean. Medical devices and equipment and pharmaceutical products ??and the raw materials to make them ??are at greatest risk as demand for face masks and drugs to combat the virus rises. Panic buying and consumer hoarding have restricted some of these critical supplies because of "poor allocation," with shoppers at low risk buying up protective gear, leaving too few face masks for medical professionals and workers who have frequent interaction with the public, such as taxi and bus drivers or retail clerks, Girotra says. Supply chain experts say to stop worrying about hoarding basic necessities beyond having on hand the recommended 14-day emergency supply of food and necessities. "Panic is the biggest enemy," Girotra says. Perishable food such as fruits and vegetables are unlikely to be limited in the short term. Supplies of imported frozen meat and fish are more at risk but already were limited by trade sanctions. Packaged goods such as cereal and toothpaste and dry goods won't be affected in the near term either. For items that are now in shorter supply, such as hand sanitizer, plenty of substitutes exist such as soap. Some people are even making their own. Anna Sequoia, 74, of Glen Cove, New York, made several stops in search of paper masks last week ??no luck on those ??and Purell hand sanitizer ??"extremely hard to find" or sold out. She was able to fill prescriptions and pick up over-the-counter medicine, vitamins, dog and cat food, cat litter, dry beans, pasta, frozen fruit, and paper goods. She and her husband were floored by the crush of humanity on a visit to Costco Sunday morning. "I haven't seen it like that, even before Thanksgiving or Christmas," Sequoia said. "There was an air of aggressive competition even before we got into the store. People were pushing carts into each other. Almost no courtesy. Virtually every cart on the way out had Clorox wipes in it. The carts were LOADED." The panic buying, Sequoia said, was "pretty disconcerting." Even with images of all those empty shelves flooding social media feeds, supply chain experts urged people to stop, well, freaking out. "We don't have a shortage of toilet paper in this country. We have plenty of toilet paper to go around," said Per Hong, a senior partner in the strategic operations practice at Kearney, a global management consultancy. "Those supplies will be fully restocked and my ability to go to the store to get those supplies isn't going to go away anytime soon." Adam White, 39, of South St. Paul, Minnesota, says he and his partner stocked up on food, medication, bottled water, paper products, and cleaning supplies Saturday, the same day President Trump held a news conference about the coronavirus. "We thought there would be a panic from the news of the virus spreading and wanted to ensure we could get the supplies that we needed," he said. But anxiety levels were much lower than he expected. "The atmosphere when I was at the store was pretty normal. It didn't seem frenzied or panicked," he said. "My partner and I are in the process of remodeling our house, and have actually noticed masks being in short supply for several weeks. We were able to find some at a local 'mom and pop' hardware store for the purposes we were needing them for." 
2020-03-02	JESSE WATTERS, FOX NEWS HOST: All right, White House officials wrapping up a press conference on the coronavirus. We'll be back here tomorrow. "SPECIAL REPORT" is up next. And stay tuned for a Mike Bloomberg Town Hall. GREG GUTFELD, FOX NEWS HOST: Not Baier. BRET BAIER, FOX NEWS ANCHOR: Good evening. I'm Bret Baier. Breaking tonight, we are coming to you live from Manassas, Virginia, wherein 30 minutes, we'll have a special Fox News town hall with Democratic presidential candidate Mike Bloomberg. There are several major topics likely to come up at this event and they are our top stories tonight. There's a major shakeup going on in the Democratic presidential race as moderates and centrist consolidate, in an apparent attempt to stop front runner Bernie Sanders. Minnesota Senator Amy Klobuchar is out, throwing her support behind Joe Biden. Pete Buttigieg, who dropped out last night also lining up tonight with the former vice president. Details on all of that in just a moment. First up tonight, the coronavirus. Four more people have died from the illness in Washington State. That brings the total in the U.S. to six. Vice President Pence taking questions at the White House about the virus. You can follow that on FoxNews.com. We're monitoring it for news. President Trump, meantime, says he's considering new travel restrictions and pushing drug companies to come up with a vaccine quickly. Last week, stock market losses blamed on the virus fears have begun to mitigate a big gain today. All three major exchanges exploded for their biggest single-day point gains ever on the hopes of an interest rate cut by the Federal Reserve. The Dow finishing ahead 20 -- 1,294. The S&P 500 was up 136, the NASDAQ surged 385. The president will address a rally in North Carolina at the top of the hour. Correspondent Kristin Fisher is at the White House tonight with the latest. Good evening, Kristin. KRISTIN FISHER, FOX NEWS CORRESPONDENT: Good evening, Bret. Well, as you saw, Vice President Mike Pence and members of the coronavirus task force are still taking questions right now in the briefing room. The vice president said that despite the very sad news today, that now six Americans have died from the coronavirus, all in Washington State. He says that the overall risk to everyday Americans remains relatively low. As for President Trump, he just finished meeting with executives from top pharmaceutical companies, and he is pushing them to get this vaccine produced and out as fast as possible. (BEGIN VIDEOTAPE) DONALD TRUMP, PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES: We will confront this challenge together and we will continue to do exactly what we're doing. And we're going to be very successful. FISHER: As the White House and the world races to develop a vaccine for the coronavirus, today the death toll jumped in the U.S. to six. All of them in Washington State. Health officials believe the virus has likely been circulating in the greater Seattle area undetected for weeks. JEFFREY DUCHIN, HEALTH OFFICER FOR PUBLIC HEALTH, SEATTLE AND KING COUNTY: We expect the number of cases will continue to increase in the coming days and weeks. And we're taking this situation extremely seriously. The risk for all of us that becoming infected will be increasing. FISHER: The coronavirus has now been confirmed in at least 10 states, including New York, where a healthcare worker who recently returned from Iran tested positive. Governor Andrew Cuomo, says it was only a matter of time before the virus appeared in the nation's largest city, and is now urging all New Yorkers to simply go about their lives. GOV. ANDREW CUOMO (D), NEW YORK: I get the emotion. I understand it. I understand the anxiety. I'm a native-born New Yorker, we live with anxiety. But the facts don't back it up here. FISHER: Globally, the coronavirus is now present on every continent except the Antarctica. It has infected nearly 90,000 people and killed more than 3,000, including a top advisor to Iran Supreme Leader. Over the weekend, President Trump announced new travel restrictions on Iran, banning any foreign national who has visited the country within the last 14 days from entering the United States. He also increased the travel advisory for Italy and South Korea to level four, the highest level. And is now advising Americans to avoid traveling to specific regions in those countries. And today, President Trump said he's considering even more travel restrictions from more countries. TRUMP: Yes, we are, to certain countries where they have more of a breakout. (END VIDEOTAPE) FISHER: And President Trump announced today that he is going to be visiting the National Institute of Health tomorrow. He's going to be visiting the CDC in Atlanta at some point before the end of the week. But first, he has another big rally tonight in North Carolina, one of the Super Tuesday states, Bret, this virus, it does not stop Super Tuesday. Bret. BAIER: That's for sure. Kristin Fisher, live in the North Lawn. Kristin, thank you. As mentioned, the markets soared today. Kristina Partsinevelos of Fox Business has a look from New York. Good evening, Kristina. KRISTINA PARTSINEVELOS, FOX BUSINESS NETWORK BUSINESS CORRESPONDENT: Good evening, Bret. And you've have an investors right now that are betting that central banks around the globe including here in the United States can stabilize markets by cutting interest rates. And when you cut interest rates, that makes debt cheaper, encouraging people to spend, and that helps company profits. We know that the Dow did close five percent higher like you mentioned. The S&P 500 and the NASDAQ also higher. But, many are worried about the spread of the coronavirus. Shoppers flock to Costco and Walmart stores over the weekend, stockpiling and everything from can beans to toilet paper, and Purell. You can see Costco shares closed over nine percent higher and Walmart over seven percent higher. But Walmart also announced it would launch its own Amazon prime kind of membership. But not everyone was a winner today, shares Alpha Pro Tech and Lakeland plummeted. Both companies make facemask, and over the weekend the surge, in general, urged people on Twitter to quote stop buying mass because they are not effective in preventing the public from catching coronavirus. Right now though, investors don't know what the economic impact of the virus will be, but for today, we did see markets roar back, Bret. BAIER: Kristina, thank you. Our other top story tonight, major movements in the Democratic presidential field. Just hours away from Super Tuesday voting, Mayor Pete Buttigieg and Senator Amy Klobuchar out. Vice President Biden staging a revival. Mayor Bloomberg insisting he is all in and in it to win it. Correspondent Peter Doocy is here in Manassas tonight. (BEGIN VIDEOTAPE) UNIDENTIFIED FEMALE: Senator Bernie Sander. PETER DOOCY, FOX NEWS GENERAL ASSIGNMENT REPORTER: Democrats desperate to deny Bernie Sanders, the nomination are getting out of the way. Amy Klobuchar and Pete Buttigieg dropped out. And tonight, those two rivals who traded bitter barbs at the last debates -- SEN. AMY KLOBUCHAR (D-MN): Are you trying to say that I'm dumb? DOOCY: -- will unite at a rally in Texas to endorse Joe Biden. JOE BIDEN (D), PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATE: A moment to choose a path forward has arrived for a party. Maybe sooner than what people anticipated. DOOCY: Buttigieg goes home less than a month after winning Iowa. PETE BUTTIGIEG, FORMER MAYOR, SOUTH BEND, INDIANA: I will do everything in my power to ensure that we have a new Democratic president come January. DOOCY: Now the question becomes, who is next? MICHAEL BLOOMBERG (D), PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATE: I've talked to Mayor Pete and Amy Klobuchar. They represented their country and their states very well. And I felt sorry for them, but I'm in it to win it. DOOCY: Before Biden won South Carolina, Buttigieg thought he had the upper hand. BUTTIGIEG: By Super Tuesday, we could be on an irreversible trajectory toward nominating Senator Sanders unless we come together around an alternative. I'm offering to be that alternative. DOOCY: Sanders doesn't care. He just wants Buttigieg backers behind him. SEN. BERNIE SANDERS (I-VT), PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATE: I just want to welcome all of his supporters into our movement. DOOCY: Today in Utah, Sanders never mentioned Klobuchar or Buttigieg. SANDERS: We are going to defeat Trump because while Trump is trying to divide our people up, we are going to bring our people together. DOOCY: Don't expect to drop out from Elizabeth Warren, any time before the July convention. After South Carolina, her campaign manager explained, "Our grassroots campaign is built to compete in every state and territory and ultimately prevail at the national convention in Milwaukee." Biden is trying to make a compelling case before the convention. BIDEN: We can win big or lose big. Most Americans don't want a promise of a revolution, they want a guarantee of results on the things that affect them. DOOCY: There's one big untested wildcard tomorrow, though, it's Bloomberg. BLOOMBERG: I've won three elections so far. I don't plan to start losing now. (END VIDEOTAPE) DOOCY: Bloomberg hasn't competed on a presidential primary day yet, but he has been on ballots that people have been turning in early for weeks. And tomorrow, we will finally find out what half a billion dollars' worth of ads gets you. Bret. BAIER: We'll ask about it too. Peter, thanks. Several government agencies are warning of foreign interference in Super Tuesday voting. A rare joint statement by the FBI, Homeland Security, and others says foreign sources are spreading false information and propaganda about political processes and also candidates on social media in hopes of causing confusion and creating doubt in the system. A federal judge is ordering Hillary Clinton to sit for a sworn deposition to answer questions about her use of a private e-mail server to conduct government business. The judge granted a request from conservative watchdog group Judicial Watch. Clinton has argued that she has already answered questions about this and should not have to do so again. But the judge, says Clinton's earlier responses were either "incomplete, unhelpful or cursory at best." The U.S. Supreme Court will once again decide the fate of Obamacare. Justices agreed to take the case today, involving a challenge to the health care plan's legality. Correspondent David Spunt has details tonight. (BEGIN VIDEOTAPE) BARACK OBAMA, FORMER PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES: We are (INAUDIBLE). DAVID SPUNT, FOX NEWS CHANNEL CORRESPONDENT: 10 years to the month after it became the law, efforts by the Trump administration to get rid of the key funding mechanism could leave the entire Affordable Care Act in jeopardy. The Supreme Court agreed to hear a lawsuit by Texas and other states questioning the constitutionality of the individual mandate, the part of the ACA requiring Americans to buy health insurance or pay a price. CYNTHIA COX, VICE PRESIDENT, KAISER FAMILY FOUNDATION: It could be a huge deal. For 10 years, the health care system which is a fifth of our economy has been completely wrapped up in the Affordable Care Act. And you can't just push a button and unwind the clock 10 years. SPUNT: This would be the third time the ACA is before the court. The justices twice decided the individual mandate penalty fell under Congress's taxation power. TRUMP: So, help me, God. JOHN G. ROBERTS, CHIEF JUSTICE OF THE UNITED STATES: Congratulations, Mr. President. SPUNT: But when President Trump came to the White House, he and his Republican allies in Congress got rid of that requirement. TRUMP: We killed the individual mandate which is the most unbelievable, horrible. SPUNT: A coalition of blue-leaning states and Democrats in the House of Representatives want to keep current protections, like Medicaid expansion and coverage of pre-existing conditions in place. House Speaker Nancy Pelosi, said in a statement today, "The sooner the GOP's dangerous anti-health care lawsuit is ended, the better. Every day, the Affordable Care Act provides lifesaving protections and coverage for families across America. (END VIDEOTAPE) SPUNT: The court agreed to hear the case next term, which likely means later this fall, potentially days before the election. A decision is expected next year until this is fully litigated, the 20 million Americans now covered under the ACA will not lose their insurance. Bret. BAIER: David, thank you. Looking live now Charlotte, North Carolina. Air Force One just landing as referenced before. Kristin Fisher, saying that the president will have a rally there as he has in other states before Democratic voting in Iowa, New Hampshire, Nevada, and South Carolina. We'll bring you updates from that as we get it. Former General Electric CEO Jack Welch has died. Welch transformed the company from a maker of appliances and light bulbs into an industrial and financial services powerhouse. In 1999, Fortune Magazine named Welsh, its manager of the century. President Trump tweeted condolences, calling Welsh a friend and a supporter. James Lipton, who hosted the long-running T.V. show Inside the Actors Studio has also died. His wife tells various media, Lipton died of bladder cancer early today in his Manhattan home. Lipton hosted nearly 300 actors, including many Oscar winners during the show's run. Jack Welch was 84. James Lipton, 93. (COMMERCIAL BREAK) BAIER: Overseas, Israelis voted today in an unprecedented third election in less than a year to decide whether longtime Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu stays in power, despite his upcoming trial on corruption charges. Netanyahu has been a caretaker prime minister for more than a year, as a divided country has weathered two inconclusive votes. Exit polls tonight, indicate Netanyahu holds an edge over rival Benny Gantz, but so far has not clinched a parliamentary majority. Defense Secretary Mark Esper, says the U.S. will begin withdrawing troops from Afghanistan within 10 days. This comes two days after the two sides signed a historic peace deal that is supposed to pave the way to end America's longest war. It did not take long though for a problem to emerge. Senior foreign affairs correspondent Greg Palkot has the latest tonight from Kabul. (BEGIN VIDEOTAPE) GREG PALKOT, FOX NEWS SENIOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS CORRESPONDENT: It was peaceful in Kabul today, but there's already trouble in the U.S.-Taliban peace deal. After a seven day partial truce, the Taliban now says it's resuming offensive operations not against the U.S. but Afghan forces. The Afghan Government rejected the deals call for the release of 5,000 Taliban prisoners. The Taliban now says it won't start new talks unless the release happens. Here is former Taliban official Abdul Hakim Mujahid's take. ABDUL HAKIM MUJAHID, FORMER TALIBAN REPRESENTATIVE TO THE UNITED NATIONS: Everything what is agreed upon in the agreement, they will be abiding, abiding by that. And they will fulfill all these conditions. UNIDENTIFIED MALE: Including the release of this prisoner. MUJAHID: Yes. PALKOT: The U.S. agreed to reduce troops to zero in 14 months. But only if the Taliban abides by the deal's conditions. The commander of U.S. and NATO troops in Afghanistan, General Austin Scott Miller, says they'll be watching. GEN. AUSTIN SCOTT MILLER, COMMANDER, RESOLUTE SUPPORT MISSION: We have the means, we have the capabilities to monitor and verify. And you know, the agreement stipulates some clear commitments. PALKOT: The U.S. and Afghan governments now say, they look at the feasibility of releasing prisoners, but didn't give a time frame or a number. Afghan President Ashraf Ghani is playing fair but tough. ASHRAF GHANI, PRESIDENT OF AFGHANISTAN: This Afghanistan runs on a sense of deep tolerance, forgiveness, and ability to end conflict. If they join us, we'd be delighted. If not, we can defend ourselves. (END VIDEOTAPE) PALKOT: President Ghani, by the way, had praise for President Trump's leadership in this diplomacy for work, in his words, disrupting a destructive status quo. Bret. BAIER: Greg Palkot in Kabul, Afghanistan. Greg, thanks. I spoke with Secretary of State Mike Pompeo earlier today about the peace agreement and the Afghan president's refusal to release Taliban prisoners. I started by asking if that happens could it void the new deal. (BEGIN VIDEOTAPE) MIKE POMPEO, UNITED STATES SECRETARY OF STATE: There is a long series of discussions have been taking place over months and months and it's shouldn't surprise anyone that the habits of old days are hard to break. And this will be a bumpy road going forward. If you look at the agreement, as a provision about the exchange of prisoners, it talks about discussions with all the relevant parties and moving forward. We have a team on the ground even as we're sitting here now working, working to deliver not only on that element, right? That's an important confidence-building measure. But delivering on the larger task, which is to keep the levels of violence down and getting the teams built so that the first time in 20 years, something the previous two administrations couldn't achieve. A commitment to break with al-Qaeda and a commitment to sit down with the other side has not been done before. And that's the next step. That's the next goal. I'm confident it will be challenged but we're determined to get there. BAIER: This morning, the Taliban, through a spokesman, said they were resuming operations against the Afghan government and its forces, not U.S. troops. That's what they said in response to the president about the Taliban prisoner issue. How is that going to work? POMPEO: So, I've seen lots of remarks. Just watch what really happens. Pay less attention to statements, pay less attention to things people say. Watch what happens on the ground there. There's been a lot of work done at detailed levels about how this will proceed. So far, so good. We're just hours into this. I'm sure we'll have days when we started and say that the problem is big, but we're determined. The president's made this commitment. Our mission set is to protect America from the threat of terrorism from Afghanistan. To reduce our cost, I was a CIA director, I was a soldier. I want to see fewer Americans having to make their third, fourth, and fifth trip there. And fewer Americans coming home injured, maimed, or worse yet never having a chance to be with their loved ones again. That's the president's mission. That's what this agreement is aiming to achieve. BAIER: The President as a candidate was very critical of President Obama setting a timeline and talked about it a lot. You're setting a timeline for withdrawal of U.S. troops. POMPEO: It's very different. What we've done is fundamentally different than what the Obama administration did. Indeed, we accomplished what they tried to do, but it could not. They never got the Taliban to break with al-Qaeda. And they never got a commitment. This is if you execute the following, conditions-based. That is if the violence levels come down, that is, if the security posture for the United States of America is reduced, then and only then, I will begin to deliver a commensurate footprint inside of your country. You can see the deal, we made it all public. There's no secret side deals. Members of Congress will get to see the two classified implementation military elements of this. But the deal is laid out there for the world to see. I'm confident that over time, we're going to get to a better place. BAIER: There's what President Ghani said this weekend. GHANI: The most important verification that needs to take place is, not just Taliban cutting ties with al-Qaeda, but with all terrorist groups. In our discussion, that is going to be one of the most fundamental issues. This requires verification, not verbal assurances. BAIER: As you know, the Taliban has a long history with al-Qaeda. It's detailed in the 9/11 Commission Reports. This weekend on "Face the Nation" on CBS, you said that it was a strict cut. And you said that, that the Taliban would now work against al Qaeda. And they've made a break. Al-Qaeda's mentioned twice in the passages in the report, in the language. It says it will not allow any of its members or other individuals or groups, including al-Qaeda, to use the soil of Afghanistan to threaten the security of the United States and its allies. But that's not really a break. That's not a renouncing -- POMPEO: Oh, yes. Oh, yes. BAIER: A renouncing of al-Qaeda? POMPEO: Absolutely. Absolutely, when you say you're not going to let them operate there, you know it, Bret. They've done it for 20 years. They're not going to let them operate it anymore. That's -- that is a central provision. That's one that for 20 years, I'd know, Ambassador Khalilzad was there trying to get exactly that language for two decades. We got it. But what's more important than the language, Bret, is the execution. President Ghani here is right, verification matters. We'll have the ability to see what they're doing. Are they really living up to that commitment? It's our expectation. I met with them myself when I was in Doha. I looked them in the eye. They revalidated to that commitment. Now, they've got to execute it. Now, we'll be able to see, the world will be able to see if they truly live up to that obligation. It's important because that's the reason we went there, Bret. You know that. I still think about 9/11, and you can feel -- you can feel the emotion of that day. I know all Americans can. We went there to defeat al -Qaeda, we have crushed them and we put real, real costs on the Taliban over the past months. That's why they came to the table. It's why we're having this discussion. That's why I am hopeful that all parties in Afghanistan will take seriously the commitment to try to reach the political resolution that is the only path forward for the Afghan people. BAIER: So what do you say to skeptical American who looks at this and head of an election, and says that this was about living up to election promise, and not really about the specifics in a deal on the ground. POMPEO: Yes, well, they're wrong. But besides that, a promises do matter. We're trying to live up to all the commitments that we make. It's a good thing that the president made this commitment, a good thing we're on the path. But that's not why this time it took place. It took us longer than we had wished to reach this point. These were hard-fought negotiations. The Taliban expressed interest in having these associations when President Trump gave the Department of Defense the authority to really go after them in serious ways. And it took us this long. We now have a timeline. This timeline extends past the election. And it is conditioned space. We got to get it right, Bret. We have an obligation to get this right for the American people. We've got to keep America safe from attacks in Afghanistan. We got to get the footprint right. So, we have the resources, capabilities, and skills to do what President Trump is committed to. We took down al-Baghdadi, we took out Qasim al-Raymi, we took down Qasem Soleimani, we took down Hamza bin Laden. This President has a clear record on keeping America safe, and we're determined to continue to do that everywhere, including Afghanistan. BAIER: John Bolton, former national security advisor, calls this an Obama-style deal. I know you pushed back on that earlier. He also tweeted out, "North Korea, true to form, resumes ballistic missile testing, yet again violating U.N. Security Council resolutions. U.S. policy must finally face the reality that North Korea will never voluntarily stop pursuing deliverable nuclear weapons." Is he right? POMPEO: The President's made a real commitment to try to find a path forward. Chairman Kim now, goodness, almost two years ago made a commitment to denuclearize. We're determined to try and achieve that. The path forward for the North Koreans is very clear. We are hopeful they will choose it and we're using every diplomatic tool we have in our tool bag. BAIER: Last thing: coronavirus. Are you considering moving staff anyplace besides China out of a spreading coronavirus environment? Italy, Europe, other places? POMPEO: That's a good question, Bret. Look, it's the vice president and Secretary Azar are running the elements of this. We're -- are working with them to make sure we get it right. We want to keep our team safe, not only our diplomats and all the people that fall under the State Department in countries around the world, but we want to make sure we keep our soldiers, sailors, airmen, and Marines safe as well. It's a complicated decision-making process. We're constantly evaluating both the right number of people to have and where we can have them. BAIER: Mr. Secretary, we appreciate the time. POMPEO: Great. Thank you, Bret. (END VIDEOTAPE) BAIER: Coming up next, Martha MacCallum and I will host a town hall with presidential candidate Mike Bloomberg here in Manassas, Virginia. Tomorrow, we'll have special coverage of Super Tuesday starting 6:00 p.m. Eastern. Live results and race calls all evening long. And then, on Thursday, we have another town hall, this time with President Trump, his first of the 2020 campaign season. That will start at 6:30 p.m. Eastern after an abbreviated SPECIAL REPORT in Scranton, Pennsylvania. Thanks for inviting us into your home tonight. That is it for this SPECIAL REPORT. Fair balanced, and still unafraid. Our Town Hall with Mayor Mike Bloomberg begins after a short break. (COMMERCIAL BREAK) END 
2020-03-02	GAYLE KING: We are following a pair of big stories this morning, including a massive shake-up in the Democratic race for president. But first, of course, we need to talk about the coronavirus. It has now killed a second person here in this country in Washington State. The number of states with confirmed cases is now up to twelve, including a new case right here in New York City. ANTHONY MASON: A total of eighty-nine people have now become sick in the U.S., including two at a single nursing home in Kirkland, Washington, outside Seattle. That's where Jonathan Vigliotti is. Jonathan, we understand officials fear it could get worse there. JONATHAN VIGLIOTTI (CBS News Correspondent): That's correct. Good morning to you, Anthony. And the possible outbreak of this virus is not happening in a major city, instead in this leafy suburb. At least two people inside this nursing facility confirmed to have the coronavirus. We watched yesterday as another person was rushed to the hospital for testing. More than fifty people, we are told, connected to the facility, are now undergoing testing for the coronavirus. And we're being told that family members and volunteers are being told to stay clear of this site for fear more people could get sick. (Begin VT) JONATHAN VIGLIOTTI: Paramedics treating patients at the Life Care Center nursing home in Kirkland, Washington, were seen taking extraordinary precautions Sunday, wearing protective gear as they removed another patient from the facility. WOMAN: I'm scared. JONATHAN VIGLIOTTI: This woman, who asked not to be identified, says her mom and aunt work at the Seattle area nursing home. She's concerned about the possible repercussions of speaking out. Your mother and aunt are on the front lines of all of this. WOMAN: Yes. My aunt has direct contact with patients, that's my concern. It's not just the two of them that's going to be affected; it's going to be the whole family. JONATHAN VIGLIOTTI: Over the weekend, health officials announced new infections in Washington State, Oregon, California, Illinois, New York, Florida and Rhode Island. DR. NICOLE ALEXANDER-SCOTT (Rhode Island Department of Health Director): We are not seeing widespread community transmission in Rhode Island. JONATHAN VIGLIOTTI: State and local officials are stepping up testing for the illness. The federal government says it has the capacity to screen seventy-five thousand people, but it's also investigating a possible manufacturing defect in some of its test kits, prompting some states, including New York, to use their own tests instead. President Trump sought to reassure Americans over the weekend. PRESIDENT DONALD TRUMP (Saturday): Healthy individuals should be able to fully recover, and we think that will be a statement that we can make with great surety now that we've gotten familiar with this problem. JONATHAN VIGLIOTTI: Concerned Americans are swarming stores to stock up on basics like bottled water, toilet paper and hand sanitizer. But those most directly affected wonder if that's enough. WOMAN: We can take all the extra precautions that they're talking about, wash your hand, but you just don't know who you're next to. (End VT) JONATHAN VIGLIOTTI: And more than two dozen first responders who were called to this nursing home are now undergoing monitoring for possible symptoms in what has become the new normal for this community. Several schools are closed today for deep cleaning. The CDC has sent a team here to trace back the point for this virus. It is important to point out that most people with this virus are experiencing mild symptoms and they're recovering. Tony. TONY DOKOUPIL: Yeah, indeed. Jonathan, thank you very much. And overseas, many popular tourist destinations are eerily quiet due to coronavirus concerns. The waterways of Venice are largely empty and the Louvre in Paris is closed today as more infections are confirmed across Europe. More than eighty-nine thousand cases have now been confirmed in sixty-six different countries with more than three thousand deaths reported. Kris Van Cleave is at Washington's Reagan National Airport for us. Kris, good morning. So, how is the virus affecting traveler? KRIS VAN CLEAVE (CBS News Correspondent): Well, good morning. We know the airlines are very concern and we got another sign of just how concerned they were over the weekend in an e-mail from United's CEO, where only are they worried that this virus spread that it's going to impact their bottom line but it also could disrupt their ability to operate flights around the world. Now in this e-mail to employee send over the weekend, Oscar Munoz said in addition to suspending flights to China and scaling back service to countries in Asia. It is likely additional schedule reductions will be necessary. That could include parts of Europe, even domestic service. Also over the weekend, Delta and American Airlines both announced they'll temporarily suspend flights to and from Milan, Italy. That comes as the State Department raised its travel advisory for two regions in northern Italy to level four, that's its highest level urging Americans not to travel there. The CDC is telling people to avoid nonessential travel to China, Italy, South Korea and, of course, Iran. Alaska, America and JetBlue are waiving changing fees for flyers out of concern for coronavirus. Now, the virus is having a steep impact on demand for travel. Take Italy in just a five-day period last week, searches for round-trip travel to Italy dropped by thirteen percent to the lowest point of the year. United has already said it has seen demand for travel to Asia drop more than seventy-five percent. Gayle. GAYLE KING: All right. Kris, thank you. We mentioned that New York City has its first case of the coronavirus. It is a woman in her thirties who recently returned from Iran and who is now in isolation. New York's Governor Andrew Cuomo joins us with more on this story. Governor, good morning to you. You know, a lot of New Yorkers woke up-- GOVERNOR ANDREW CUOMO (D-New York): Good morning to you. GAYLE KING: A lot of New Yorkers, certainly here in the city, woke up and said, oh, no, here we go. What can you tell us about this latest case? What do we know? GOVERNOR ANDREW CUOMO: Yeah. Well, good morning to all of you, and you, Gayle. First, New Yorkers should not be surprised. We've been talking about this for days. I have said it's not a question of if but when. You see the number of cases around the globe. New York is the gateway to the world. So, that's not shocking. And we've been preparing for it and we've been truly diligent on this issue. This is somewhat of a unique case because this woman was a health care worker, coming back from Iran, as you mentioned. GAYLE KING: Right. GOVERNOR ANDREW CUOMO: So, she knew to take precautions and stay in a controlled situation. And then go for testing. And we got the testing results back. So, I don't think there's anything extraordinary in this case, of anything, because she was a health care worker. She-- she knew to take precautions herself, which was fortunate. ANTHONY MASON: Governor, how effective do you expect that test to be? And do you have enough? Will you have enough? GOVERNOR ANDREW CUOMO: Good question. We just got the federal authority to do the testing, and we are now going to scale up very, very quickly. So, we'll have the ability to test. And again, in this quote, unquote, "containment phase." It's about the detection and then the isolation. And it's the mobilization of the health care system more than anything. Beyond that, it's a communication issue to people, you know. This-- we-- we want to keep this-- we want to have a healthy diligence about this issue, but we don't want an unnecessary anxiety and we don't want people overreacting. TONY DOKOUPIL: Yeah. GOVERNOR ANDREW CUOMO: So, it's-- that's what this is really about to me. TONY DOKOUPIL: Can you confirm that she was-- she lives in Manhattan? And if that is the case, have you ruled out the possibility of something like we saw in China, where a city or region is sealed off as a containment method? GOVERNOR ANDREW CUOMO: Yeah. She does live in Manhattan. She is isolated in her apartment and there's no cause to do anything but that. Again, this is not-- by the way, Ebola was much more frightening than this issue. We've gone through viruses that are frankly more frightening than this, so we need a little context for all of this, a little perspective. We have to treat it. We have to be serious, but there's the-- the fear, in my opinion, is outpacing reason at this point-- GAYLE KING: Okay. GOVERNOR ANDREW CUOMO: --at this point. GAYLE KING: Governor, we thank-- we thank you very much for your time. ANTHONY MASON: Thanks very much, Governor. GOVERNOR ANDREW CUOMO: Thanks, guys. Thank you. END 
2020-03-02	GAYLE KING: The Democratic presidential field is shrinking ahead of tomorrow's Super Tuesday vote. Pete Buttigieg suspended his campaign yesterday after finishing fourth in the South Carolina primary. Joe Biden trounced Bernie Sanders in that race to give his campaign more momentum going into Super Tuesday. And Tom Steyer, as you saw, finished third in South Carolina, dancing on his way out but he's dropped out of the race. Sanders holds a narrow lead in delegates over Biden with more than thirteen hundred delegates up for grabs tomorrow. Ed O'Keefe is covering Campaign 2020 and joins us now to discuss. Ed, good morning to you. Why do you think Pete Buttigieg dropped out before the vote tomorrow night? ED O'KEEFE (CBS News Political Correspondent): Well, good morning, Gayle. Buttigieg's sudden exit came as a surprise and the timing is significant. He signaled the decision is designed to stop front-runner Senator Bernie Sanders from amassing an insurmountable lead in delegates on Tuesday. (Begin VT) PETE BUTTIGIEG (D-Former Presidential Candidate): The truth is that the path has narrowed to a close. ED O'KEEFE: Former Mayor Pete Buttigieg, the first openly gay candidate for President, brought his historic candidacy to an end in his home state. PETE BUTTIGIEG: The best way to keep faith with those goals and ideals is to step aside and help bring our party and our country together. ED O'KEEFE: Buttigieg has argued that if Senator Bernie Sanders is the nominee it could hurt Democrats in the House and Senate something he alluded to last night. PETE BUTTIGIEG: So, I urge everyone who supported me to continue in the cause of ensuring that we bring change to the White House and working to win the absolutely critical down ballot races. ED O'KEEFE: Speaking in Los Angeles, Sanders said he knows that some Democratic Party leaders are now trying to block his rise, but he encouraged Buttigieg's supporters to join him. SENATOR BERNIE SANDERS (D-Presidential Candidate): I just want to welcome all of his supporters into our movement. ED O'KEEFE: A January CBS News Battleground Tracker poll found that among Buttigieg supporters, their second choice would be Senator Elizabeth Warren followed by former Vice President Joe Biden. FORMER VICE PRESIDENT JOE BIDEN (D-Presidential Candidate): Just days ago, the press and the pundits had declared this candidacy dead. Now thanks to the heart of the Democratic Party in South Carolina, I'm very much alive. (Crowd cheering) ED O'KEEFE: Coming off a decisive victory in South Carolina, Biden focused his attacks on Sanders. FORMER VICE PRESIDENT JOE BIDEN (NBC): People are not-- they're not looking for a revolution. They're looking for results. ED O'KEEFE: With six candidates still in the race, former Mayor Michael Bloomberg told 60 MINUTES, he won't quit, even if he doesn't finish in the top three on Tuesday. SCOTT PELLEY (60 MINUTES): You'll keep going? MICHAEL BLOOMBERG (D-Presidential Candidate; 60 MINUTES): Yeah, sure. There's an election seven or so days later. There's another one fourteen days later. (End VT) ED O'KEEFE: Bloomberg was one of several candidates visiting Alabama yesterday to campaign and commemorate the fifty-fifth anniversary of the Bloody Sunday march in Selma. But when he delivered remarks at the historic Brown Chapel AME Church, several congregants stood up and turned their backs on him and remained standing throughout his speech. Anthony. ANTHONY MASON: Ed, thanks. Chief Washington correspondent Major Garrett is also watching the Democratic race going into Super Tuesday. Major, good morning. MAJOR GARRETT (CBS News Chief Washington Correspondent): Good morning. ANTHONY MASON: Who has the most to gain from Pete Buttigieg's exit? MAJOR GARRETT: In theory, Joe Biden. But as Ed O'Keefe pointed out back in January, the second choice for most Buttigieg supporters was Elizabeth Warren, but that was in January. Things are different now. And the Democratic Party is looking to consolidate. Joe Biden is the person most likely to get that consolidation metric or that idea. But this is the real key for the Biden campaign. It has got to get better faster. It's got to take this momentum from South Carolina, add the Buttigieg supporters and donors if it can. Remember, as Joe Biden was winning South Carolina, his number one endorser Congressman Jim Clyburn said his campaign had been mishandled. What did he mean by that? He meant that Joe Biden was probably always going to win South Carolina and win it big, but what that victory did has save Biden from catastrophe. It did not catapult him into the absolute undisputed front-runner position. Why? Because Joe Biden performed so poorly in Iowa, New Hampshire and Nevada. That's what he meant by mishandling. So Biden's campaign to seize whatever momentum comes from Buttigieg's exit has to get better and has to get better very rapidly. GAYLE KING: Major, Mayor Bloomberg on the ballot for the first time tomorrow night. What is at stake for him? MAJOR GARRETT: Something he knows a lot about, return on investment. ANTHONY MASON: Mm-Hm. MAJOR GARRETT: He has spent-- GAYLE KING: Mm-Hm. MAJOR GARRETT: --more than five hundred million dollars when you look at broadcast and digital advertising. Does he win a single state? If not, does he come in a strong and respectable second at any key battleground state, and does he reap delegates from places unexpected terrain? If the answer to all three of those questions is no, then there's almost no return on investment and no path to make this campaign relevant going forward. So, all this money and this entire premise about skipping the first four contests is on the line and the theory behind it will be decided, not by Mike Bloomberg and not by his money but by voters who've been besieged by his campaign ads and rendering their own judgment. TONY DOKOUPIL: Major, more than a third of all the delegates up for grabs this primary season will be on the plate on Tuesday. So, what else should we be looking for? MAJOR GARRETT: But one thing to think about, that's a lot of delegates. But because Democrats apportion them, not winner take all, but how you do in congressional districts and statewide, if you meet that fifteen percent threshold, to name, Elizabeth Warren, Amy Klobuchar, anyone else, you get a few delegates. So what to watch, California and Texas, they are the biggest prizes. But also Democrats are going to be very focus on who can carry a place like North Carolina and Virginia. There's a lot to watch. Fourteen states tomorrow. But remember, no one is going to emerge from Super Tuesday with a lock on the nomination. You could get a lot closer, but you will not lock it up tomorrow night. TONY DOKOUPIL: All right. Major, thank you very much. Moving overseas, North Korea reportedly has fired its first missile in months. South Korea military says two apparent short-range ballistic missiles were fired about a hundred and fifty miles into the Sea of Japan overnight. This happened two days after North Korea reported its leader, Kim Jong-un, had supervised a combat readiness drill. Reports say the coronavirus outbreak in Asia could explain the pause in North Korea's missile testing. ANTHONY MASON: A disagreement over releasing Taliban prisoners threatens to upset a deal to end the eighteen-year conflict in Afghanistan, America's longest war. The agreement with the Taliban signed on Saturday would allow all U.S. troops to leave in fourteen months, if conditions are met. But Afghanistan's president doesn't want to free thousands of prisoners. Today, the Taliban said it won't negotiate with the government until those prisoners are released. Secretary of State Mike Pompeo said on FACE THE NATION yesterday that bringing peace to Afghanistan is, quote, "going to be rocky and bumpy." GAYLE KING: Two Chicago police officers are under investigation after shooting a man in a struggle that was all caught on camera. Ahead, how this confrontation at a transit station escalated. But first, it is seven eighteen, time to check your local weather. (LOCAL WEATHER BREAK) (ANNOUNCEMENTS) ANTHONY MASON: We have much more news ahead, including a disturbing violent crime in Puerto Rico. Police say hateful words on social media played a role in the killing of a transgender woman. MARIA: We might not be killed, but a lot of us live feeling like we're dead. ANTHONY MASON: Ahead, we hear from friends of the victim who hope her death leads to a cultural shift. You're watching CBS THIS MORNING. (ANNOUNCEMENTS) TONY DOKOUPIL: As you just heard, New York Governor Andrew Cuomo talked about the first coronavirus case here in New York City. Ahead, our Doctor Tara Narula will tell you what you need to know about the virus, how infectious it is and the signs and symptoms to watch out for. GAYLE KING: Plus, this could be a scene from a movie. How a brutal late winter storm left homes covered in several feet of ice. Yikes. Can you imagine if you're in your house, you open the door-- TONY DOKOUPIL: Look at that. GAYLE KING: --and go, hey. ANTHONY MASON: I'm not sure you could open the door. TONY DOKOUPIL: No. GAYLE KING: I don't think you can. What meteorologists say was to blame for all of this. It looks pretty. TONY DOKOUPIL: It's like Elsa's parents lived there. GAYLE KING: Yeah. ANTHONY MASON: You need to-- you need to blow torch to get home. GAYLE KING: Let it go. You're watching CBS THIS MORNING. Thank you for that. Local news coming right up. (ANNOUNCEMENTS) *****************************************************************************(7:30 AM, EDT) TONY DOKOUPIL: It's seven thirty. Here's what's happening on CBS THIS MORNING. WOMAN: The whole world really is engaged in this right now. TONY DOKOUPIL: Airlines stop flying to more countries hit by coronavirus while New York City confirms its first case of the illness. GOVERNOR ANDREW CUOMO: The state was just given the authority to test, and we're ramping that up quickly. PETE BUTTIGIEG: I am making the difficult decision to suspend my campaign. ANTHONY MASON: Former Mayor Pete Buttigieg drops out of the Democratic race ahead of tomorrow's biggest battle so far. GAYLE KING: A newly reached peace agreement with the Taliban to end the eighteen-year war in Afghanistan hits a snag. MIKE POMPEO (FACE THE NATION): It's going to be rocky and bumpy. No one-- no one is under any false illusion. BELLEN WOODARD: You need to color the same. TONY DOKOUPIL: Plus, a nine-year-old's colorful campaign to highlight multicultural backgrounds in the classroom. BELLEN WOODARD: Now everyone knows that they're also important, too. ANTHONY MASON: And an exclusive look at scams that cost Americans more than half a billion dollars last year. (Excerpt from The Office) TONY DOKOUPIL: I don't know, but half a billion dollars is no laughing matter. ANTHONY MASON: No. TONY DOKOUPIL: Americans losing that money. GAYLE KING: I always love The Office, though. ANTHONY MASON: My son's favorite show. GAYLE KING: And John Krasinski in particular. TONY DOKOUPIL: You can watch it as soon as our show is over. GAYLE KING: His deadpan expression was hilarious. ANTHONY MASON: Yes. TONY DOKOUPIL: Or streaming now. GAYLE KING: Yeah. END 
2020-03-02	GAYLE KING: We begin, of course, with the coronavirus because it continues to spread across the world and right here in this country, where a second person has now died. Officials say a man in his seventies died over the weekend at the EvergreenHealth Medical Center, that's just outside Seattle, Washington. There are now cases of the potentially deadly virus in twelve different states. TONY DOKOUPIL: And that includes New York, which just confirmed its first case in New York City. Officials say a female health care worker in her thirties is isolated in her Manhattan home after contracting the virus in Iran. America is one of at least sixty-seven countries with coronavirus. Italy has been hit especially hard. And Charlie D'Agata is there for us in Rome. Charlie, good morning. What are you seeing? CHARLIE D'AGATA (CBS News Foreign Correspondent): Good morning. Well, it's kind of what we're not seeing and that's a ton of tourists outside the Colosseum, which would normally be heaving. Now, hotels are empty, too. And we're now hearing that the first case has been detected here in Rome. (Begin VT) CHARLIE D'AGATA: Here's what Venice looks like now, not much more than a week after many were aware the coronavirus had arrived. The number of cases in Italy soared by fifty percent on Sunday to more than seventeen hundred. People even worried about the health of Pope Francis, who had to pause to cough a couple of times during yesterday's prayers. Vatican officials tell us his holiness just has a pretty bad cold. They're telling where many people are little bit worried about gathering in large crowds, the fear of spreading the virus. The numbers here seem a lot lighter than usual. When the U.S. State Department upped the travel advisory here to its highest level, Rosemary McMillan (ph) from Nebraska faced calls from parents at her daughter's school. ROSEMARY MCMILLAN: I had parents calling me and saying well, what are your contingency plans when you arrive back, like we were going to put ourselves in quarantine. And I was just like, no, that's not the way-- CHARLIE D'AGATA: That's just not going to happen. ROSEMARY MCMILLAN: --it's got-- going to work. CHARLIE D'AGATA: In Paris, the Louvre shut its doors over staff concerns. The health minister suggested people stop kissing when they meet, though, marathon runners defied a ban on events more than five thousand people. In Germany, Chancellor Angela Merkel had a handshake turndown. For today's election, Israel has setup voting stations for those in quarantine with staff in full hazmat gear. But outside of China, nowhere has been hit harder than South Korea, where cases keep climbing now at more than forty-three hundred people. (End VT) CHARLIE D'AGATA: Now, most people we've spoken to here say the hype has been overblown. But we met a couple who arrived here off a cruise from Ireland. They tried to buy some hand sanitizer like this, about this size. They were told it was going to cost them around twenty-two bucks. Anthony. ANTHONY MASON: Charlie D'Agata in Rome. Thanks, Charlie. Our Doctor Tara Narula is here with how infectious the disease actually is and how it affects the human body. Tara, good morning. DR. TARA NARULA (CBS News Medical Contributor/Lenox Hill Hospital-Northwell Health): Good morning. ANTHONY MASON: What do we actually know about how the virus is spread? DR. TARA NARULA: So, what we know about COVID-19 is based on what we know about how other coronaviruses are spread, which is person to person contact by droplets. So if I cough or sneeze, those droplets can travel up to six feet and enter your mouth or your nose or your lungs. Another way is if I cough or sneeze and it lands on a surface or an object and then you touch that same object or surface and touch your face, the virus can enter that way. You know, we do think that, as I said, the spread is confined to about six feet, that it is not really airborne, like some diseases, like measles, for example. So that's why people are concerned with the masks. TONY DOKOUPIL: What are some of the signs and symptoms? DR. TARA NARULA: So signs and symptoms, fever, cough, shortness of breath. In some cases, people can have headache or even diarrhea, muscle ache, sore throat, runny nose, congestion. GAYLE KING: It's easy to work yourself up. I was in the gym, working out in L.A. over the weekend. Somebody starts coughing. You look over at them. You're on a plane-- DR. TARA NARULA: Right. GAYLE KING: --somebody starts coughing and sneezing. ANTHONY MASON: Yeah. GAYLE KING: How do we put this in perspective, Tara, about how worried we should be and when to really get worried? DR. TARA NARULA: I think what everybody is saying is that we need to be prepared and not panicked, right? That's what-- ANTHONY MASON: Yeah. GAYLE KING: Easier said than done, though. DR. TARA NARULA: It is easier said than done. GAYLE KING: Yeah. DR. TARA NARULA: But when you look at what we know from China, eighty percent of those cases were mild. They had mild symptoms. ANTHONY MASON: Yeah. DR. TARA NARULA: Only about fourteen percent were severe and even less were critical. The death rate that we have calculated at this point is about two percent, although because there's probably so many more cases than we've detected, it's probably even lower. So in the grand scheme of things, for most people if they get it, it will end up being a mild disorder. GAYLE KING: And it can be treated-- it can be treated if you get it? It can be treated? DR. TARA NARULA: Well, treated with supportive care, right? We don't have any sort of antiviral that's designated. GAYLE KING: There's no vaccine? DR. TARA NARULA: Yeah. And there's no vaccine. ANTHONY MASON: When does it-- when does it become deadly? DR. TARA NARULA: Right. So, the issue with COVID-19 is that this virus can affect the lower track of your airway. So, it can enter those cells that line your respiratory track in the lungs and there it can start to replicate and damage those cells. What happens after that point is your immune system launches a response to try to clean up and repair. The problem is in some people that immune system response is so overwhelming, it's not in check. And that basically floods the lungs with inflammatory mediators and cellular debris and you also have leakiness of the blood vessels. So, essentially, the lungs start to drown. And that's the situation that can become a severe pneumonia, the pneumonia can then progress to what we call sepsis, where you can have a drop of blood pressure-- GAYLE KING: Mm-Hm. DR. TARA NARULA: --and multiorgan failure. And that's how it really causes death. You know, the lungs are where we exchange oxygen and carbon dioxide. So if your lungs are full of fluid and debris and cellular material, you cannot get oxygen and a blood into your cells to the rest of your body. That's how it becomes severe. GAYLE KING: All right. Doctor Tara Narula-- Tara Narula, your name hasn't changed, thank you-- thank you very much. DR. TARA NARULA: Thank you. END 
2020-03-02	PALM SPRINGS, Calif. ??Bob Costas has seen sports scandals at almost every level of sports in his more than 40 years in broadcasting, from Ben Johnson being disqualified for doping in the 1988 Summer Olympics in South Korea to the steroid era in Major League Baseball to the concussion controversies of the National Football League. Now Costas can add the Astros' sign-stealing scandal to that list. But the Astros getting caught using technology for their elaborate sign stealing in 2017 is in one important way different from the other controversies, he said. "I wouldn't say it is worse or even ranks as significant as doping in the Olympics or the steroid era in baseball or the existential crisis in football over the nature of the game and head injuries," said Costas, known for his versatile career as a sports journalist at NBC and now doing play-by-play work for MLB Network. "But the specifics of this really have resonated with fans and the other players." As Major League Baseball and commissioner Rob Manfred grapple with the fallout of the revelations of the depth of the Astros' sign-stealing scheme in their World Series-winning year of 2017 and the lack of discipline for the players involved, Costas is talking about baseball a lot these days. It is the sport he is most identified with other than the Olympics, which he hosted for 24 years for NBC. Other players lashing out The idea that there are 29 victim teams of the scandal and that the Astros are a bogus champion seems to have overwhelmed those who defend the Astros by saying that everyone is bending or even breaking the rules, Costas said. "Most people grasp the distinction between gamesmanship and flat-out systematic cheating," Costas said. Costas gave his views on the scandal as well as anecdotes on his career during a weekend presentation as part of the Desert Town Hall speaker series in Indian Wells. In an exclusive interview with the Desert Sun, Costas said while Manfred might be considered weak in his response to the Astros' scandal by offering immunity to Astros players, there were some legitimate reasons for the tepid response to a year-long suspension for manager A.J. Hinch and general manager Jeff Luhnow, who were both in turn fired by the Astros. Alex Cora and Carlos Beltran, managers of the Red Sox and Mets, respectively, and both players for the 2017 Astros, both left their jobs after the scandal was revealed and could still be subject to MLB discipline. "If people look beyond that first impression, in fairness to Manfred, there would have been negotiations with CBA and another negotiation is coming soon and we know how formidable the players association has been in such negotiations," Costas said. League will act in the future Costas expects Major League Baseball and the players association to come to an agreement that would permit discipline for any future cheating scandals, much as the two sides did for violations on performance-enhancing drugs. But Costas does believe the league's ability to suspend managers or general managers should serve as a deterrent. Costas said Hinch, Cora and Beltran are universally considered among the brightest minds in the game, and seeing them without jobs as a new season approaches is a strong message to other managers. "No coach or manager is going to run the risk of having their career derailed or destroyed by doing this," Costas said. While Costas no longer works for NBC, his work as studio host for the Summer and Winter Olympics as well as work on baseball, football and basketball made him the face of the network's sports broadcasts. With concerns now over the potential cancellations of the Summer Olympics in Tokyo because of the coronavirus, Costas said organizers can only take a wait-and-see approach for now. "There were concerns about zika (virus) in Rio (de Janeiro) in 2016, but that didn't approach what potentially this could be," Costas said. "We'll just have to let things unfold over the next several months." 
2020-02-28	GAYLE KING: Welcome back to CBS THIS MORNING. The head of the World Health Organization says the coronavirus outbreak has pandemic poden-- potential as it continues to spread around the world. Cases are now reported in at least fifty-one countries outside of China. In Sacramento, California, officials are trying find everyone who may have been in contact with a woman who contracted the virus with unknown origin. She's being treated at UC Davis Medical Center. That's near Travis Air Force Base where many Americans evacuated from China were taken. But so far there's been no connection between her and anyone at that base. ANTHONY MASON: Fears of the coronavirus mean the stock market could be headed for its worst week since the 2008 financial crisis. The Dow Jones Industrials, NASDAQ and S&P 500 all fell more than four percent yesterday. It was the Dow's worst one day point drop in history. In the past week, the Dow lost an entire year's worth of gains, closing below where it was at this time last year. CBS News business analyst Jill Schlesinger joins us. Jill, good morning. JILL SCHLESINGER (CBS News Business Analyst): Good morning. ANTHONY MASON: Is this a-- a temporary reaction to this? Could it rebound quickly if this clams down or is this a long term thing? JILL SCHLESINGER: Well, we don't know yet. It's certainly temporary as we know it right now. Here's what's really happens, fascinating actually. If you just pull back to a week and a half ago-- ANTHONY MASON: Yeah. JILL SCHLESINGER: --these stock market indexes were making all time new highs. The consensus was, this virus is awful but it seems to be contained. The number of cases reported in China was starting to diminish. And people really felt like the economic impact would be limited. As soon as we got a spread in Italy, in Iran, in South Korea, new cases here, that's when investors started to get really freaked out this week and they sold because they're not sure of the extent of it, how long it will last, and what the true economic impact will be. GAYLE KING: I-- I bet you're going to tell us not to panic. I bet your mom had something to say to you, Jill, as she always does. Because I said Jill's going to come on today and tell us not to panic. JILL SCHLESINGER: Yes. GAYLE KING: What is Jill saying? What does your mom say? JILL SCHLESINGER: My mother said don't tell people not to panic. GAYLE KING: Exactly. It's hard not to panic when you look at those numbers. JILL SCHLESINGER: Well-- okay. I agree with you. I think these numbers are scary, because we are now as-- in a correction, meaning-- ANTHONY MASON: Yeah. JILL SCHLESINGER: --we are down ten-- more than ten percent from the recent highs. This is the fastest correction for the S&P 500 ever from top to the correction point. GAYLE KING: Hm. JILL SCHLESINGER: So here's why it's scary. It happens fast. You get a little bit of like, wow, I'm-- I feel like I have whiplash. GAYLE KING: Yes. JILL SCHLESINGER: But when you think about it, most of us are long term investors. ANTHONY MASON: Right. GAYLE KING: That's true. JILL SCHLESINGER: We are thinking about decades in the future. You probably have a diversified portfolio. Meaning, your stock position probably looks pretty rotten this week. But your bonds look great. And hopefully you've got a little cash in that account. When you feel the panic, you try to say to yourself, hey, wait a second, I don't need this money for a while. I'm on track. I don't want to alter my plans. I'm not going to fall into this trap. ANTHONY MASON: So don't make changes, you know, radically right now. JILL SCHLESINGER: Absolutely not. GAYLE KING: I like to know when do you panic, Jill? JILL SCHLESINGER: Okay. I-- GAYLE KING: Yeah. JILL SCHLESINGER: Well, I've had my panic moments. You know when I would-- I tell you what, if you needed your money-- GAYLE KING: Yes. JILL SCHLESINGER: --this year, if you said I had money in the stock market-- ANTHONY MASON: Mm-Hm. JILL SCHLESINGER: --and I need it to buy a car, I have to pay a tuition check and by mistake, I had that money at risk-- TONY DOKOUPIL: Yeah. GAYLE KING: Hm. JILL SCHLESINGER: --then I think you have to sell now, free up that cash and make sure it's secure. But if you are in no-- if you don't need this money this year, keep your plan in place. I know it's hard to do. Again, you can feel the butterflies. Don't act on them. TONY DOKOUPIL: Of course, if you've got some extra money laying around, you can buy some stocks out. JILL SCHLESINGER: Well, look at the market timer-- GAYLE KING: Yes. JILL SCHLESINGER: --right here. (Cross-talking) TONY DOKOUPIL: Yeah. JILL SCHLESINGER: Yeah. TONY DOKOUPIL: All right, Jill. JILL SCHLESINGER: Well, put that money to work. That's-- would be very good advice for sure. TONY DOKOUPIL: Good advice. GAYLE KING: Thank you, Jill. TONY DOKOUPIL: Jill, thank you very much. END 
2020-02-27	(COMMERCIAL BREAK) (BEGIN VIDEO CLIP) BRET BAIER, FOX NEWS ANCHOR: South Carolina's primary two days away with Super Tuesday just behind it, and the fight is intensifying in the still crowded 2020 Democratic field. SEN. AMY KLOBUCHAR (D-MN), PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATE: I think we can get all those bold progressive things done without having someone that is so alienating. SEN. BERNIE SANDERS, (D-VT) PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATE: Hey, Amy, my favorability actually, I believe, is the highest up here, as a matter of fact. MARTHA MACCALLUM, FOX NEWS ANCHOR: The so-called moderate lane bumper-to-bumper and head-to-head with progressives. MICHAEL BLOOMBERG, (D) FORMER NEW YORK MAYOR: I don't know what else she wants us to do. SEN. ELIZABETH WARREN, (D-MA) PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATE: I'll be clear. BLOOMBERG: We're following exactly what she asked to do. WARREN: I'll tell you exactly what I want you to do. BLOOMBERG: And the trouble is with this senator, enough is never enough. MACCALLUM: And each other. KLOBUCHAR: I wish everyone was as perfect as you, Pete. BAIER: Can the senator from Minnesota break out of the pack in time? MACCALLUM: When it comes to total votes cast in the first three races, Amy Klobuchar is third behind Bernie Sanders and Pete Buttigieg. BAIER: Tonight she comes to the Tarheel state to try to continue her fight for the soul of the Democratic Party. KLOBUCHAR: Donald Trump's worst nightmare is having someone that the people in the middle who are tired of the insults and the extremes in our politics have someone to vote for. MACCALLUM: Time is not on her side. She has to make her mark fast. The next few days will determine whether her campaign for president rolls on. (END VIDEO CLIP) (APPLAUSE) BAIER: Good evening from Raleigh, North Carolina. This is one of the 14 states that will vote on Super Tuesday, what figures to be the most important night so far of the Democratic presidential campaign. I'm Bret Baier. MACCALLUM: And I'm Martha MacCallum. Tonight, we are next door to South Carolina, of course, where there's a big primary Saturday, one that Joe Biden has said he will win. The stakes are very high for the former vice president's campaign. BAIER: One of the hopefuls also needing a strong finish is our guest tonight for this FOX News town hall. Minnesota Senator Amy Klobuchar is tied for sixth in South Carolina according to the Real Clear Politics average of polls and nationally. MACCALLUM: She is also in sixth place in the latest FOX News poll. She is hoping to bridge some of that gap between her and the frontrunners over the course of the next week. Please everybody, give a warm welcome to Minnesota Senator Amy Klobuchar. (APPLAUSE) SEN. AMY KLOBUCHAR, (D-MN) PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATE: Thanks, guys. Thank you, Bret. MACCALLUM: Welcome. BAIER: Warm welcome in the Tarheel state. KLOBUCHAR: I hear you used to work here. BAIER: I did, 23 years ago. KLOBUCHAR: Yes. BAIER: Let's get right to the audience questions. That's really why we're here. Our first audience question comes from Adrienne. She is an undecided voter. It has to do with the coronavirus. KLOBUCHAR: OK. BAIER: Adrienne? ADRIENNE KELLY-LUMPKIN, CEO ALTERNATE ACCESS INC: Thank you for being here, senator. COVID-19, the coronavirus, has spread like wildfire not only across China but into other countries including South Korea, Iran, Italy, and there are a growing number of cases in the U.S. as well. The impact goes well beyond health implications, affecting global trade and finance, as witnessed by the stock market plunge this week. And there's also the consideration of growing fear among our citizens. As president, what steps would you take to contain this disease and to prevent pandemics in the future? KLOBUCHAR: Thank you so much. And this is such a serious matter. We were asked about it at the debate. And I actually noted that a lot of candidates give out their own website. But I gave out the CDC website to take the politics out of this, which is, of course, CDC.gov, for people to get advice on what they should do, if they feel sick to call their healthcare provider, and the like. And I think part of this right now is planning. And it is citizens getting informed. I personally, if you ask what I would have done from the very beginning, and this goes back a few years, I would not have proposed cutting the Centers for Disease Control, which the president did, and I would not have proposed cutting out the agency, the group, the coordinating office that coordinates with the rest of the world. But we are where we are right now. And I think it is really important, one, to work with countries around the world, two, to support our health professionals and make sure that they have all of the equipment that they need, three, to support the development of a vaccine, which is months and months and maybe a year away according to some of the professionals out there. And then to really step back and think that this is one pandemic, but there may be others. And I just don't think we can isolate ourselves from the rest of the world, that we have to work with the rest of the world. I believe in science. I believe in not silencing health professionals. I'm concerned there's some reports about that out there. I think we're going to have to -- we're all in this together. And we're going to have to get the information to people. We're going to have to have the funding on the federal level. The president hasn't really proposed an amount. I think it's important to be clear. That funding levels can always change, but you want to have a set amount you ask for from Congress so we can move ahead on emergency preparations. And honesty is the best policy here with people. In terms of things that have happened, I thought that was a very messy situation with the 14 people off the cruise that we later found out they were infected and they ended up on the plane. That should have been handled differently. There's all kinds of things. But the most important thing right now is that we work together as a country, move forward, and that everyone be informed, and that we plan ahead. BAIER: Senator, you said you want to take the politics out of this. We've obviously heard all kinds of aggressive characterizations by Democrats, including Speaker Pelosi and Senator Schumer about the administration's response. And some Democrats are being accused of politicizing or even weaponizing this virus for politics. "The New York Times" had an op-ed this week titled "Let's call it Trumpvirus. If you're feeling awful, you know who to blame." You obviously want to be commander-in-chief. What would you say to people who say this is a moment to really get behind the president fighting this no matter the party? KLOBUCHAR: First of all, I think there's a lot of frustration there with not requesting the funding with the information. I personally called on him to address the nation, which he did the next day after the debate. So I think that you're seeing that bubbling up. And we don't have an amount of money we're requesting. He said $ 1 billion, but then the Congress thinks it should be $ 8 billion. And then he said Congress should decide. So I think that's the frustration you're seeing. I think in any kind of national crisis America comes together. We must. And it is not just with the people in Washington. It's with local health professionals who are going to be on the front line, governors and heads of hospitals in local areas like in North Carolina that are going to be giving advice to people on what they should do. So the reason I said the website is because I think people are going to have to step back and depoliticize this, as I said, and do what they should do, because this isn't normal. This isn't normal. This is a really serious thing. People have died. And we want to contain it as much as we can, use quarantine when we must, but make sure that we are treating people and that they get the treatment they need. And what we know about this disease is, some people get very sick and some people don't get that sick. So we don't want underreaction, but you don't want overreaction. MACCALLUM: Let's go to Jason who is currently supporting Michael Bloomberg. Jason? KLOBUCHAR: Hi, Jason. JASON SCHARFF, DUKE UNIVERSITY STUDENT: Hi, Amy. You're currently behind in delegates and national polls. KLOBUCHAR: But I have more delegates than Michael Bloomberg. SCHARFF: This is true. (APPLAUSE) SCHARFF: Is it time for some of the more moderate candidates such as yourself to try and consolidate behind one candidate? KLOBUCHAR: That's a nice verb. But this is what I think has to happen, and North Carolina should care a lot about this because only three percent of the people have voted in this country. And if you look, as you note, at the delegates, and you look at the number of votes, because two of those states were caucuses -- let's not go to caucuses right now -- but because two of those states were caucuses, I actually have the third biggest vote total in the field right now. And so as we go forward, Super Tuesday, nearly a third of Americans are going to vote. So I think people should have that ability without trying to push people out of this race. And as far as the mayor, my concern always has -- I'm the one that pushed to have him on the debate stage. I don't know if that was good idea for him. But I pushed for that because I think that you can't just have money determine politics. You just can't. And so he is running constant ads, and that's his right. He can do that. But it creates this uneven playing field, and it doesn't allow Americans to really examine who they want as head of the ticket. I am the only one up there on that stage that actually has won repeatedly in rural areas and in suburban areas, in areas that are more Republican and independent. I've won in Michele Bachmann's congressional district all three times. And I've done by reaching out and bringing people with us. I think that's what our nation needs right now. I think that's what our party needs. It's a reason that I've gotten the endorsements of not just "The New York Times" but also the "Houston Chronicle" recently, which is a very big newspaper, as well as the San Francisco paper, as well as the "Seattle Times" paper, as well as, today, the Bangor, Maine, paper. And most of the focus of these -- and these are long, long interviews you do where you answer questions -- and the San Jose newspaper. You answer questions about what issues are in their local areas as well as the country. And the reason they have endorsed me is they believe I can unite this country. I know I don't have the biggest bank account. But since the debates, we've been able to bring in from regular people online millions and millions of dollars that have allowed me to continue this campaign the right way, have allowed me to do town halls in places like Raleigh and get to all of the states that we need to as well as run some television ads. So I think we should pick the best candidate, not the candidate that has the biggest bank account. (APPLAUSE) MACCALLUM: So senator, you talked about your ability to win in Minnesota and turn those districts that are generally Republican. There was another Minnesota senator who very much wanted to be president of the United States as well. But Walter Mondale, in the end, when he made to it the general election won one state, and it was Minnesota. How do you convince Democratic voters that, at the position you're at right now, which is about sixth in the coming primaries, that you cannot only win the nomination, but that you have what it takes to win nationwide, and not remind them of what happened to the last Minnesota senator? KLOBUCHAR: OK, well, I, first, want to defend Walter Mondale. He's 91-years-old. MACCALLUM: He's a very nice guy. KLOBUCHAR: And, as you know, he was running against Ronald Reagan in his election. And he was a good vice president. So I just want to put that in there as a defense, and an excellent senator. So as far as my election, that was a long time ago. This is now. And when you look at what we need for our country, we are in such a unique moment. And we truly need someone in my mind who can work with people across the aisle. I'm the only one in the Senate that is left on that stage that has a track record of doing that in a big way. I passed over 100 bills as the lead Democrat. The Vanderbilt University in Tennessee, last Congress, found me the most effective Democrat on 15 different metrics. I think that matters because we have someone in the White House right now that wakes up every morning and sends mean tweets, that wakes up every day and figures out how to create wedges. I think we can do so much better than that as a country. And what I have seen across our nation is a number of people who stayed home in 2016 or people who maybe even voted for Donald Trump that are standing back and they're watching those debates. And believe it or not, they don't agree with everything that is said on the debate stage. I don't agree with everything said on the debate stage. But what unites them is this -- they believe that the heart of America is bigger than the heart of the person in the White House right now. It is like the cattle rancher that I met in my own state that took me on a tour on an ATV of his ranch as we dodged these big cows, and I thought this is not how I want to die. (LAUGHTER) KLOBUCHAR: And we went into his house afterward. Everyone had left. And he said, we voted for Trump. I said, what do you mean, the ranchers? He says, no, I don't like to talk about myself. I mean, I did, he said, because I was mad at the time about healthcare. And he said, but then the day after the inauguration, I saw him standing in front of that wall. And I said no, no, the wall is not built. He said, the CIA wall. And he remembered when the president gave a partisan speech about the size of his crowd in front of this sacred wall covered in the stars, anonymous stars of the CIA agents that had died in the line of duty. And this guy said that was bad. I couldn't handle this. And then he went on to explain some other partisan speeches and inappropriate things, and he just said that was it for me. So I think there's a lot of people that see this election as a decency check. They see it as a patriotism check. They see in this patriotic state of North Carolina that has had so many who have served our country, they see a president that stands next to Vladimir Putin, and when he's asked about interference in our election, he makes a joke about it. Think about it. Thousands of people from this great state, hundreds of thousands of people from America, have lost their lives standing up for our democracy. That's what World War II was about, standing up for democracies across the world. Four little girls in a church in Birmingham, Alabama, lost their lives as innocents because they wanted to be part of a democracy, and other people were trying to push it away from them. So many of the greatest moments and the worst moments in our country's history have been about our rights, our freedoms, and our democracies. And this president makes a joke about it. So I just want us to remember that. And one of my argues for my candidacy is I bring people with me, I don't shut them out. And I think we need that right now. (APPLAUSE) BAIER: Senator, we have heard -- you make the case for your candidacy. I guess, what would you tell somebody who says I really like what she said, but what is the path? Tell me the path about how you get the nomination. Are you for a contested convention, that you go in and get it there? How do you get to the nomination? KLOBUCHAR: I start with this town hall to see if everyone watching me at home will support me. That could go a long way. So I start with this. And then I just keep going. And we go and reach people where they are, and we build our support. I started at nearly nothing, and we keep adding more support. I don't know what is going to happen at the convention. BAIER: But that's the plan? KLOBUCHAR: I just know the people of America have a right to have a candidate that is coming at this in a different way with ideas, when it comes to healthcare and education, that aren't pipe dreams, that are actual plans, and actually will get things done for people. And so as far as the convention, the convention has rules. That will be set. BAIER: So if Bernie Sanders gets there with a plurality, leading the delegates, and he gets to Milwaukee, you don't think that he should be the nominee? KLOBUCHAR: There's rules in the convention. He may be the nominee. There's rules about how that works from ballot to ballot to ballot. And we have to follow the rules. That's why you set out rules. You can't change the rules in the middle of a game. That's how the rules are. And we will see who wins. Will the field be narrowed down at that point some? I would think it would be, yes. But it shouldn't be narrowed down when only three percent of Americans have voted. Certainly, you must think this in this state or -- BAIER: You need to win Minnesota. You need to win Minnesota. KLOBUCHAR: Yes, I think I should win my state. I think I'm 10 points ahead there, and have done a lot of work, and people know me well there. MACCALLUM: Let's go to Kim Rose who has a question from the audience. Kim? KIM ROSE, SENIOR DIRECTOR: Hi, Senator. KLOBUCHAR: Hi. ROSE: My question is about healthcare, specifically regarding ACA expansion and how it will help families afford coverage. Can you explain your plan and how it would be more affordable? KLOBUCHAR: Sure. So I think you know the Affordable Care Act did a lot of good things. It protected people so they wouldn't be thrown off their health insurance for pre-existing conditions. One of my fondest memories of this was being in a small town parade and seeing a woman with a stroller, and she pointed at her toddler, and she said this is my son. He has Down syndrome. She said I will fight for his healthcare to the end. But then she pauses, and she says, but this is what a pre-existing condition looks like. We brought people with us, people from the disability community, people from AARP, with us in that fight to preserve the Affordable Care Act. But your question is a good one. How do we make it better? How do we make the premiums more affordable, the drugs more affordable? And I think the way you do that is, first of all, not blowing it up like some of my colleagues, Senator Senators and Senator Warren want to do. I did not get on that bill, Medicare for all. There was a lot of pressure to get on it, but I read it. And on page eight of the bill, it says that it will kick 149 million people off of their current health insurance in four years. So I don't think that is the answer. But what I do think is the answer is making the Affordable Care Act better. I would put forward a nonprofit public option, something that President Obama wanted to do from the beginning that would compete with the insurance companies. And one estimate is that for a family making, say, $ 100,000 a year, family of four, it would bring the premiums down by 50 percent because it would simply produce more competition. You could do it with Medicare, that's one idea, or you could do it with Medicaid. The other thing I would do big time, and there's been bipartisan support for this, is take on the pharmaceutical companies to bring the prices down. Nothing has been done on that, really. And that's why you see the spiraling costs of insulin and other common drugs. I lead the bill to unleash the power of 45 million seniors to negotiate better prices under Medicare. That will make a big difference. Another thing, bringing in less expensive drugs from other countries. In Minnesota, we can see Canada from our porch, and so I am able to see those cheaper prices. And this is a bill I had with my friend, Senator McCain. After we sadly lost him, Senator Grassley has stepped in, and we have that bill. Bernie and I did an amendment once at midnight on this exact concept and got 14 Republican senators to vote for it. So I think that there is support for doing that. It would put enormous leverage on prices, and that's a good idea. You can put a cap tied to international. And the other things I'd add for healthcare is addiction as well as mental health. There is still so much stigma about getting treatment for both addiction and mental health, and I actually have a plan, and I show how I'm going to pay for it to get treatment out to people that need it and make sure that we have enough hospital beds, especially in rural areas. It's really hard to get help for mental health counselors in schools. We've had a 30 percent increase in suicides in this country in just 15 years, just to give you a sense of what we're talking about. It's not just people that you read about in the news. It is the raw numbers. And it's a lot of veterans, farmers, LGBTQ community, kids. It's a very disturbing thing that is going on in our country. And just to let you know how much I want to get this done with the mental health and the treatment, for me it's personal. My dad struggled with alcoholism my whole life growing up. By the time my husband and I got married, he had three DWIs. On the third one, the judge said to him, treatment or jail. And he chose treatment, and it changed his life. He is now 91, he is sober, he is in assisted living, his A.A. group still visits him there. And in his words, it's hard to get a drink around here anyway. (LAUGHTER) KLOBUCHAR: But it has truly changed his life. And I think everyone should have that same right to be pursued by grace. And there is a way to do that. And those are his words, his treatment, his faith, his family got him to that point. BAIER: Senator, Senator Elizabeth Warren on the debate stage said your website had your healthcare plan that was the size of a post-it note. You pushed back on that. That sounded a little bit more detailed than the post-it note. Go ahead. KLOBUCHAR: For one, Minnesota invented the post-it notes, so I took it personally. But secondly, it's been found now by two fact-checking organizations to be patently false. After the debate, after millions of people saw her say it, it turned out to be totally false. The healthcare plan is many, many, many pages, and it involves in greater detail that I just shared with you, including how I'm going to pay for things, how we will get this done. BAIER: But when you see polls, like our new FOX News polls that says Democrats, more than 60 percent, some even higher, want Medicare for all, how do you answer them? KLOBUCHAR: I answer with the truth and the facts. And I think these debates should serve that purpose, that people see what this really means. It sounds really good on paper, but as we know, these plans -- first of all, all of Bernie's plans combined -- combined, the Medicare for all and many things, have been estimated to be $ 60 trillion. Just to be really clear, as well-intentioned as they are, that is three times the cost of the entire U.S. economy. Not the federal government. I know people often use that as a measure. Everything you're doing, the whole U.S. economy. And so I just don't think that that is where people are going to go when they understand that. And mostly they don't want to be kicked off their healthcare, 149 million Americans. And there is a way to do this and make it better, and that is by creating this nonprofit public option, which I mentioned, which is what Barack Obama wanted to do in the first place. MACCALLUM: We're going to take a quick break. And we'll be back with more questions with Senator Amy Klobuchar in Raleigh, North Carolina, right after this. Stay with us. (APPLAUSE) BAIER: Welcome back to Raleigh, North Carolina, in our FOX News town hall with Democratic presidential candidate Minnesota Senator Amy Klobuchar. One of the obstacles Democrats face in many states, including here in North Carolina is the fact, or at least the perception, that the economy is very strong. There are certainly numbers to back that up. Correspondent Peter Doocy has more on that tonight. (BEGIN VIDEOTAPE) PETER DOOCY, FOX NEWS CORRESPONDENT: There's still time for candidates to court North Carolinians. UNIDENTIFIED FEMALE: I'm just in general having a really hard time deciding who I'm going to support. DOOCY: The unemployment rate here is near a 20-year low, but some couldn't wait to pick a Trump challenger. UNIDENTIFIED MALE: I've already voted early. I voted for Elizabeth Warren because I think she is best positioned to do that. DOOCY: The trade with China dried up Tarheel state tobacco exports to China, but overall, exports to China have actually grown, boosted by pharmaceuticals. UNIDENTIFIED MALE: On Super Tuesday, North Carolina has the third largest delegate load among all the states. And then when you look at the fall election, everybody agrees that we are a battleground state. DOOCY: And some young Democrats are hoping for relief now from student loan debt. UNIDENTIFIED MALE: It's crushing. Then health care is a big thing, too, for me. They go hand-in-hand. You can't afford things as you're in debt. DOOCY: And 5,700 manufacturing jobs have been added since Trump took office compared to 21,000 the previous three years. UNIDENTIFIED FEMALE: North Carolina's minimum wage is $ 7.25 an hour still, and we think it should be doubled, at least $ 15, $ 20. DOOCY: There's another problem for Democrats, a lack of confidence in the current crop of candidates. UNIDENTIFIED FEMALE: A lot of the candidates I'm worried are not going to have the chance to even beat Trump, and that's the biggest thing I want to happen. So it's very frustrating to me. (END VIDEOTAPE) DOOCY: Despite the frustration, people are paying attention. Every person we found from Raleigh rattled off pluses and minuses about different Democratic candidates, as knowledgeable as voters anywhere else we've been, and they all plan to vote in the primary. Bret and Martha? BAIER: Peter, thank you. MACCALLUM: Thanks to Peter Doocy. END 
2020-02-27	GAYLE KING: Good morning to you, and welcome to CBS THIS MORNING. I'm Gayle King with Anthony Mason and Tony Dokoupil. New coronavirus alarm. U.S. officials identify the first case in this country that has not been linked to travel or another patient. How President Trump is trying to prevent panic. ANTHONY MASON: Brewery rampage. New information about the man who killed five co-workers at the Milwaukee Molson Coors complex. We'll hear from one worker who says he narrowly avoided getting shot. TONY DOKOUPIL: Breaking overnight, lawyers for Actress Lori Loughlin and her husband say they could be cleared in the college admission scandal by newly released notes from the alleged mastermind of the scheme. ANTHONY MASON: And destroying a rainforest. CBSN Originals takes us to the Amazon and shows possible links between U.S. companies and efforts to shrink the world's largest rainforest. GAYLE KING: It's Thursday, February 27, 2020. Here's today's Eye Opener--your world in ninety seconds. PRESIDENT DONALD TRUMP: I'm going to be announcing exactly right now that I'm going to be putting our Vice President Mike Pence in charge. TONY DOKOUPIL: The vice president is tapped to lead the coronavirus response. MAN #1: A patient in California may be the first in the country to contract the illness from unknown origins. MAN #2: Mass shooting at a brewery in Milwaukee. The gunman was an employee who killed five fellow workers before turning the gun on himself. TOM BARRETT: This is an unthinkable tragedy for us. JOE BIDEN: We have to restore the soul of America. WOMAN #1: Candidates are working overtime to win votes before the South Carolina primary. SENATOR BERNIE SANDERS: Enough is enough. MAN #3: Snow on its way through the Great Lakes right now, this is headed into the Northeast. MAN #4: Some big time lake-effect snow is going to blow up. MAN #5: The mother of two missing kids is heading back to Idaho. WOMAN #2: Lori Vallow waived her right to an extradition hearing in court. TONY DOKOUPIL: All that-- NORAH O'DONNELL: Maria Sharapova is calling it game, set and match for her career. MAN #6: Sharapova announced she is retiring from tennis. MAN #7: Hefty travel for this police officer in Idaho. These turkeys came out nowhere and wouldn't leave him alone. MAN #8 (body cam video): Get back. TONY DOKOUPIL: --and all that matters-- WOMAN #3: During Ash Wednesday, his address in St. Peter's Square, the pope suggested we give up online trolling. JIMMY KIMMEL (Jimmy Kimmel Live, ABC): He said Lent is a time to give up useless words, gossip, rumors, tittle-tattle and speak to God on a first-name basis. I'm with him on everything but the tittle-tattle. That I will not give up. TONY DOKOUPIL: --on CBS THIS MORNING. MAN #9: In an effort to combat the global spread of coronavirus, the CDC is cautioning that facial hair can interfere with face masks and respirators. STEPHEN COLBERT (Late Show with Stephen Colbert, CBS): Safe styles include Zorro, Walrus and best of all, Soul Patch. So, congratulations on your continued health. Smash Mouth. (SINGING) TONY DOKOUPIL: I'm glad the Walrus is a-- is good to go. ANTHONY MASON: Yeah. It's been a while since I heard any Smash Mouth. GAYLE KING: Stephen Colbert always has a way of putting it in perspective, but this is really very serious stuff. ANTHONY MASON: Yeah. It is. GAYLE KING: Welcome to CBS THIS MORNING. And that's where we begin. Because there are growing new concerns about the coronavirus right here in the United States, because we now have the first case with no immediate links to worldwide travel or a related illness. California health officials say that patient has been isolated. It's one of sixty known cases in the U.S. More than eighty-two thousand illnesses are reported globally in more than forty different countries with some taking drastic measures to prevent a spread. ANTHONY MASON: This morning, Saudi Arabia closed all its major Islamic holy sites to foreigners and Japan said it will close all of its schools for a month to keep coronavirus from spreading. Back here in the U.S., Carter Evans is outside that hospital in Sacramento where that new American patient is being treated. Carter, why is this case causing so much concern? CARTER EVANS (CBS News Correspondent): Well, it's a big concern, because there have been only two other cases of person to person transmission of the virus here in the U.S., and both of those occurred after exposure to a family member who had been to China. We don't know how the person here got infected with this virus right now. And that's a big concern for health officials who are trying to stop its spread. (Begin VT) DR. DEAN BLUMBERG (UC Davis Health): There's probably other cases out there in the community that we don't know about. CARTER EVANS: Doctors at the UC Davis Medical Center are concerned the patient here might just be the first of many infected by someone else in the general population. The individual was transferred here last Wednesday, already intubated and on a ventilator. He or she wasn't tested for coronavirus until Sunday and the results came back positive just yesterday. It's the first case of what doctors are calling community transmission. DR. DEAN BLUMBERG: That suggests that we don't know where they got it from. So the person who exposed them probably exposed others. CARTER EVANS: This is the fifteenth case in the U.S. Efforts to combat the highly contagious virus are growing coast to coast. WOMAN: Your gown goes on first. CARTER EVANS: Hospital workers outside New York are being trained to protect themselves as more than eighty people who may have been exposed in China are currently in isolation in their homes. BILL DE BLASIO (New York City Mayor): We're in a state of high vigilance, high readiness--all elements of the city government to address this crisis. CARTER EVANS: Los Angeles is also taking extraordinary precautions. ERIC GARCETTI (Los Angeles Mayor): We're disinfecting LAX every hour. We're making sure that those points of entry are as secure as we can possibly make them. (End VT) CARTER EVANS: Villanova University is telling its students studying abroad in Italy that they need to return home now because of the increase in-- in cases there. Also, same goes for Sacramento State with its students in South Korea, telling them to come back right now. We expect to learn more about the patient here at a news conference later today. Tony. TONY DOKOUPIL: All right. Carter, thank you very much. END 
2020-02-27	BRET BAIER, FOX NEWS ANCHOR: South Carolina's primary two days away, with Super Tuesday just behind it. And the fight is intensifying in the still crowded 2020 Democratic field. (BEGIN VIDEO CLIP) SEN. AMY KLOBUCHAR (D-MN), PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATE: I think that we can get all of those bold, progressive things done without having someone that is so alienating. SEN. BERNIE SANDERS (I-VT), PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATE: Hey, Amy? KLOBUCHAR: Yes, Bernie? SANDERS: My favorabilities, actually, I believe are the highest up here, as a matter of fact. (END VIDEO CLIP) MARTHA MACCALLUM, FOX NEWS ANCHOR: The so-called moderate lane bumper to bumper and head to head with progressives. (BEGIN VIDEO CLIP) MICHAEL BLOOMBERG, PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATE: I don't know what else she wants us to do. SEN. ELIZABETH WARREN (D-MA), PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATE: Oh, I will be clear. BLOOMBERG: We're following what she asked to do. WARREN: I will tell you exactly what I want you to do. BLOOMBERG: And the trouble is, with this senator, enough is never enough. (END VIDEO CLIP) MACCALLUM: And each other. (BEGIN VIDEO CLIP) KLOBUCHAR: I wish everybody was as perfect as you, Pete. (END VIDEO CLIP) BAIER: Can the senator from Minnesota break out of the pack in time? MACCALLUM: When it comes to total votes cast in the first three races, Amy Klobuchar is third behind Bernie Sanders and Pete Buttigieg. (BEGIN VIDEO CLIP) AUDIENCE: Amy! Amy! Amy! (END VIDEO CLIP) BAIER: Tonight, she comes to the Tar Heel State to try to continue her fight for the soul of the Democratic Party. (BEGIN VIDEO CLIP) KLOBUCHAR: Donald Trump's worst nightmare is to have someone that the people in the middle, who are tired of the insults and the extremes in our politics, have someone to vote for. (END VIDEO CLIP) MACCALLUM: Time is not on her side. She has to make her mark fast. The next few days will determine whether her campaign for president rolls on. (APPLAUSE) BAIER: Good evening from Raleigh, North Carolina. This is one of the 14 states that will vote on Super Tuesday, what figures to be the most important night so far of the Democratic presidential campaign. I'm Bret Baier. MACCALLUM: And I'm Martha MacCallum. Tonight, we're also next door to South Carolina, of course, where there's a big primary on Saturday, one that Joe Biden has said he will win. The stakes are very high for the former vice president's campaign. BAIER: One of the hopefuls also needing a strong finish is our guest tonight for this FOX News town hall. Minnesota Senator Amy Klobuchar is tied for sixth in South Carolina, according to the RealClearPolitics average of polls, and nationally. MACCALLUM: She's also in sixth plate in the latest FOX News poll. She is hoping to bridge some of that gap between her and the front-runners over the course of the next week. Please, everybody, give a warm welcome to Minnesota Senator Amy Klobuchar. (CHEERING AND APPLAUSE) BAIER: Hey, Senator. (CROSSTALK) KLOBUCHAR: Thank you, Bret. BAIER: Hello. (APPLAUSE) KLOBUCHAR: Thanks, guys. MACCALLUM: Welcome. BAIER: Warm welcome in the Tar Heel State for you. KLOBUCHAR: Yes. Well, I hear you used to work here. BAIER: I did, 23 years ago. KLOBUCHAR: You're famous. Yes. BAIER: Let's get right to the audience questions. That's really why we're here. Our first audience question comes from Adrienne. She is an undecided voter. It has to deal with the coronavirus. KLOBUCHAR: OK. BAIER: Adrienne? ADRIENNE KELLY-LUMPKIN, VOTER: Thank you for being here, Senator. COVID-19, the coronavirus, has spread like wildfire, not only across China, but into other countries, including South Korea, Iran, Italy, and there are a growing number of cases in the U.S. as well. The impact goes well beyond health implications, affecting global trade and finance, as witnessed by the stock market plunge this week. And there's also the consideration of growing fear among our citizens. As president, what steps would you take to contain this disease and to prevent pandemics in the future? KLOBUCHAR: Thank you so much. And this is such a serious matter. We were asked about it at the debate. And I actually noted that a lot of candidates give out their own Web site. But I gave out the CDC Web site, to take the politics out of this, which is, of course, CDC.gov, for people to get advice on what they should do, if they feel sick, to call their health care provider, and the like. And I think part of this right now is planning. And it is citizens getting informed. I -- personally, if you ask what I would have done from the very beginning -- and this goes back a few years -- I wouldn't have proposed cutting the Centers for Disease Control, which the president did. And I would not have proposed cutting out the agency, the group, the coordinating office that coordinates with the rest of the world. But we are where we are right now. And I think it is really important, one, to work with countries around the world, two, to support our health professionals, and make sure that they have all of the equipment that they need. Three, to support the development of a vaccine, which is months and months, and maybe a year away, according to some of the professionals out there. And then to really step back and think that this is one pandemic, but there may be others. And I just don't think we can isolate ourselves from the rest of the world, that we have to work with the rest of the world. But I believe in science. I believe in not silencing health professionals. I'm concerned there are some reports about that out there. I think we're going to have to -- we are all in this together. And we're going to have to get the information to people. We are going to have to have the funding on the federal level. The president hasn't really proposed an amount. I think it's important to be clear. That funding level can always change, but you want to have a set amount you ask for from Congress, so we can move ahead on emergency preparations. And honesty is the best policy here with people. In terms of things that have happened, I thought that was a very messy situation with the 14 people off the cruise that we later found out they were infected, and they ended up on the plane. That should have been handled differently. There's all kinds of things. But the most important thing right now is that we will work together as a country, move forward, and that everyone be informed and that we plan ahead. BAIER: Senator, you said you wanted to take the politics out of this. We have obviously heard all kinds of aggressive characterizations by Democrats, including Speaker Pelosi and Senator Schumer, about the administration's response. And some Democrats are being accused of politicizing or even weaponizing this virus for politics. The New York Times had an op-ed this week. It was titled "Let's Call It Trump Virus." "If you're feeling awful, you know who to blame." You obviously want to be commander in chief. What would you say to people who say, this is a moment to really get behind the president fighting this, no matter the party? KLOBUCHAR: Well, first of all, I think there's a lot of frustration there with not requesting the funding, with the information. I personally called on him to address the nation, which he did the next day after the debate. And so I think that you're seeing that bubbling up. And we don't have an amount of money we're requesting. He said a billion, but then the Congress thinks it should be $ 8 billion. So there's -- and then he said, Congress should decide. So I think that's the frustration you're seeing. I think, in any kind of national crisis, America comes together. We must. And it is not just with the people in Washington. It's with local health professionals, who are going to be on the front line, governors and heads of hospitals in local areas, like in North Carolina, that are going to be giving advice to people on what they should do. So, the reason I said the Web site is because I think people are going to have to step back and depoliticize this, as I said, and do what they should do, because this isn't normal. This isn't normal. This is a really serious thing. People have died. And we want to contain it as much as we can, use quarantine when we must, but make sure that we are treating people, and that they get the treatment they need. And what we know about this disease is, some people get very sick, and some people don't get that sick. So, we want -- don't want underreaction, but you don't want overreaction. MACCALLUM: Let's go next to Jason, who is currently supporting Michael Bloomberg. Jason. JASON SCHARFF, VOTER: You're currently-- KLOBUCHAR: Hi, Jason. SCHARFF: Hi, Amy. (LAUGHTER) SCHARFF: You're currently behind in delegates and in national polls. Is it time-- KLOBUCHAR: But I have more delegates than Michael Bloomberg. SCHARFF: This is true. (LAUGHTER) (CROSSTALK) (CHEERING AND APPLAUSE) SCHARFF: Is it time for some of the more moderate candidates, such as yourself, to try and consolidate behind one candidate? KLOBUCHAR: That's a nice verb. But this is what I think has to happen. And North Carolina should care a lot about this, because only 3 percent of the people have voted in this country. And if you look, as you note, at the delegates, and you look at the number of votes, because two of those states were caucuses -- let's not go into caucuses right now. (LAUGHTER) KLOBUCHAR: But, because two of those states were caucuses, I actually have the third biggest vote total in the field right now. And so, as we go forward, Super Tuesday, nearly a third of Americans are going to vote. So, I think people should have that ability, without trying to push people out of this race. And, as far as the mayor, I mean, my concern always has -- I am the one that pushed to have him on the debate stage. I don't know if that was a good idea for him. (LAUGHTER) KLOBUCHAR: But I -- I pushed for that because I think -- I think that you can't just have money determine politics. You just can't. And so he is running constant ads, and that's his right. He can do that. But it creates this uneven playing field. And it doesn't allow Americans to really examine who they want as head of the ticket. I am the only one up there on that stage that actually has won in -- repeatedly in rural areas and in suburban and areas that are more Republican and Independent, I won in Michelle Bachman's congressional district all three times, and I've done it by reaching it out and bringing people with us. I think that's what our nation needs right now. I think that's what our party needs, it's a reason that I've got gotten the endorsement of not just "The New York Times," but also "The Houston Chronicle," recently which is a very big newspaper as well as the San Francisco paper, as well as "The Seattle Times," paper, as well as today the Bangor, Maine paper. And most of the focus of these -- and these are long, long interviews you do where you answer questions -- oh, and the San Jose newspaper. You answer questions about what issues are in their local areas, as well as the country. And the reason they've endorsed me is they believe I can unite this country. I know I don't have the biggest bank account, but since the debates we've been able to bring in, from regular people online, millions and millions of dollars that have allowed me to continue this campaign the right way, have allowed me to do town halls in places like Raleigh, and get to all the states that we needed to as well as run some television ads. So I think we should pick the best candidate, not the candidate that has the biggest bank account. MACCALLUM: So Senator, you talked about your ability to win in Minnesota, and to turn those districts that are generally Republican. There was another Minnesota senator who very much wanted to be president of the United States as well. But Walter Mondale, in the end when he made it to the general election won only one state and it was Minnesota. How do you convince Democratic voters that, you know, at the position you're at right now which is about sixth in the coming primaries, that you can not only win the nomination but that you have what it takes to win nationwide and not remind them of what happened to the last Minnesota senator? KLOBUCHAR: OK, well I first want to defend Walter Mondale, he's 91-years-old. MACCALLUM: He's a very nice man. KLOBUCHAR: And as you know he was running against Ronald Reagan in his election. And he was a good vice president, so I just want to put that in there, as a defense -- and an excellent senator. So as far as my election, that was a long time ago, this is now. And when you look at what we need for a country, we are in such a unique moment. And we truly need someone in my mind, who can work with people across the aisle. I'm the only one in the Senate that's left on that stage that has a track record of doing that in a big way. I have passed over 100 bills as the lead Democrat. The Vanderbilt University in Tennessee, last Congress found me the most effective Democrat on 15 different metrics. I think that matters, because we have someone in the White House right now that wakes up every morning and sends mean tweets, that wakes up every day and figures out how to creates wedges. I think we can do so much better than that as a country. And what I have seen across our nation is a number of people who stayed home in 2016, or people who maybe even voted for Donald Trump that are standing back and they're watching those debates -- and believe it or not, they don't agree with everything that's said on the debate stage. I don't agree with everything that's said on the debate stage. But what they do -- what unites them is this, they believe that the heart of America is bigger than the heart of the person whose in that's in the White House right now. It is like the cattle rancher that I met in my own state who took me on a tour on an ATV, of his ranch, as we dodged these big cows and I thought this is not how I want to die. And he -- we went in to his house afterward, everyone had left -- and he said, you know, we voted for Trump. And I said, what do you mean, the ranchers? And he says, no, I don't like to talk about myself, he said -- I mean, I did because I was mad at the time about healthcare. And he said, but then the day after the inauguration I saw him standing in front of that wall. And I said, no, no -- the wall's not built. He said, no the CIA wall, and he remembered when the president gave a partisan speech about the size of his crowd in front of this sacred wall covered in the stars -- anonymous stars of the CIA agents that had died in the line of duty, and this guy said, that was bad, I couldn't handle this. And then he went on to explain some other partisan speeches and inappropriate things, and he just said that was it for me. So I think there's a lot of people that see this election as a decency check. They see it as a patriotism check, they see it in this patriotic state of North Carolina that has produced so many who've served our country. They see a president that stands next to Vladimir Putin and when he's asked about interference in our election, he makes a joke about it. Think about it, thousands of people from this great state, hundreds of thousands of people from America have lost their lives standing up for our democracy. That's what World War II was about, standing up for democracies across the world. Four little girls in a church in Birmingham, Alabama lost their lives as innocents because they wanted to be part of a democracy, and other people were trying to push it away from them. So many of the greatest moments and the worst moments in our country's history have been about our rights, our freedoms, and our democracies -- and this president makes a joke about it. BAIER: Senator -- KLOBUCHAR: So I just -- I want us to remember that, and one of my arguments from my candidacy is I bring people with me, I don't shut them out. And I think we need that right now. (APPLAUSE) BAIER: Senator, we have heard -- you know, you make the case for your candidacy. I guess, what would you tell somebody who says, I really like what she said but what's the path? Tell me the path about how you get the nomination? Are you for a contested convention that you go in and get it there? How do you get to the nomination? KLOBUCHAR: OK, well I start with this town hall. Just if everyone watching at home will support me, that could go a long way. So I start with this, and then I just keep going and we go and we reach people where they are and we build our support. I started at nearly nothing and we keep adding more support. I don't know what's going to happen at the convention -- BAIER: But that's the plan. KLOBUCHAR: -- I just know the people of America have a right to have a candidate that's coming at this in a different way with ideas when it comes to healthcare and education that aren't pipedreams, that are actual plans and actually will get things done for people. And so, as far as the convention -- the convention has rules, that will be set. BAIER: So if Bernie Sanders gets there with the plurality, leading the delegates and he gets to Milwaukee, you don't think that he should be the nominee? KLOBUCHAR: No, there's rules in the convention. He may be the nominee -- there's rules about how that works from ballot, to ballot, to ballot, and we have to follow the rules -- that's why you sent (ph) out rules, you can't change the rules in the middle of a game. That's how the rules are, and we will see who wins. Will the field be narrowed down at that point, some? I would think it would be, yes. But it shouldn't be narrowed down when only 3 percent of Americans have voted - BAIER: So you need to -- KLOBUCHAR: Certainly you must think this in this state, or I wouldn't be here (ph) -- BAIER: You need to win Minnesota -- you need to win Minnesota. KLOBUCHAR: Well I was (ph) -- yes, I think I should win my state. I think I'm 10 points ahead there and have done a lot of work and people know me well there. MACCALLUM: All right, let's go to Kim Rose (ph) who has a question from the audience. Kim (ph). KLOBUCHAR: Hey. QUESTION: Hi, Senator. KLOBUCHAR: Hi. QUESTION: My question is about healthcare, specifically regarding ACA expansion, and how it will help families afford coverage. Can you explain your plan, and how it would be more affordable? KLOBUCHAR: Sure. So I think you know the Affordable Care Act did a lot of good things, it protected people so they wouldn't be thrown off their health insurance for preexisting conditions. One of my fondest memories of this was being in a small town parade and seeing a woman with a stroller and she pointed at her toddler and she said, this is my son, he has Down's syndrome, she said, I will fight for his healthcare to the end. But then she pauses and she says, but this is what a preexisting condition looks like. We brought people with us, people from the disability community, people from AARP with us in that fight to preserve the Affordable Care Act. But your question is a good one, how do we make it better? How do we make the premiums more affordable? The drugs more affordable? And I think the way you do that is first of all not blowing it up like some of my colleagues, Senator Sanders and Senator Warren want to do. I did not get on that bill, Medicare for All. There was a lot of pressure to get on it, but I read it and on page eight of the bill it says that it will kick 149 million off their current health insurance in four years. So I don't think that's the answer. But what I do think is the answer is making the Affordable Care Act better, I would put forward a nonprofit public option, something that President Obama wanted to do from the beginning that would compete with the insurance companies, and one estimate is that for a family making, say $ 100,000 a year -- a family of four, it would bring the premiums down by 50 percent because it would simply produce more competition. You could do it with Medicare, that's that one idea (ph) -- or you could do it with Medicaid. The other thing I would do big time and there's been bipartisan support for this, is take on the pharmaceutical companies to bring the prices down. Nothing has been done on that, really, and that's why you see these spiraling costs of insulin and other common drugs. I lead the bill to unleash the power of 45 million seniors to negotiate better prices under Medicare -- that will make a big difference. Another thing, bringing in less expensive drugs from other countries. In Minnesota, we can see Canada from our porch, and so I am able to see those cheaper prices, and this is a bill that I had with my friend Senator McCain. After we sadly lost him, Senator Grassley has stepped in and we have that bill. Bernie and I did an amendment once at midnight on this exact concept and got 14 Republican senators to vote for it. So you know, I think that there is support for doing that. It would put enormous leverage on prices and that's a good idea. You can put a cap tied to international. And the other things I'd add for healthcare is, addiction as well as mental health. There is still so much stigma about getting treatment for both addiction and mental health. And I actually have a plan and I show how I pay for it to get treatment out to people that need it and make sure that we have enough hospital beds, especially in rural areas. It's really hard to get help for mental health, counselors in schools. We've had a 30 percent increase in suicides in this country in just 15 years; just to give you a sense of what we're talking about. It's not just people that you read about in the news, it is the raw numbers and it's a lot of veterans, farmers, LGBTQ community, kids. It's a very disturbing thing that's going on in our country. And just to let you know how much I want to get this done with the mental health and the treatment, for me it's personal. My dad struggled with alcoholism my whole life growing up. By the time my husband and I got married, he had three DWIs. On the third one, the judge said to him, treatment or jail, and he chose treatment and it changed his life. He's now 91, he is sober, he is in assisted living, his A.A. group still visits him there. And in his words, it's hard to get a drink and here anyway. (LAUGHTER) But it has truly changed his life, and I think everyone should have that same right to be pursued by grace, and there is a way to do that. Those are his words, his treatment, his faith, his family got him to that point. BAIER: Senator, you know, Senator Elizabeth Warren on the debate stage said your website had your healthcare plan that was the size of a Post-it Note. You pushed back on that, that sounded a little more detailed than the Post-it Note. But go ahead -- KLOBUCHAR: For one, you know, Minnesota invented the post-it notes, so I took it personally. (LAUGHTER) But secondly, it's been found (ph) now by two fact checking organizations to be patently false. After the debate, after millions of people saw her say it, it turned out to be totally false. The healthcare plan is many, many, many pages and it involves in greater detail that I just shared with you, including how I'm going to pay for things how we will get this done. BAIER: Well when you see polls like the new Fox News poll that says Democrats, more than 60 percent, some even higher, want Medicare for all, how do you answer them? KLOBUCHAR: I answer with the truth and the facts, and I think these debates should serve that purpose, that people see what this really means. It sounds really good on paper, but as we know, these plans -- first of all, all of Bernie's plans combined, combined, the Medicare for all, and many things, have been estimated to be $ 60 trillion. Just to be clear, as well intentioned as they are, that is three times the cost of the entire U.S. economy. Not the federal government, I know people often use that as a measure. Everything you're doing, the whole U.S. economy. And so I just don't think that that is where people are going to go when they understand that; and mostly, they don't want to be kicked off their healthcare, 149 million Americans. And there is a way to do this and make it better, and that is by creating this nonprofit public option, which I mentioned, which is what Barack Obama wanted to do in the first place. MACCALLUM: We're going to take a quick break and we'll be back with more questions with Senator Amy Klobuchar in Raleigh, North Carolina right after this. Stay with us. (APPLAUSE) (COMMERCIAL BREAK) BAIER: Welcome back to Raleigh, North Carolina, in our Fox News town hall with Democratic presidential candidate, Minnesota Senator Amy Klobuchar. One of the obstacles Democrats face in many states, including here in North Carolina, is the fact or at least the perception that the economy is very strong. There are certainly numbers to back that up. Correspondent Peter Doocy has more on that tonight. (BEGIN VIDEO TAPE) PETER DOOCY, FOX CORRESPONDENT: There's still time for candidates to court North Carolinians. UNIDENTIFIED FEMALE: I'm just in general having a really hard time deciding who I'm going to support. DOOCY: The unemployment rate is there a 20 year low, but some could not wait to pick a Trump challenger. UNIDENTIFIED MALE: I've already voted early, I voted for Elizabeth Warren because I think she's best positioned to do that. DOOCY: The trade war with China dried up Tar Heel state tobacco exports to China, but overall, exports of China have actually grown, boosted by pharmaceuticals. UNIDENTIFIED MALE: On Super Tuesday, North Carolina has the third largest delegate load among all the states. And then when you look at the fall election, everybody agrees that we are a battleground state. DOOCY: And some Democrats are hoping for a lead now for student loan debt. UNIDENTIFIED MALE: It's crushing. And you know, health care is a big thing for me too. They go hand-in-hand. You can't afford things because you're in debt. DOOCY: Fifty-seven hundred manufacturing jobs have been added since Trump took office compared to 21,000 in the previous three years. UNIDENTIFIED FEMALE: North Carolina's minimum wage is $ 7.25 an hour still, and we think it should be doubled, at least 15, 20. DOOCY: There's another problem for Democrats, a lack of confidence in the current crop of candidates. UNIDENTIFIED FEMALE: A lot of the candidates I'm worried are not going to have a chance to even beat Trump, and that's the biggest thing I want to happen, so it's very frustrating to me. DOOCY: Despite the frustration, people are paying attention. Every person we found from Raleigh rattled off plus and minuses about different Democratic candidates as knowledgeable as voters anywhere we've been and they all plan to vote in the primary. Bret and Martha? (END VIDEO TAPE) BAIER: Peter, thank you. MACCALLUM: Thanks, Peter Doocy. So, Senator Klobuchar, one of the things that small business owners say has really helped them in this economy to grow was the - END 
2020-02-27	WASHINGTON ??President Donald Trump said Wednesday the nation is prepared for the coronavirus during a press conference where he announced that Vice President Mike Pence would lead the administration's response. "We're very, very ready for this," Trump said. "The risk to the American people remains very low." Trump said he trusted the advice from his top health officials, but he also at times appeared to contradict him. The president repeatedly said he didn't believe it was inevitable that the virus would spread in the United States but acknowledged that it "probably" would. Asked if he thought schools and other public institutions should prepare for the virus to attain a more widespread reach, he said he thought they should, adding that people should prepare the same way they prepare for flu season. The president slammed congressional Democrats who have criticized his response and who have suggested that the administration's initial request for $2.5 billion in emergency funding was inadequate. But Trump also acknowledged that some Republicans, including House Minority Leader Kevin McCarthy, have suggested more money may be needed. He seemed open to that, without citing a new number he thought might be appropriate. "If they want to do more," he said, "we'll do more." Trump, who held the rare press conference after markets closed, also fired back at criticism from House Speaker Nancy Pelosi, saying that she was "incompetent" and "trying to create panic." But the president was vague about the need to take additional immediate steps. He said he would consider travel restrictions but said the situation did not demand it now. Both Trump and Pence indicated that the White House would bring on additional staff to deal with the virus. "At the right time we may do that," Trump said of travel restrictions to countries such as South Korea and Italy that have experienced recent spikes in cases. "But right now it's not the right time." Anthony Fauci, who heads the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, appeared to throw cold water on Trump's early assertion that the U.S. was getting "close" to developing a vaccine. Fauci said that it could take a year to 18 months, if testing went well, before a vaccine could be effectively applied to respond to the virus. Trump, who suggested two weeks ago that the threat would go away once temperatures warmed in April, huddled earlier Wednesday at the White House with officials from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention to go over the administration's strategy for dealing with the virus. Lawmakers from both parties expressed concern that the administration isn't doing enough to prepare for a possible outbreak of the virus that has spawned more than 80,000 cases around the world, including 59 confirmed cases in the USA. Health and Human Services Secretary Alex Azar shot down reports that the administration plans to appoint a czar to lead the coronavirus strategy. Azar assured the House Appropriations Committee that the administration's strategy is working "extremely well." "If it doesn't work or there is a need for a change ??then that would be for the president to decide," he said. Trump fired off a series of tweets early Wednesday in which he said health officials are doing "a great job" in addressing the global epidemic. The day before, he described the epidemic as "very well under control in our country" despite a sharp increase in cases. Financial markets have fallen sharply amid concerns over the global outbreak, and critics accused the president of not doing enough. "Democrats talking point is that we are doing badly," Trump tweeted. "If the virus disappeared tomorrow, they would say we did a really poor, and even incompetent, job. Not fair, but it is what it is." "The coronavirus story has changed in the past few days and led to a sharp market sell-off on Tuesday as fears of the virus spreading increased," said GOP consultant Matt Mackowiak. "At this point, it is urgently important that the administration develop a bipartisan plan and communicate facts on this subject to the public." The White House requested $2.5 billion in emergency funding to deal with the outbreak, but congressional Democrats slammed the request as "woefully insufficient." Senate Democratic leader Chuck Schumer offered a counterproposal for an emergency spending package of $8.5 billion and ridiculed the president as "incompetent and dangerous." "You reduced our ability to prevent epidemics. You proposed cuts to CDC funding. You just trusted other governments (like China) to handle this," Schumer wrote on Twitter. "You can spin this any way you want, but it's incompetence." Some Republicans condemned the administration's response as well. Sen. John Kennedy, R-La., ripped into acting Homeland Security Secretary Chad Wolf during a hearing Tuesday, arguing that the administration has not provided the public with crucial information about the virus. Kennedy asked Wolf how many coronavirus cases the administration expects in the USA. Wolf didn't know, prompting Kennedy to exclaim: "You're the head of Homeland Security, and your job is to keep us safe. ??Don't you think you ought to check on that?" Ken Cuccinelli, a top member of Trump's coronavirus task force, turned to Twitter for help Monday after he had trouble calling up an online map produced by Johns Hopkins University to show the virus' spread. "Has the Johns Hopkins map of the coronavirus stopped working for other people, or just me?" he asked, adding that it appeared the hospital had put the map behind a paywall. "Seems like bad timing to stop helping the world with this (previously) useful resource," Cuccinelli wrote. "Here's hoping it goes back up soon." Other Twitter users cited Cuccinelli's tweets as an example of what they said was the administration's inept response to the outbreak and pointed out that, as acting deputy secretary of Homeland Security, he should have direct access to the same numbers through the CDC. Sen. Lamar Alexander, R-Tenn., chairman of the Senate committee with jurisdiction over health care, said the United States needs to redouble its efforts to combat the virus. Asked if the administration's request for $2.5 billion was enough to fight the outbreak, he said, "We'll see." "We've done a good job so far," he said, noting the slow spread of the virus among Americans. "The problem is, it's very aggressive, it's spreading among other countries, and it will inevitably spread here." House Republicans pushed back on criticism that the administration is not prepared to combat the virus. "We're better prepared than anybody else. It doesn't mean you're going to escape through this with absolutely no impact," said Rep. Tom Cole, R-Okla., who sits on the House Appropriations Committee. House Minority Leader Kevin McCarthy, R-Calif., said that if anyone is to blame for a tepid response, it's China. "The lack of accountability from China harms the entire world," he said, adding that China's resistance to releasing facts about the virus, including when it was discovered, prevented quicker action. In San Francisco, Mayor London Breed issued an emergency declaration aimed at preparing the city for an outbreak ??even though no cases of the virus have been confirmed there. "Although there are still zero confirmed cases in San Francisco residents, the global picture is changing rapidly, and we need to step up preparedness," Breed said. And on Wednesday, Orange County ??which has had one case ??declared a local health emergency, though for a different reason. Supervisors Michelle Steel and Andrew Do said it was a response opposing the proposal to quarantine coronavirus patients in a local facility, which has sparked an uproar. Contributing: John Bacon, Christal Hayes, Nicholas Wu 
2020-02-27	It is far too early to get in a panic over the fate of the Tokyo Olympics. The coronavirus is not to be taken lightly, with more than 80,000 cases and 2,700 deaths in 40-plus countries. Longtime International Olympic Committee member Dick Pound is probably right when he says a decision on the Games would need to be made by late May and that postponing or moving them aren't viable options. But Pound ??and let's make it clear, he was speaking for himself, not the IOC ??didn't say a decision will be made. He said that would be the time frame if there's a decision to be made. That's an important distinction to make. And we're a long way from it. The world would have to be in a full-blown pandemic, the disease still spreading rapidly and unable to be contained, for the Games to be canceled. But consider that we didn't even know about the coronavirus until two months ago. The reach of the disease is constantly changing, and clinical trials on a possible treatment are underway in China and the United States. All of which makes it impossible to predict ??good or bad ??where we will be in three weeks, let alone three months. "Our basic thoughts are that we will go ahead with the Olympic and Paralympic Games as scheduled," Toshiro Muto, the CEO of the Tokyo organizing committee, said Wednesday at a news conference in Japan. "For the time being, the situation of the coronavirus infection is, admittedly, difficult to predict, but we will take measures such that we'll have a safe Olympic and Paralympic Games." The IOC has said repeatedly, and did so again Wednesday, that it is in contact with the World Health Organization. That Tokyo organizers will work with international health officials to "review any countermeasures that may be necessary." But panicking, or fretting over what ifs and maybes several months down the road, is pointless. Especially since the IOC has been here before. Many times. Four years ago Zika was supposed to bring about the ruin of the Rio Olympics. Some notable PGA Tour players even used it as an excuse to pull out of the first Games to feature golf since 1904. Not a single case of Zika was reported during the Olympics, by athletes or spectators, according to WHO. Fears over an outbreak of H1N1, or the swine flu, amounted to nothing at the Vancouver Games in 2010. Ditto for the bird flu before the Pyeongchang Olympics in 2018. There were worries about terror attacks at the Athens Olympics, and rumors that Black Widow suicide bombers would strike in Sochi. There were suggestions the United States should consider a boycott of Pyeongchang because of tensions with North Korea. The pollution in Beijing was going to make athletes sick. None of these fears ever came to pass. This is not meant to diminish the seriousness of the coronavirus, or suggest that the IOC and Tokyo organizers shouldn't keep a close watch on developments. Japan is wise to cancel or limit sporting events in the near future that could draw big crowds, like Sunday's Tokyo Marathon, where only elite runners will be allowed. But a dose of perspective is needed. It was just last week that the WHO wrapped up a two-day review of Games preparations without sounding any alarms. "Certainly the advice we've received externally from the WHO is that there's no cause for any contingency plans or canceling the Games or moving the Games," John Coates, an Australian IOC member who headed the coordination commission for the review, said afterward. Despite outbreaks of diseases, geopolitical tensions and plans that fell woefully behind schedule, the Olympics have gone off as scheduled since 1948. In the modern era, which dates to 1896, the only cancellations have been due to world wars. The opening ceremony for the Tokyo Olympics is five months away. Let's save the Chicken Little hysteria until it's actually warranted. 
2020-02-26	TONY DOKOUPIL: Now to our other big story today. The CDC says Americans should begin preparing for a likely coronavirus pandemic now. The agency says an outbreak in the U.S. is inevitable and the disruption to everyday life may be severe. Nancy Cordes is on Capitol Hill, where lawmakers were briefed yesterday. Nancy, this-- this sounds very serious. Is it being taken seriously on the Hill? NANCY CORDES (CBS News Chief Congressional Correspondent): It is, Tony. And that CDC warning ran counter to what the President said, which is that everyone with coronavirus is getting better. Now some lawmakers from both sides are questioning the administration's preparations for this virus, even as the White House argues that it's Democrats and the media who are trying to, quote, "disturb the American people with fearful rhetoric." (Begin VT) PRESIDENT DONALD TRUMP: The coronavirus, which is very well under control in our country. NANCY CORDES: Even as the White House downplayed the disease-- LARRY KUDLOW: We have tightly contained this. NANCY CORDES: --CDC officials warned an outbreak could be inevitable. DR. ANNE SCHUCHAT (CDC Principal Deputy Director): Now it's not so much a question of if this will happen anymore, but rather more a question of exactly when this will happen. SENATOR CHUCK SCHUMER: They don't have a plan. NANCY CORDES: Lawmakers from both sides challenged the White House Tuesday on its 2.5-billion-dollar budget for fighting coronavirus-- SENATOR RICHARD SHELBY (R-Alabama): If you lowball something like this, you'll pay for it later. SENATOR JOHN KENNEDY (R-Louisiana): Here is a secretary of homeland security. CHAD WOLF (Acting Homeland Security Secretary): Yes, Sir. SENATOR JOHN KENNEDY: And you can't tell me if we have enough respirators. NANCY CORDES: --and its plan for stockpiling supplies. SENATOR JOHN KENNEDY: Do we have enough face masks? CHAD WOLF: We-- for the Department of Homeland Security-- SENATOR JOHN KENNEDY: I'm not asking for the Department of Homeland Security. I'm asking for the American people. CHAD WOLF: For the-- for the entire American public? SENATOR JOHN KENNEDY: Yes. CHAD WOLF: No. I would say probably not. NANCY CORDES: Other countries have struggled to curb the virus. Italy now reporting more than three hundred fifty cases. South Korea has reported nearly thirteen hundred. In Iran, the deputy health minister himself has contracted the virus and the country has the highest death toll outside of China. SENATOR LINDSEY GRAHAM: It seems to be getting worse, not better. NANCY CORDES: President Trump predicted that a vaccine is right around the corner, health officials disagreed. DR. ANTHONY FAUCI (NIAID Director): When you're talking about the availability of a vaccine, even to scale it up, you're talking about a year to a year and a half. NANCY CORDES: Those mixed messages causing some confusion on Capitol Hill. The public is getting a very different message from the White House, which is saying this is all but contained. SENATOR ROY BLUNT (R-Missouri): Well, I don't-- I can't comment on what the White House has been saying on this because people who work for the White House are not saying that. (End VT) NANCY CORDES: But that is exactly what the White House is saying. The HHS secretary argued yesterday afternoon that because the number of cases here in the U.S. has barely changed over the past two weeks, the virus is contained in the U.S., at least for now. Anthony. ANTHONY MASON: Nancy, thank you. Doctor Anne Schuchat, principal deputy director of the Centers for Disease Control joins us now from CDC headquarters in Atlanta. Doctor Schuchat, good morning. Thanks for being here. DR. ANNE SCHUCHAT (CDC Principal Deputy Director): My pleasure. ANTHONY MASON: As-- as we just heard Nancy Cordes allude to, there's-- there's some mixed message-- messages that seem to be coming at us on-- on the coronavirus. On the one hand, you've got the White House saying it's tightly contained and you've got the CDC saying the spread of the virus here is inevitable. What are we supposed to make of this? DR. ANNE SCHUCHAT: You know, it could be a confusing time right now, as we've seen the coronavirus spread in China and now in a number of other countries. The good news is that here in the United States, the virus is contained with an aggressive approach. We've been able to keep the numbers down. Only fourteen cases detected through our public health system and medical system and forty-three other cases detected among people repatriated from hot spots in China or on the cruise ship. But as we see outbreaks in Italy and Iran and South Korea, we need to be prepared in case things change here. GAYLE KING: Doctor Schuchat, your-- if and when scenario was a little unsettling for a lot of people because you said it's not a matter of if, it's a matter of when. Do you have a timetable in mind and are you concentrating on a certain part of the country? DR. ANNE SCHUCHAT: We really need to be ready everywhere. We've seen in other outbreaks that there can be what's called a popcorn pattern where one community has an outbreak and another doesn't. You can see that that's what's occurring in Italy right now, northern Italy has more disease and we're not really seeing it in other parts. So, we cannot predict exactly where there may be community transmission. We can't say for sure if we will get community transmission. But based on what we're seeing in Europe and the Middle East, we think it's more likely than we thought a week or two ago. TONY DOKOUPIL: Doctor, when you talk about the approach, what specific steps is the CDC taking to prevent a wider outbreak here in the U.S.? DR. ANNE SCHUCHAT: We have been working aggressively on a border strategy at airports and on a strategy with clinicians to detect individuals who have this virus early and to manage them appropriately. We've learned a lot in the last few weeks about the virus. It doesn't seem to be as severe as we first feared, but it does seem to be quite transmissible. And some people have very mild symptoms or possibly even no symptoms at all. GAYLE KING: We're hearing you say that the screening is in place for people who are coming here. What about people who might have already been infected and who are already here, what about those people? DR. ANNE SCHUCHAT: Absolutely. One of the things we're doing is increasing what we called community surveillance so that we can find cases earlier so that we understand whether there already is virus circulating that's been undetected. ANTHONY MASON: Who is most at risk for getting infected by coronavirus? DR. ANNE SCHUCHAT: Based on what we know so far, the severe cases are primarily occurring in the elderly, in adults with chronic conditions like diabetes or chronic lung disease. We haven't seen disease to any great extent in children, and that's a difference with seasonal flu or other influenza. One of the big drivers of our flu outbreaks each year is the high rates of illness in children but we haven't seen that with this virus. Something we're on the lookout for, but that hasn't been detected so far. ANTHONY MASON: All right. Doctor Anne Schuchat with the CDC. Thanks so much for being with us this morning. DR. ANNE SCHUCHAT: It was my pleasure. TONY DOKOUPIL: The firefighters in Southern California battled a huge fire this morning at the largest refinery on the West Coast. Flames could be seen shooting from the Marathon Petroleum refinery in Carson. Fire officials say there was an explosion before the fire started burning in a cooling tower. All lanes of the 405 Freeway were temporarily closed. The refinery processes about three hundred and sixty thousand barrels of crude oil per day. No reports of injuries fortunately and no word on what sparked the fire. ANTHONY MASON: An heir to the Hot Pockets fortune is the latest person to be sentenced in the college admissions scandal. A judge sentenced forty-nine-year-old Michelle Janavs to five months for paying bribes to get her two daughters into school. Janavs' family invented Hot Pockets. She admitted to paying one hundred thousand dollars to have a proctor correct her daughter's answers on the ACT exam. Prosecutors say she also agreed to pay two hundred thousand dollars to have one of her daughters get into USC as a fake beach volleyball recruit. GAYLE KING: First on CBS THIS MORNING, what a grandfather charged in the death of his little granddaughter in a fall from a cruise ship is saying about a major development in his case. But first, it is seven eighteen, time to check your local weather. (LOCAL WEATHER BREAK) (ANNOUNCEMENTS) ANTHONY MASON: We have much more news ahead, a juror in the Harvey Weinstein trial tells what it was like to reach a verdict. WOMAN: Every last woman that took the stand, I wish them the best. I hope that this is now a chapter that they could close. ANTHONY MASON: Coming up, how tensions rose in the jury room during the deliberations. You're watching CBS THIS MORNING. (ANNOUNCEMENTS) END 
2020-02-26	As the coronavirus spreads and raises the risk of recession, some analysts are further downgrading their forecasts for the U.S. economy. Mark Zandi, chief economist of Moody's Analytics, estimates the outbreak will reduce growth during the first three months of 2020 by six-tenths of a percentage point to 1.3%, more than his previous forecast of a four- to five-tenths of a point. The halt to Boeing's production of its 737 Max airliner also is set to significantly hurt the economy this quarter. The epidemic's spread in recent days has sharply increased the number of cases in China, South Korea, Italy and Iran. The number of infections worldwide is approaching 80,000, most of them in China, and the death toll now tops 2,600. There have been 35 cases in the U.S. The outbreak is taking a growing toll on the U.S. economy, chiefly through reduced travel and tourism, Zandi says. Also, manufacturers will likely export less to Asia and Europe as demand there slackens. And lower imports from those regions are expected to lead to shortages of intermediate parts and retail products in the U.S., along with higher prices that curb spending. China outbreak hits U.S. construction The construction industry is also likely to be affected, because it imports 30% of its products from China, more than from any other country, says Richard Branch, chief economist of Dodge Data and Analytics. Unless the virus is quickly contained, he says, "supplies will continue to tighten ??causing building costs to escalate and potential delays or cancellations of projects." And the 1,032-point plunge in the Dow Jones industrial average on Monday over reports of the virus's spread reflects market volatility that's likely to curtail consumer and business spending, Zandi says. For all of 2020, Zandi predicts the virus will trim growth by two-tenths of a percentage point to 1.7%. But if the outbreak becomes a global pandemic ??a risk Zandi puts at 40%, up from 20% ??that almost certainly would result in a U.S. and global recession, he says. Threat to U.S. economic expansion "It's becoming a threat to the economic expansion that is rising," he says. The U.S. economy has grown for a record 101/2 years. Diane Swonk, chief economist at Grant Thornton, also is increasing her estimate of the outbreak's impact, possibly by about two-tenths of a point. "It's causing an economic pandemic," she says. "We have a global reaction that's literally shutting down businesses." Swonk is concerned that some American manufacturers won't receive parts from countries overseas, prompting them to lay off workers, who, in turn, will cut back on spending. "The longer it goes on, the more the risk of a vicious cycle," says Swonk, who also worries about a "fear factor" that triggers a pullback in business investment beyond actual supply chain disruptions. Will the virus affect interest rates? Other economists have a more measured view. RSM chief economist Joe Brusuelas and Nationwide chief economist David Berson say the virus's advance has not yet led them to further lower their forecasts. Both estimate the outbreak will trim first-quarter growth by a relatively modest two-tenths of a percentage point. Swonk believes the intensified outbreak will lead the Federal Reserve to cut interest rates again at its mid-March meeting. The Fed has been taking a wait-and-see approach since lowering rates three times last year but said that could change if there was a "material" change in its outlook. Another Fed rate cut likely would provide a boost to stocks. Zandi, however, doesn't believe the Fed will reduce rates again unless the epidemic worsens significantly. The central bank also could act if Monday's market turmoil continues, says Rubeela Farooqi, chief U.S. economist of High Frequency Economics, The recent sharp drop in long-term Treasury rates ??which reflects a dimmer global outlook because of the coronavirus ??is likely aiding consumers more than any Fed cut to short-term rates, says Tom Porcelli, chief US economist of RBC Capital Markets. Ten-year Treasury rates directly affect mortgage rates, for example. Cleveland Fed President Loretta Mester said Monday that the virus poses a "downside risk" to her outlook. But at the National Association of Business Economics policy conference in Washington, she added that "at this point, it is difficult to assess the magnitude of the economic effects." 
2020-02-26	A federal health official warned Tuesday that the deadly coronavirus could cause "severe" disruptions in the USA as global experts struggled to fend off the outbreak and avoid a pandemic. "Disruption to everyday life may be severe," Nancy Messonnier, director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention's National Center for Immunization and Respiratory Diseases, warned at a news conference Tuesday. Schools could be closed, mass public gatherings suspended and businesses forced to have employees work remotely, she said. Messonnier said the coronavirus has caused sickness and death and sustained person-to-person transmission ??two of the three factors for a pandemic. "As community spread is detected in more and more countries, the world moves closer to meeting the third criteria ??worldwide spread of the new virus," Messonnier said. Although the World Health Organization determined Monday that the term pandemic "did not fit the facts," experts said it very soon could. Dennis Carroll, former director of the U.S. Agency for International Development's Global Health Security and Development Unit, credited China's "extraordinary control measures" with delaying the spread of the virus, but he said avoiding a pandemic is "very unlikely." "The dramatic uptick of cases in South Korea, Iran and Italy are reflective of a self-sustaining spreading of the virus and a clear message that the horse is out of the barn," Carroll, who leads the Global Virome Project science cooperative, told USA TODAY. Melissa Nolan, a medical doctor and professor of epidemiology at the University of South Carolina's Arnold School of Public Health, cited new clusters in Iran, which faces at least 95 cases and has had 16 deaths, and Italy, which is dealing with 322 cases. "If we continue to see focalized local transmission in areas outside of China, the WHO will need to reconvene," Nolan told USA TODAY on Tuesday. "We are very close to seeing this virus becoming a pandemic." Nolan said responses to the outbreaks in Iran and Italy could help health officials in other countries prepare their own medical and quarantine policies before an outbreak. That is crucial, said Robert Glatter, an emergency physician at New York's Lenox Hill Hospital who fears the world is on the "cusp" of a pandemic. "Trying to contain a disease which spreads like influenza, in this case COVID-19, is almost impossible," he said. "We are talking about rapid-fire and sustained transmission." That means redirecting the focus from containment measures to preparing for treatment of big numbers of sick patients with antivirals while continuing the effort to develop an effective vaccine, he said. Beyond an epidemic, which involves a defined region, a pandemic has global impact. It can be a moving target ??there is no threshold, such as number of deaths or infections. WHO, which could make a pandemic declaration, describes a pandemic as "an epidemic occurring worldwide, or over a very wide area, crossing international boundaries and usually affecting a large number of people." WHO Director-General Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus does not want to go there. "I have spoken consistently about the need for facts, not fear," Tedros said. "Using the word 'pandemic' now does not fit the facts, but it may certainly cause fear." Ogbonnaya Omenka, an assistant professor and public health specialist at Butler University's College of Pharmacy and Health Sciences, said he understands the concerns. The main implication of declaring a pandemic is requiring, or at least further urging, national governments to prepare facilities and health workers to treat a lot of patients, he told USA TODAY. "Not only is this costly, it may also trigger panic," he warned. "Countries may as well put in place these plans without the official announcement." Tedros stressed that a pandemic declaration would not eliminate the need for health authorities to continue testing, limiting contact with the sick and encouraging frequent hand washing ??the front-line defense. He noted that cases in China have declined for the past three weeks. In Wuhan, where health services were stretched when the outbreak began in December, the fatality rate is 2%-4%. Elsewhere in China, it's less than 1%. This season's flu death rate in the USA is less than 0.1%, according to the CDC. More than 30 million Americans have suffered from the flu this season, while the global number of confirmed coronavirus cases hasn't reached 100,000. There is a vaccine for the flu. Labs around the world are scrambling to develop one for the coronavirus. President Donald Trump requested $2.5billion to fight the virus, including more than $1 billion toward developing a vaccine. At a news conference Tuesday in India, Trump tried to tamp down concerns, saying the virus was "very well under control in our country." Confirmed cases totaled 57 Tuesday, and no one has died in the USA, although one American died in Wuhan. "We have very few people with it, and the people are all getting better," Trump said. Messonnier acknowledged the CDC struck a more urgent tone in warnings about the virus in the USA. The proliferation of coronavirus in countries outside China raised the agency's expectations the virus will spread here. "People are concerned about this situation ??I would say rightfully so," she said. "But we are putting our concerns to work preparing. Now is the time for businesses, hospitals, communities, schools and everyday people to begin preparing as well." 
2020-02-25	A swath of "hot spot" cities and towns across northern Italy were in lockdown Monday as authorities battled to contain a fast-spreading outbreak of the new coronavirus that has killed 2,600 people in China. The unrelenting spread of the virus pushed global stocks sharply lower Monday amid fears that the outbreak could become a global pandemic ??a worldwide outbreak of a serious new illness. The outbreak is not there yet, said Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, director general of the World Health Organization. "For the moment, we are not witnessing the uncontained global spread of this virus, and we are not witnessing large-scale, severe disease or death," Tedros said Monday. "Does this virus have pandemic potential? Absolutely. Are we there yet? From our assessment, not yet." Tedros said a WHO team has determined the outbreak there peaked in late January and early February and has been in decline since. A boom in cases in Italy, South Korea and Iran, he said, was "certainly very concerning." But he said China has shown that the virus can be contained. In Europe, "protecting our citizens is the main priority," said Stella Kyriakides, European Commissioner for Health and Food Safety. "We are all taking this situation seriously, but without giving in to panic, disorder or disinformation." In Italy, the death toll rose to five. With more than 200 cases of the virus confirmed, Italy is easily the most involved European country. Italian Prime Minister Giuseppe Conte has banned people from leaving infected areas, and police have been ordered to fine anyone entering or leaving certain towns. Soldiers patrolled piazzas in Milan, and Venice shut down its carnival three days early as Italy tightened restrictions on large public gatherings. Police roadblocks have been set up to stop people entering or leaving about a dozen towns. Several regions have closed schools, universities, museums, monuments and libraries and banned public events that attract crowds. Basilicata Gov. Vito Bardi ordered 14-day quarantines for anyone entering his southern region from the northern part of the country. Virus investigators in Italy suffered a setback when a person who recently visited China and was thought to be the "patient zero" for the Italian outbreak tested negative for the virus. Kyriakides announced that a team of experts from the European Center for Disease Prevention and Control and the World Health Organization was being sent to help Italy in its efforts to limit the transmission of the virus, known as COVID-19. Iran's death toll from the coronavirus has risen to 12, parliament spokesman Asadollah Abbasi said, giving the country the most fatalities from the outbreak outside China. The government rejected a claim from a lawmaker, published in a reformist-leaning media outlet, that 50 people had died. Deputy Health Minister Iraj Harirchi said in a news conference on state TV that "this is not the time for political confrontations." In China, the National People's Congress postponed the legislative session set to begin March 5. No new date was set. Also Monday, the epicenter city of Wuhan announced a plan to relax the month-long lockdown and allow small groups of nonresidents to leave for their homes. But a few hours later the plan was rescinded. Government figures have shown a decline in the number of new cases, even as cases are sharply rising in Italy, South Korea and a few other countries. The U.S. total of 35 confirmed cases remained unchanged Monday. 
2020-02-25	A sharp rise in coronavirus cases outside China jolted global financial markets Monday, reviving concerns about the potential economic fallout from the outbreak. The Dow Jones industrial average plunged 1,031.61 points, or 3.6%, to close at 27,960.80, its biggest one-day point drop since February 2018, when inflation fears rattled investors. It erased the blue-chip average's gains for the year. The Standard & Poor's 500 slid 3.4% to end at 3,225.89 but is still sitting within about 5% of its record high Wednesday. The technology-heavy Nasdaq Composite shed 3.7% to end at 9,221.28. Stocks were pummeled after South Korea reported 231 new cases of the deadly virus Monday, bringing the country's total to 833 cases. China reported 409 new cases, raising the mainland's total to 77,150. The 150 new deaths from the illness raised China's total to 2,592. Elsewhere, a surge in reports of new cases in Iran and Italy raised the prospect of more disruptions. "Many investors remain complacent about the far-reaching impact of coronavirus, which is continuing to spread ??and a faster pace," Nigel Green, chief executive and founder of financial consultancy deVere Group, said in a note. "This will inevitably hit financial markets and investors' complacency leaves many wide open to nasty surprises." Monday's decline battered stocks across most industries, including everything from airlines to technology companies to large financial firms. The sharp drop comes just days after stocks rallied to all-time highs, signaling a potential mood shift as investors looked for safety in havens like gold and U.S. bonds. The developments raised fresh worries that the outbreak could threaten to derail global growth. Investors fear that production delays in China because of the virus could force multinational companies to cut their earnings outlooks. Diane Swonk, chief economist at Grant Thornton, said the spread of the coronavirus is prompting her to increase her estimate of the outbreak's impact on U.S. economic growth in the first half of the year. She had forecast the virus would cut growth by three-tenths of a percentage point in the first quarter but now says the impact could be about half a percentage point, though she hasn't completed her analysis. "It's causing an economic pandemic," she says. "We have a global reaction that's literally shutting down businesses." The main effect is on American manufacturers that may not receive parts from countries such as Italy as overseas factories shutter. Those U.S. companies could lay off workers, who, in turn, cut back on spending. Expectations have climbed among traders that the Federal Reserve will cut interest rates this year to help cushion the U.S. economy. Fed-funds futures, used by investors to place bets on the course of the central bank's policy, showed 90% of the market on Monday priced in at least one rate cut this year, up from a 58% probability a month ago, according to data from CME Group. Still, another rate cut from the Fed might not have the same influence on the global economy compared with other times in recent memory, analysts caution. One reason why: the virus is hurting supply for companies, not demand, according to Tim Bray, senior portfolio manager at GuideStone Capital Management. "No matter how much the Fed cuts rates, auto manufactures and other similar industries can't suddenly produce supplies and inventories if factories are shut down," Bray says. On Monday, Dow components United Health and Nike were among the biggest decliners in the blue-chip average, shedding 7.8% and 4.3%, respectively. Technology companies were among the worst hit by the sell-off. Apple, which depends on China for a lot of business, slid 4.8%. Financial stocks sold off as worries about the global spread of the virus sent bond yields tumbling. Shares of JPMorgan Chase, Goldman Sachs and Bank of America fell 2.7%, 2.6% and 4.7%, respectively. The yield on the 10-year Treasury, which is a benchmark for mortgages and other loans, fell to 1.38% from 1.47% Friday. That yield was close to 1.90% at the start of this year. Investors also flocked to other safe-haven corners of the market. Gold prices jumped 1.7%. Commodity prices slumped over the outbreak's impact on demand for crude oil. U.S. oil prices slid 3.7% to to $51.43 per barrel. In Europe, the Stoxx Europe 600 index fell 3.8% while Italy's FTSE MIB shed 5.4%. Benchmark stock indexes in Hong Kong and Sydney fell 1.8% and 2.3%, respectively. Although global stocks suffered sharp declines, the pullback shouldn't be viewed as unusual, some analysts say. Some had warned that stock prices were looking pricey compared with historical averages. "The market had gone too far too fast," says Timothy Chubb, chief investment officer at Girard, a wealth management firm. "I'm surprised it hadn't started taking the virus more seriously until this point." Bray of GuideStone Capital Management agrees. "Investors need to invest for the long term, stick with their strategy and ride out volatility at points like this," Bray says. "Whenever there's heightened risks, it's always a good idea to take a look at your long-term strategy and make sure you're on the right track so that you're appropriately diversified." Contributing: Paul Davidson of USA TODAY; The Associated Press 
2020-02-24	TONY DOKOUPIL: Kobe Bryant and his daughter, Gianna, will be honored today in the building where he became a basketball legend. Los Angeles Staples Center is expected to be filled to capacity with many of the same fans who watched him play during his twenty-year career with that team. Dana Jacobson reports from outside Staples Center. (Begin VT) DANA JACOBSON (CBS THIS MORNING: SATURDAY Co-Host): In a city that spent the past four weeks mourning the loss of a legend, today's memorial will be an opportunity to celebrate the lives of Kobe Bryant and his daughter, Gianna. KAREEM ABDUL-JABBAR (Former Los Angeles Lakers Center): I expect more evidence of what we've seen so far, you know, how-- how many people have enjoyed Kobe's career and just taken him into their hearts. You drive around and seen all kinds of memorials to Kobe, big signs, paintings, it's amazing. DANA JACOBSON: NBA star Kareem Abdul-Jabbar will be at the ceremony in what's expected to be a who's who of the sports world. Some of whom may speak at the event. The memorial is also expected to be Vanessa Bryant's first public appearance since the death of her husband and daughter. In an Instagram post, she said today's date 2-24-20 is particularly symbolic with the month and day representing Kobe and Gianna's jersey numbers and the year representing the number of years Vanessa and Kobe were together. Kobe and Gianna were laid to rest in a private funeral service earlier this month. Former Laker John Salley won a championship with Kobe and believes there's no better place than Staples Center to honor the two. The idea that people will come together inside house to that Kobe built-- JOHN SALLEY (Former NBA Player): Mm-Hm. DANA JACOBSON: --what does that mean? JOHN SALLEY: It's big. It will be some closure for everybody who loves Laker nation and seeing their star. And if Vanessa and the girls are there, it's all the energy these-- the audience can give to her. (End VT) DANA JACOBSON: And Salley will be one of the former players in attendance today. As for current players, I'm told, the Celtics who played here yesterday will also have members attending along with the Lakers and Clippers. But, Anthony, that guest list of celebrities and athletes has really been kept under wraps. TONY DOKOUPIL: All right. Dana Jacobson. Thanks, Dana. It is seven nineteen, time to check your local weather. (LOCAL WEATHER BREAK) (ANNOUNCEMENTS) ANTHONY MASON: We have much more news ahead. Why the South Carolina race is still anyone's game. (ANNOUNCEMENTS) *****************************************************************************(7:30 AM, EDT) GAYLE KING: Hey, it's seven thirty. Here's what's happening on CBS THIS MORNING. SENATOR AMY KLOBUCHAR: So, we need you to vote because you got to vote like your life depends on it. GAYLE KING: Candidates campaign hard before South Carolina's CBS News Democratic debate. SENATOR BERNIE SANDERS: And we can transform this country. Let's do it. TONY DOKOUPIL: President Trump's visit to India begins with a welcoming rally in front of a massive crowd. PRESIDENT DONALD TRUMP: Your nation is doing so well. We are very, very proud of India. ANTHONY MASON: The coronavirus spreads in South Korea, putting thousands of American troops and their families at risk. EDWARD BALLANCO: We're well prepared for this. We're watching it very closely. TONY DOKOUPIL: Plus, ahead of Kobe Bryant's public memorial, we talk with fellow Lakers legend Kareem Abdul-Jabbar. KAREEM ABDUL-JABBAR: He inspired a whole generation of people. That's-- that's quite a giving. GAYLE KING: And how Charleston, South Carolina, has become more honest about its history of slavery. BERNARD POWERS: It's very important to be forthright about the brutality of the system of slavery. END 
2020-02-24	ANTHONY MASON: Breaking overnight, U.S. stocks look set for a sharply lower open amid growing fears over the coronavirus. And in South Korea, a frequent visitor to a U.S. military base has tested positive for the disease. South Korea is one of multiple countries where coronavirus infections have skyrocketed. Ramy Inocencio visited that military base in Daegu near the epicenter of the South Korean outbreak. (Begin VT) RAMY INOCENCIO (CBS News Foreign Correspondent): Here in South Korea city of Daegu, the country's fourth biggest, coronavirus cases have quadrupled since Friday. Empty streets have become the new normal for the city of two and a half million residents. Daegu is also home to more than two thousand five hundred U.S. military servicemen and women. CBS News was granted access to the U.S. Army Garrison here with temperature screenings and the same questions for all visitors. MAN #1: Can I take everybody's temperature? MAN #2: Yeah. RAMY INOCENCIO: And today, a first for the U.S. military in Korea, a sixty-one-year-old woman linked to an American soldier at this base has now tested positive for coronavirus. Colonel Edward Ballanco is the face of the base giving health and personal updates on Facebook Live. On a personal level, how-- how are you feeling with the situation outside? EDWARD BALLANCO: I'm-- I'm nervous but I feel confident, too. The coronavirus is really harsh on people who are vulnerable. Our population reg-- relative to the regular population is not vulnerable. Still, though, you know, I-- we're all nervous about it. RAMY INOCENCIO: Meanwhile in the U.S., people are protesting against plans to quarantine patients in California and Alabama from the virus-stricken Diamond Princess cruise ship anchored in Yokohama, Japan. The Trump administration backed off plans for Alabama, but is confident in the country's response to a potential outbreak. PRESIDENT DONALD TRUMP: We have the greatest doctors in the world. We have it very much under control. (End VT) RAMY INOCENCIO: And here in Daegu, this city is basically under a state of emergency but not under an official lockdown. Well, at least not yet. As for the capital of Seoul the government is under increasing pressure, for example, the parliament building has now been shut for its first time in history. That's after a man who is now confirmed to have the coronavirus walked through its doors last week. Tony. TONY DOKOUPIL: Ramy Inocencio in Daegu, South Korea. Ramy, thank you very much. END 
2020-02-24	ANTHONY MASON: Good morning, and welcome to CBS THIS MORNING. I am Anthony Mason with Tony Dokoupil. Gayle King is in Charleston, South Carolina. GAYLE KING: We are for tomorrow night's crucial CBS News Democratic debate, the last time candidates will face off before the state's primary and the all-important Super Tuesday contest. Joe Biden still leads in the polls in South Carolina, but Bernie Sanders' big win in Nevada means the rest of the field is now chasing him. We'll talk to voters in the state that brings the different task for Democrats. TONY DOKOUPIL: President Trump in India. More than a hundred thousand cheering fans greet the President at the start of a two-day visit. Why he is reaching out to India and its controversial leader. ANTHONY MASON: Breaking overnight. A U.S. Military base in South Korea reports its first case of coronavirus. Ramy Inocencio visits that base as fears grow amid an alarming new outbreak. TONY DOKOUPIL: And celebrating Kobe Bryant. A memorial today honors the NBA great and his daughter Gianna. Hall of Famer Kareem Abdul-Jabbar talks about Bryant's lasting legacy. ANTHONY MASON: It's Monday, February 24, 2020. Here's today Eye Opener--your world in ninety seconds. SENATOR BERNIE SANDERS: We won the Nevada caucus, and don't tell anybody because these folks get very, very agitated and nervous. ANTHONY MASON: Democrats shift their focus to the South Carolina primary. FORMER VICE PRESIDENT JOE BIDEN (FACE THE NATION): I think we're going to do well. I think we're going to go on to Super Tuesday and do very well. ANNE-MARIE GREEN: President Trump kickoff his first officials visit to India this morning where he received a warm welcome. PRESIDENT DONALD TRUMP: Namaste. Namaste. (Crowd cheering) MAN #1: Italy and South Korea are reporting alarming spike in cases of coronavirus triggering new warnings, lockdowns and alerts. WOMAN #1: Hikers in their seventies got lost in dense California forest. More than a week later, they were found alive. BRENTON SCHNEIDER: Carol and Ian's survival is a miracle. WOMAN #2: Kobe and Gianna Bryant are set to be honored later today at the Staples Center for what Bryant's widow is calling a celebration of life. WOMAN #3: A massive fire at a condo complex under construction. MAN #2: The good news is there were no reports of any injuries. ANTHONY MASON: All that-- MAN #3: Spring training baseball, Yankees and Rays. MAN #4: Check this man out. He is going to show off for the crowd. MAN #5: Take a bow. ANTHONY MASON: --and all that matters-- MAN #6: One of the most memorable moments for the Carolina Hurricanes this season. WOMAN #4: A forty-two--year-old Zamboni driver called into NHL action after the team goalies went down. MAN #7: David Ayres becomes the oldest goalie ever to win his NHL debut. MAN #8: Number ninety will live on for the Carolina Hurricanes. ANTHONY MASON: --on CBS THIS MORNING. MAN #9: Let's see what she's got. WOMAN #5: A really cool moment during halftime of the Ole Miss-Alabama game. MAN #10: Tiger Woods might want to consider giving eighty-four-year-old Mary Ann Wakefield a call for some tips on how to sink a putt from ninety-four-feet out. MAN #11: That's looking really good. MAN #12: There you go. MAN #13: She won it. She won a new car. MAN #14: Miss Mary Ann, wow. WOMAN #6: Look at them going crazy. That is awesome. WOMAN #7: Faces out in the course of time, where she didn't even have-- MAN #15: I think so. ANTHONY MASON: That putt is tough enough on under any circumstance, but on a basketball court? TONY DOKOUPIL: I know. With a cartoon shark next. You're talking about a long shot. ANTHONY MASON: No kidding. Welcome to CBS THIS MORNING. We expect this to be a critical week in the Democratic presidential race with the focus shifting to South Carolina, which is where our Gayle King is, in Charleston, the state's largest city ahead of tomorrow's CBS News Democratic debate. And Gayle's been down there all weekend. Gayle, how is it going? GAYLE KING: I was going to say, Anthony, as you know I got off the set on Friday, went straight to the airport and been here ever since. Listen, we spent a lot of time talking to voters who tell us they are going to be looking at this debate very closely because its five days and counting until the big primary and many of them told us they have not made up their mind. That was a surprise to me. TONY DOKOUPIL: And that's a big deal because we've got Senator Bernie Sanders, he had a commanding victory in Nevada over the weekend. He's got forty percent in the latest count over Joe Biden at nineteen, doubling up the number two position. But that-- that map, that could change dramatically and we could see a new front-runner, Joe Biden would certainly hope so with that big lead down in South Carolina, Gayle. GAYLE KING: It remains to be seen. South Carolina is the center of the political world this week. Seven Democratic candidates will be on that stage tomorrow night at the Gaillard Center. You can see it behind me. It's a spectacular building. Gives me goosebumps as we sit here knowing what's going to happen there tomorrow night. The debate as you may have heard is co-hosted by CBS News. We're very proud to be part of this. It's the last time that voters will see the candidates together before Saturday's South Carolina primary and the big Super Tuesday showdown next week, so this is a really big deal. Our CBS News Battleground Tracker shows former Vice President Joe Biden leading in South Carolina with twenty-eight percent, but that number is down seventeen points since last November. And Bernie Sanders is closing in. So this is what makes this primary different. This will be the first significant test of support among black voters who make up about sixty percent of the Democratic electorate in the state. Ed O'Keefe is here with more on that part of the story. So, what can we expect here? Hello, Ed. ED O'KEEFE (CBS News Political Correspondent): Welcome back to the campaign trail. GAYLE KING: Yeah. ED O'KEEFE: Good morning. GAYLE KING: It's good to be here. ED O'KEEFE: Good to see you. GAYLE KING: What can we expect from the candidates this morning? ED O'KEEFE: Well, look, as you said, South Carolina has the largest percentage of African-American voters in an early primary state. Joe Biden has been leading among them but his support has fallen nineteen percent with them since the fall. Bernie Sanders won Nevada over the weekend with support from women, Latino voters and young voters. (Begin VT) SENATOR BERNIE SANDERS (D-Presidential Candidate): My God, there are a lot of people here tonight. ED O'KEEFE: Senator Bernie Sanders campaigned Sunday in the Super Tuesday state of Texas, speaking to crowds of thousands. SENATOR BERNIE SANDERS: I've been hearing, you know, the establishment is getting a little bit nervous about our campaign. ED O'KEEFE: Sanders now has the most delegates and votes, not to mention all the momentum--something former Vice President Joe Biden is hoping to curb this week in South Carolina. FORMER VICE PRESIDENT JOE BIDEN (D-Presidential Candidate): The African-American community in South Carolina can make a judgment about who the next President of the United States is going to be. ED O'KEEFE: Doing well in South Carolina means winning over the state's predominantly black voters and Biden support has been slipping. FORMER VICE PRESIDENT JOE BIDEN: What I'm expecting is to make the case to the people here in South Carolina that they have an opportunity to essentially determine who the next President is. ED O'KEEFE: The biggest hurdle for moderate Democrats right now is consolidating enough support to stop Sanders. Some Democrats like South Carolina Congressman Jim Clyburn are concerned that the senator, a self-described Democratic socialist will alienate some voters. REPRESENTATIVE JIM CLYBURN (D-South Carolina; ABC): This is South Carolina. And South Carolinians are pretty leery about that title socialist. ED O'KEEFE: And Congresswoman Donna Shalala, a Democrat representing parts of South Florida, is raising concerns about Sanders' comments about the late Cuban dictator Fidel Castro on 60 MINUTES. SENATOR BERNIE SANDERS (60 MINUTES): We're very opposed to the authoritarian nature of Cuba. But, you know, it's unfair to simply say everything is bad. You know, when Fidel Castro came into office, you know what he did? He had a massive literacy program. Is that a bad thing, even though Fidel Castro did it? ANDERSON COOPER (60 MINUTES): A lot of p-- dissidents imprisoned in-- in Cuba. SENATOR BERNIE SANDERS: That's right. And we condemn that. (End VT) ED O'KEEFE: Now while the candidates are here today and tomorrow for the debate, they are not going to spend all week in this state because as we mentioned there are fourteen states holding contest, just eight days from now on Super Tuesday. They'll be dolling out more than thirteen hundred delegates on that day. That's why they want to spend some time trying to find delegates in other parts of the country, as well. GAYLE KING: Well, if they are not spending time here, they sure are leaving a lot of commercials. ED O'KEEFE: Sure. GAYLE KING: It's amazing what you see when you go out of New York and see all the commercials. It's a big world out there. Thank you very much, Ed. END 
2020-02-21	GAYLE KING: There are new signs global fears are rising over the coronavirus. In Ukraine, protesters set fires, put up barricades and threw rocks at a bus carrying newly arrived evacuees from China. Now, this comes as South Korea confirmed dozens of new cases of the virus and Japan grapples with the crisis ahead of the 2020 Olympic Games. Debora Patta reports from Tokyo. (Begin VT) DEBORA PATTA (CBS News Foreign Correspondent): Should the Olympics still be held here? JEFF KINGSTON (Temple University Japan Director of Asian Studies): Well, there's a growing number of people that are skeptical about the prospect. DEBORA PATTA: Jeffrey Kingston is the director of Asian Studies at Temple University in Tokyo. JEFF KINGSTON: They really botched the quarantine on the Diamond Princess and now they released all the people who tested negative. This may be an epic mistake. DEBORA PATTA: With just five months to go before the Summer Olympics, the Japanese government believes that the spread of the virus both at home and in the rest of the region will be contained by then. KENTARO IWATA (Infectious Disease Expert; YouTube): And it's so scared. DEBORA PATTA: Infectious disease expert Professor Kentaro Iwata visited the Diamond Princess and was scathing in his criticism on YouTube of how the quarantine was handled. KENTARO IWATA (YouTube): There was no single professional infection control person inside the ship and there was nobody in charge of infection prevention as a professional. DEBORA PATTA: Over three hundred Americans were evacuated from the Diamond Princess and we are learning that nearly all of a group of thirteen passengers quarantined in Omaha have tested positive for the virus. In the crisis epicenter of Wuhan, millions have been in lockdown for nearly a month now. British citizen Connor Reed is trapped in the city where he told us war time measures are in place. You can only go outside briefly every three days and food has to be ordered via a group messaging system. CONNOR REED (Trapped British Citizen): We purchased all our food on that platform and then from there they get delivered to the central community area, so to speak. (End VT) DEBORA PATTA: There's a lot at stake for Japan should the Olympics be disrupted. They've already spent twenty-eight billion dollars on infrastructure, including building this stadium and there is about six billion dollars in sponsorships. Anthony. ANTHONY MASON: Debora Patta in Tokyo. Thanks, Debora. A man survived a fiery inferno in Indiana, thanks in part to the heroic action of a new mom who ran into extreme danger to save him. Cell phone video captures the shocking moment a semi-tanker truck explodes, sending a massive fireball and black smoke into the sky. The truck carrying an estimated four thousand gallons of jet fuel overturned on a state overpass. That's when Holly McNally driving by spotted the driver on fire. Along with another Good Samaritan, she jumped in to help extinguish the flames. HOLLY MCNALLY: We got him out and we start to walk away and I see this huge, like, stream of liquid and I could smell it. I said Jeff, honey, what are you hauling? And he said jet fuel. And I was like oh, my gosh. ANTHONY MASON: Holly McNally's heroism is even more extraordinary because she gave birth to a baby boy just five days ago. GAYLE KING: Wow. ANTHONY MASON: The driver is in critical condition. GAYLE KING: Wow. TONY DOKOUPIL: (INDISTINCT) about the mom. GAYLE KING: I know. TONY DOKOUPIL: That's extraordinary. GAYLE KING: I know. Anthony, I know you've never had a baby. But physically your body is still wobbly four or five days. TONY DOKOUPIL: Yeah. GAYLE KING: So, that's pretty amazing stuff. TONY DOKOUPIL: Moms are pretty tough-- GAYLE KING: Yes. TONY DOKOUPIL: --turns out. GAYLE KING: Yes. TONY DOKOUPIL: Ahead, why you may be one of more than a hundred and eighty million Americans who may be unable to fly by the end of the year. We'll explain. But first, it is seven nineteen, time to check your local weather. (LOCAL WEATHER BREAK) (ANNOUNCEMENTS) GAYLE KING: Ahead, we hear from a man just released from prison for a murder he did not commit. Why it took well over a decade for him to be released? We'll explain. (ANNOUNCEMENTS) (7:30 AM, EDT) TONY DOKOUPIL: It's seven thirty. Here's what's happening on CBS THIS MORNING. SENATOR ELIZABETH WARREN: Let's face it. This is a national security threat. TONY DOKOUPIL: U.S. intelligence officials warned that Russia is working to re-elect President Trump but Republicans object. REPRESENTATIVE DEVIN NUNES: Vladimir Putin is not running some operation with Donald Trump. GAYLE KING: Democrats campaign ahead of tomorrow's Nevada caucus with the front-runner taking more criticism. MICHAEL BLOOMBERG: And if we choose a candidate like Senator Sanders, it will be a fatal error. ANTHONY MASON: A woman whose two children have been missing since September is arrested in Hawaii accused of abandoning them. ANNIE CUSHING: These are serious felony charges. TONY DOKOUPIL: Plus, 48 HOURS has new information on the killing of a well-known Hollywood therapist. ERIN MORIARTY (48 HOURS): Was she scared? HERNANDO CHAVES (48 HOURS): She was. ERIN MORIARTY: Scared of what? HERNANDO CHAVES: Scared of the what ifs. GAYLE KING: And voters across the country tell us what they would like to ask Democrats at next week's CBS News debate. MAN: My question is what will you do to ensure young people see themselves thriving in the future of this country? GAYLE KING: I think that's a good question. ANTHONY MASON: It is a good question. TONY DOKOUPIL: Yeah. GAYLE KING: It might come up on Tuesday night. END 
2020-02-21	A Washington state man who was the nation's first confirmed case of the new coronavirus has made a full recovery and is no longer quarantined, health officials announced. Almost 800 people remain on the state's watch list as health officials around the world battle to contain the virus, COVID-19, which has infected more than 75,000 people worldwide and caused 2,130 deaths, mostly in mainland China. In the USA, 15 cases have been confirmed, and one American has died in China. The confirmed case in Washington state was a 35-year-old from Snohomish County, near Seattle. He was released from a hospital more than two weeks ago but remained isolated at home until Wednesday, the Snohomish Health District said in a statement. "He is now considered fully recovered and free to go about his regular activities," Snohomish officials said in a statement. The state health department said 26 people have been tested for the new virus. One test result is pending, and the rest came back negative, the department said. The 779 people under public health supervision across the state include close contacts of the confirmed case as well as people who returned from China in the past 14 days and are included in federal quarantine guidance. The Snohomish County man went to an urgent care clinic Jan. 19 with a cough and fever. He told the staff he had seen a health alert about the outbreak in China ??and he had returned four days earlier from a trip to visit family in Wuhan. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention was called in, and his diagnosis was confirmed the next day. He was admitted to an isolation unit at Providence Regional Medical Center for clinical observation and developed pneumonia. His health improved, and he was released from the hospital. "We cannot thank him enough for his patience and cooperation throughout the entire process," the Snohomish County statement said. China revises reporting method again China said it is changing its reporting of confirmed cases to eliminate cases diagnosed by clinicians with little testing. The daily infection figures will be lowered to deduct cases reported as confirmed based on clinical evaluation that turn out negative in lab tests. The new format was at least partially responsible for a sharp decline in new cases reported Thursday by China ??394 ??compared with the 1,749 cases reported the previous day. 2 dead in Iran Iran said two people have died from coronavirus infections in the city of Qom, 80 miles south of Tehran. Five cases have been confirmed in the country, and two patients suspected of infection were quarantined in the northern city of Babol, said Mostafa Javanian, a health official with the University of Medical Education in Babol. South Korea reported its first death from the virus Thursday and said its confirmed case count had more than doubled, to 104. 
2020-02-20	As the coronavirus continues to spread, upending the tech industry and causing tremors in the business sector, consumers and companies alike are wary of flying and booking hotel stays. New data collected by the attribution company AppsFlyer revealed that travel app bookings have declined steadily since news about the respiratory illness began to circulate While the virus is having the greatest impact on tourism in China, where hundreds have died and thousands of others are sickened, the travel fallout is global. Popular hotel and flight apps are sinking in popularity and taking a revenue hit, the information provided to USA TODAY suggests. "We're seeing a 13% decrease in bookings of flights and hotels and a 21% decrease in in-app revenue worldwide," said Shani Rosenfelder, head of mobile insights at AppsFlyer, in a statement. The San Francisco-based data firm analyzed information from 115 travel apps and 40 million mobile app downloads from New Year's Day to Feb. 9. The Asia Pacific region, which generally includes China, Japan, South Korea and Singapore, was affected the most by the slowdown in flights, with a 22% drop in bookings and a 27% drop in travel app revenue from Jan. 21 to Feb. 9, AppsFlyer found. The impact of coronavirus in the U.S. was notably less severe. North America saw a 7% drop in bookings and a 10% revenue fall. "We believe this is because most travel in this market is domestic, where coronavirus is seen as less of a threat," Brian Quinn, president at AppsFlyer, said in a statement. Another sign that people are holding off on vacation plans is that travel app downloads slid in late January through early February. Travelers often download several apps when a trip is in its planning stages and delete the app later, Quinn notes. Travel app installs dropped 20% in early February, AppsFlyer found. In China, which has been hardest hit by coronavirus infections and travel cancellations, residents are staying home, using weather apps less and playing more video games, the data suggest. "Long hours at home are driving a 62% increase in entertainment app activity, while social casino games are up 56%, as people seek entertainment and human connection," Quinn said. Like many tech companies, AppsFlyer was slated to attend Mobile World Congress this year but pulled out before the telecom conference was canceled due to fears of the break. Facebook, Sony and Amazon were among the tech giants to cancel early. Delta, United and American airlines have canceled or altered flights to China in an effort to contain the virus. 
2020-02-03	When Muni He triumphed at LPGA Q-Series last November, she seized control of something every professional golfer holds dear: her schedule. Being able to sign up for an event and not have to rely on the streaky nature of Monday qualifiers and the luck of the alternate list feels like a luxury for young players on the highest stage. He, 20, decided early on that she'd skip the first three LPGA tournaments that she was eligible for and start 2020 on a three-week stretch in Asia, playing off of sponsor exemptions in limited-field events in Thailand and Singapore and the Blue Bay LPGA in her native China. No one could've predicted that her first three starts would be canceled due to threats from the coronavirus. That control He worked so hard for went up in a puff of smoke. She'll now make her first start of 2020 in late March at the LPGA event in Phoenix. "I'm really trying hard not to stress," He said by phone from London. Her original plans included a stop first in London to see friends. She decided to go ahead and make that trip and play Wentworth for a few days before heading back to Los Angeles to practice. But not over-practice. Or overthink. It's so difficult not to do both or either with so much unplanned time on the calendar. Golfers live by the calendar. Natalie Gulbis used to literally schedule her sleep for the year, going to bed at 9 p.m. and rising at 5 a.m. Probably still does. Danielle Kang said she was devastated to learn that her next three events had been canceled but agrees with the decision to put safety first. The Asian events are among her favorite on tour. Kang said she hasn't had seven weeks off since high school. "I honestly have no plans," said Kang, who skipped the Australian swing. There's now a four-week gap between tournaments on the LPGA schedule. After having some time to let the news soak in, the world No. 5 started to view the unexpected break as a good thing. Kang didn't have much of an offseason over the winter and found herself feeling tired at the first two events of the year in Florida. The idea of getting into a routine for a long period of time in Las Vegas started to sound appealing. "I only have four weeks left!" said Kang, uttering an unheard phrase this time of year. At the start of the week in Australia, Inbee Park was lamenting over the fact that she so often can't buy groceries at home like a regular person because she's not there long enough to eat them. After collecting her 20th career LPGA victory in the ISPS Handa Australian Women's Open, Inbee Park headed home to South Korea, where she can buy as much as she wants in the produce section with a month off. Park hadn't originally planned to play in Phoenix, but that might change. The top two players in the world, Jin Young Ko and Sung Hyun Park, have yet to hit a shot on the LPGA tour this season. Here's a wild thought: There are now only two events remaining on the schedule before the first major of the year. Ko won the Founders Cup and ANA Inspiration in 2019. Last year He, a former Southern California college standout, put too much pressure on herself to get off to a fast start. "Look at how that turned out for me," she said. He, who goes by "Lily," now views the full season as she did Q-Series, one long marathon. "Now with four more weeks on my hands," she said, "I'm just trying to maintain."  Location: Thailand Southern California Singapore Australia China Los Angeles California Florida Asia Las Vegas Nevada South Korea  People: Kang, Danielle Park, Inbee Gulbis, Natalie Sung Hyun Park  Company / organization: Name: Ladies Professional Golf Association--LPGA; NAICS: 813990  Title: LPGA players face rare waiting game  Publication title: USA TODAY; McLean, Va.  First page: C.5  Publication year: 2020  Publication date: Feb 17, 2020  Section: SPORTS  Publisher: USA Today, a division of Gannett Satellite Information Network, Inc.  Place of publication: McLean, Va.  Country of publication: United States, McLean, Va.  Publication subject: General Interest Periodicals--United States  ISSN: 07347456  Source type: Newspapers  Language of publication: English  Document type: News  ProQuest document ID: 2355788853  Document URL: http://search.proquest.com.ssl.access.yonsei.ac.kr:8080/docview/2355788853?accountid=15179  Copyright: Copyright USA Today, a division of Gannett Satellite Information Network, Inc. Feb 17, 2020  Last updated: 2020-02-17  Database: U.S. Newsstream  ____________________________________________________________  Coronavirus blamed in Philippines death  Author: Bacon, John  Publication info: USA TODAY ; McLean, Va. [McLean, Va]03 Feb 2020: A.2.  http://search.proquest.com.ssl.access.yonsei.ac.kr:8080/docview/2350006259?accountid=15179  Abstract: None available.  Links: http://US2ST5WU6Z.search.serialssolutions.com/directLink?&amp;atitle=Coronavirus+blamed+in+Philippines+death&amp;author=Bacon%2C+John&amp;issn=07347456&amp;title=USA+TODAY&amp;volume=&amp;issue=&amp;date=2020-02-03&amp;spage=A.2&amp;id=doi:&amp;sid=ProQ_ss&amp;genre=article  Full text: A 44-year-old Chinese man hospitalized in the Philippines became the first known fatality outside China from the new virus that has killed more than 300 people and prompted a global health emergency, authorities said Sunday. Also Sunday, China's ambassador to Israel apologized for comparing the decision by several nations to close their borders to Chinese citizens to turning away Jewish refugees during the Holocaust. "There was no intention whatsoever to compare the dark days of the Holocaust with the current situation and the efforts taken by the Israeli government to protect its citizens," the embassy said in a statement. "We would like to apologize if someone understood our message the wrong way." In Manila, the Philippine Health Department said a patient died Saturday after developing severe pneumonia due to viral and bacterial infections. "In his last few days, the patient was stable and showed signs of improvement," Health Secretary Francisco Duque said. "However, the condition of the patient deteriorated within his last 24 hours." China has reported 304 deaths and more than 14,600 cases of the latest coronavirus, all of which draw their name from the virus's elliptical, spiky shape. More than 170 cases have been reported in more than two dozen other countries, including eight cases in the U.S. Duque said the man and his companion, a 38-year-old Chinese woman, arrived in Manila on Jan. 21 via Hong Kong from Wuhan, the city at the center of the outbreak. Four days later both were hospitalized and placed in isolation, where the woman remained Sunday. "I would like to emphasize that this is an imported case with no evidence of local transmission," Duque said. He said his agency was working with the Chinese Embassy to ensure the "dignified management of the remains" while also ensuring containment of the disease. The World Health Organization declared a global health emergency Thursday, recommending an urgent effort to develop vaccines and diagnostics as well as a review of every nation's preparedness plans. WHO Secretary-General Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus said in Geneva that despite the emergency declaration, there is "no reason for measures that unnecessarily interfere with international travel and trade." On Friday, the Trump administration declared the coronavirus outbreak to be a public health emergency in the United States. U.S. citizens who have been in China's Hubei province and are returning to the U.S. will undergo health screenings and be monitored during mandatory quarantines of up to 14 days, officials said. The U.S. also announced a suspension of entry into the United States of foreign nationals who pose a risk for the transmission of the virus. The U.S. and the Philippines government are among several nations issuing temporary bans on many travelers coming from China, Macao and Hong Kong ??drawing the ire of Beijing. "Just as the WHO recommended against travel restrictions, the U.S. rushed to go in the opposite way," foreign ministry spokeswoman Hua Chunying said. "Certainly not a gesture of goodwill." New Zealand announced Sunday it is temporarily banning travelers from China to protect the South Pacific region from the virus. The 14-day ban applies to foreigners leaving China but not to New Zealand residents. Last week, the U.S. flew about 200 Americans out of Wuhan on a chartered plane and indicated that more flights could follow. The European Union sponsored a similar flight last week. This weekend, South Korea and India flew hundreds of their citizens out of Wuhan. Indonesia flew back 241 nationals from Wuhan on Sunday and quarantined them on the remote Natuna Islands for two weeks. Meanwhile, six officials in the city of Huanggang, neighboring the epicenter of Wuhan in Hubei province, have been fired over "poor performance" in handling the outbreak, the official Xinhua News Agency reported. Contributing: The Associated Press 
2020-01-27	Drugmakers are hustling to make a vaccine to counter the rapidly spreading respiratory virus that has sickened at least 1,975 people in China and five in the United States. More inside Number of cases rises in U.S. 4A The National Institutes of Health has partnered with a Boston-area company, Moderna, on a vaccine targeting the novel coronavirus. A Pennsylvania biotechnology company, Inovio, also secured a $9 million grant from Norway-based Coalition for Epidemic Preparedness Innovations to develop a vaccine. The company already is developing a vaccine for Middle East respiratory syndrome, or MERS, another type of coronavirus. Officials with the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases say they can quickly develop a vaccine because Chinese scientists rapidly sequenced the virus's genome. "The agency has the funding and technology," said Anthony Fauci, director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases. "Barring any bureaucratic or regulatory holdups, which I don't think will happen, we can almost certainly get into phase one in three months." Even if the vaccine is tested rapidly, it might not come in time to slow the outbreak. Public health efforts to limit the spread of the virus and treat those who are infected will have a more immediate benefit. The virus, which originated in Wuhan, has spread to surrounding regions in China, South Korea, Japan, Singapore, Hong Kong, Macao, Taiwan, Thailand, Vietnam and the U.S. 
2020-01-23	The head of the World Health Organization said Wednesday its emergency committee needed more information before it was ready to declare the deadly global coronavirus outbreak a public health emergency, even as the hard-hit Chinese city of Wuhan shut down all air and train traffic to try to contain its spread. The death toll from a new global virus rose to at least 17 on Wednesday while experts from around the world were meeting in Geneva to debate how to address the ominous outbreak. WHO Director-General Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus called the issue an "evolving and complex situation" that required further study. While praising China's cooperation in presenting information about the virus, the WHO leader called for more debate on Thursday. "The decision about whether or not to declare a public health emergency of international concern is one I take extremely seriously, and one I am only prepared to make with appropriate consideration of all the evidence," he said. China has identified more than 500 cases and all the deaths, mostly in and around the central city of Wuhan. The virus has spread to other parts of China, and cases also have been confirmed in the U.S., Thailand, South Korea, Japan and Taiwan. The first U.S. case, reported Tuesday, involves a Washington state resident in his 30s who first displayed symptoms Sunday. He was listed in good condition at Providence Regional Medical Center in Snohomish County north of Seattle. "Our first priority remains public safety," said Washington state Secretary of Health John Wiesman. "We believe the risk to the public is low. And as this situation evolves, we will continue to communicate with the CDC, Snohomish County and the public." Coronaviruses are a large family of viruses that cause illness from the common cold to more severe infections such as pneumonia, Middle East respiratory syndrome (known as MERS) and severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS). Common signs of infection include fever, cough, shortness of breath and breathing difficulties. In more severe cases, infection can cause pneumonia, kidney failure or death. A declaration by WHO of a public health emergency would be a prerequisite for issuing recommendations to countries on guidelines to combat it. To reduce the spread of the virus, the Wuhan local government canceled all flights and trains from the city for Thursday and temporarily closed all public transportation ??bus, subway, ferry and long-distance bus service. Trish Perl, a coronavirus expert at UT Southwestern Medical Center in Dallas, said health officials should take seriously the threat of the virus spreading across the U.S. "We don't know the magnitude of this outbreak, but we know from previous outbreaks that coronaviruses can spread quickly," Perl told USA TODAY. "Some people may not know they're infected." The U.S. representative at the WHO meeting is Martin Cetron, who heads the division of Global Migration and Quarantine at the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. WHO has been here before, recommending emergency declarations made for outbreaks of SARS, MERS, Ebola, Zika and swine flu. In China, the timing of the outbreak could not be worse ??the Lunar New Year is Saturday, and hundreds of millions of people across Asia travel in packed buses, trains and planes to celebrate. Even before the halting of transportation, Chinese health officials had urged the 11 million residents of Wuhan not to leave the city, to avoid crowds as much as possible and to wear masks in public places. To scan travelers, the city has installed 35 infrared thermometers and more than 300 portable infrared thermometers in the city's airports, railway and bus stations since Jan. 14, according to the Health Commission of Wuhan, the China Daily reported. All passengers with higher than normal temperatures will be registered and transferred to nearby medical facilities, the commission said. 
2020-01-22	The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention on Tuesday confirmed the first U.S. case of a new coronavirus that has killed six people in China. The CDC and Washington state officials said the man, a Snohomish County resident in his 30s, was in good condition at Providence Regional Medical Center in Everett. Coronaviruses are a large family of viruses that cause illness ranging from the common cold to more severe infections such as pneumonia and severe acute respiratory syndrome, or SARS. Nancy Messonnier, director of the National Center for Immunization and Respiratory Diseases, called the news "concerning," particularly in light of reports the virus has begun to spread from person to person in Asia. Washington Gov. Jay Inslee said he expected more cases in the U.S, but "based on what we know now, risk to the general public is low." The CDC, which began enhanced health screenings last week at airports in San Francisco, New York and Los Angeles, said Atlanta and Chicago would be added to the list. All travel from Wuhan, China ??where the outbreak began ??to the U.S. is rerouted to these airports. Hundreds of people in China have been diagnosed in the past few weeks. A handful have been diagnosed in Thailand, South Korea and Japan. The World Health Organization is gathering experts Wednesday in Geneva to determine whether the outbreak constitutes an international public health emergency. 
2020-01-20	GAYLE KING: A dangerous virus is spreading rapidly in China and U.S. officials are very worried that it could come here. China has more than two hundred confirmed cases of coronavirus it's called, which produces pneumonia-like symptoms. Three people have already died from this illness which has spread to at least three other Asian countries. New video sent to CBS News claims to show hospital staff wearing protective gear, and that is protective gear, in Wuhan, China, considered ground zero for the outbreak. Ramy Inocencio is there. Ramy, what are you hearing? RAMY INOCENCIO (CBS News Foreign Correspondent): Good morning, Gayle. Yes, people here are understandably very nervous especially after the number of infected exploded over the weekend. The airport here in Wuhan has also started to do body temperature checks of people before they take flight. Not only that when we landed here in Wuhan earlier today, we saw people, many of them wearing masks, around the baggage carousel while we were waiting for our own bags. I took that video there. And you can see people are nervous about the situation. Not only that, taking a look at what's happening in the United States. U.S. officials want to make sure that they are raising the defenses and that is what they are doing because right now, as of now, there has not been a U.S. infection as of yet. (Begin VT) RAMY INOCENCIO: At three airports across the United States, the CDC is on guard. More than one hundred officials in San Francisco, Los Angeles and New York are screening incoming passengers from Wuhan, China to detect the deadly coronavirus. SYLVIA ZHENG (Tourist): If it's issues that are going to affect others it's-- maybe a good choices to, like, be cautious about it. RAMY INOCENCIO: Since Friday, the number of known infections across Asia has more than quadrupled, with cases confirmed in China, Thailand, Japan and now South Korea which reported its first case this morning. Authorities say most of the cases link back to this now-shuttered animal and seafood market in Wuhan. U.S. health officials are concerned this rapid spread could mimic the massive SARS outbreak of the early 2000s which resulted in seven hundred seventy-four deaths in twenty-nine countries. But so far, it does not appear that this disease is easily transmittable between people. (Woman speaking foreign language) RAMY INOCENCIO: Health officials say this strain of the coronavirus has been spread to humans through exposure in handling of animals at the market. DR. WILLIAM SCHAFFNER (Vanderbilt University Medical Center Infectious Disease Specialist): If the virus turns out to be readily transmissible from human to human, then we'll have a much larger problem on our hands. RAMY INOCENCIO: Doctor William Schaffner says public health authorities are already working on ways to fend off the epidemic. DR. WILLIAM SCHAFFNER: There are laboratories around the world already working on really good diagnostic tests and we've already started to work on a vaccine in the event that's necessary. (End VT) RAMY INOCENCIO: Now, I lived through the SARS epidemic in Beijing back in 2003, and at that time there was massive criticism of the government and that centered around transparency. The government at that time withheld a lot of information from the public about that massively growing epidemic. Now, we're going to see if this is actually going to be-- any lessons have been learned looking ahead because the future of the people of China, and not only of Asia but of the world, it could be at stake here. Anthony. ANTHONY MASON: Yeah. Hopefully, they'll be more forthcoming. Ramy, thank you in China. We appreciate it. Vladimir Duthiers is looking at the stories you'll be talking about today. Vlad, what you got? VLADIMIR DUTHIERS: Hey, Anthony. The youngest player at the Australian Open squared off with veteran Venus Williams. Don't touch that dial because we're going to show you how Coco Gauff's victory was a reminder of another stunning win over Williams. Plus, why Brad Pitt and Jennifer Aniston's reunion, Anthony, sent social media spiraling into a meltdown. ANTHONY MASON: It sure did. It was all over the place. Thanks, Vlad. We'll see you in a few minutes. But first, it's seven forty-three, time to check your local weather. (LOCAL WEATHER BREAK) (ANNOUNCEMENTS) TONY DOKOUPIL: Tell your family you'll be stepping back as a senior member for the next few minutes while Vlad's on for What to Watch. GAYLE KING: Uh-Huh. ANTHONY MASON: I love that. VLADIMIR DUTHIERS: I'm ready and available, your majesty. Here are few stories we think you'll be talking about today. Puerto Rico's governor fired three government officials after untouched disaster relief supplies were found over the weekend. Video shows residents breaking into a Ponce warehouse to access tons of supplies. Some of the aid including water bottles and baby food had apparently been sitting there since Hurricane Maria pummeled the island back in 2017. Yesterday, the mayor of Ponce took to Twitter directing all supplies to be distributed to people in hard hit towns. The Category 4 storm prompted widespread devastation across the island. Puerto Ricans who had just faced a series of earthquakes have been accusing the government of withholding relief supplies. TONY DOKOUPIL: I don't know what's-- ANTHONY MASON: Yes. GAYLE KING: That's going to make-- TONY DOKOUPIL: --incompetence or cruelty. GAYLE KING: There you go. That's going to make a lot of people angry, you donate and then you just see it sitting there-- ANTHONY MASON: Sitting there for years. GAYLE KING: --when people can use it. TONY DOKOUPIL: Why is it sitting there? VLADIMIR DUTHIERS: Yeah. David Begnaud interviewed the head of the Puerto Rico National Guard on Sunday. They said they're going to get it to folks. But you're right, people are probably very angry. ANTHONY MASON: They're angry and they have every reason to be. VLADIMIR DUTHIERS: Indeed. GAYLE KING: People should have lost their jobs over that-- VLADIMIR DUTHIERS: That's right. GAYLE KING: --and they did. VLADIMIR DUTHIERS: And they did. GAYLE KING: And they did. VLADIMIR DUTHIERS: All right. As we celebrate the legacy of Doctor Martin Luther King, Jr. today, the Navy is honoring the first African-American to receive the military's second highest combat honor. The next new aircraft carrier will be named after Doris "Dorie" Miller at a ceremony in Pearl Harbor later today. The World War II hero leapt into combat during the December 1941 attack. Miller received a Navy Cross for valor after he manned a machine gun on the USS West Virginia to fire back at attacking Japanese planes. That is incredible, guys, because African-Americans were not allowed to man a weapon in the United States Navy. He was part of the mess team. Their primary role was laundry, shining officers' shoes-- ANTHONY MASON: Yep. VLADIMIR DUTHIERS: --serving food. GAYLE KING: Yeah. ANTHONY MASON: I was-- VLADIMIR DUTHIERS: Real hero. ANTHONY MASON: --I didn't realize that. I was really stunned by that. GAYLE KING: Yeah, I hadn't heard of it either. TONY DOKOUPIL: That is stunning. GAYLE KING: And then when you read about what he did risking his own life to do so, too. VLADIMIR DUTHIERS: He rescued fellow sailors-- GAYLE KING: Yes. VLADIMIR DUTHIERS: --bringing them to safety and then jumped on that .50 caliber machine gun, fired at a couple of Japanese planes. He said he actually took one down. Sadly, he didn't survive World War II. He was killed when a Japanese torpedo attacked his ship. But he's a hero. GAYLE KING: What an honor. VLADIMIR DUTHIERS: All right. The youngest woman in the Australian Open just took down seven time Grand Slam champion Venus Williams. Take a look at this. (Crowd cheering) WOMAN: (INDISTINCT) from the fifteen-year-old. That was big second serve. She went for it. VLADIMIR DUTHIERS: Don't know who that is. That is fifteen-year-old Coco Gauff surging into the second set with a 7-6, 6-3 victory over Serena Williams. The clash was a rematch of Gauff's Grand Slam debut in Wimbledon back in July. That's when Gauff defeated Williams in straight sets. TONY DOKOUPIL: She's amazing. ANTHONY MASON: Yeah. But let's-- at thirty-nine Venus is the-- GAYLE KING: Yes. ANTHONY MASON: --oldest woman in the draw. It is-- I mean, she's amazing. She's still playing and played that well. VLADIMIR DUTHIERS: She's still out there playing. She's still winning. ANTHONY MASON: Yes. TONY DOKOUPIL: Yeah. I'm-- I'm also thirty-nine. I threw my back out changing a diaper-- waving-- waving around and I was like, oh. GAYLE KING: So Coco would beat you, too. TONY DOKOUPIL: Yeah, yeah. VLADIMIR DUTHIERS: All of us. TONY DOKOUPIL: Maybe not at diaper changing, though. VLADIMIR DUTHIERS: All right, guys. This is the feel-good story of What to Watch. GAYLE KING: Yeah. VLADIMIR DUTHIERS: Brad Pitt and Jennifer Aniston stole the show at the Screen Actors Guild Awards. It started with Pitt's acceptance speech after he won an award for his role in Once Upon a Time in Hollywood. Watch this. BRAD PITT: Let's be honest. It was a difficult part. A guy who gets high, takes his shirt off and doesn't get on with his wife. (Crowd cheering) VLADIMIR DUTHIERS: So after that, the camera quickly panned to his ex-wife, Jennifer Aniston, who's smiled and clapped. GAYLE KING: Yes. VLADIMIR DUTHIERS: She also won an award for her role in The Morning Show. The SAG Awards tweeted out video of Brad watching her-- deliver her acceptance speech. But OMG, this reunion back stage between the former lovebirds is breaking the internet. ANTHONY MASON: Oh, man, it's everywhere. VLADIMIR DUTHIERS: Everywhere. ANTHONY MASON: It's everywhere. VLADIMIR DUTHIERS: People are freaking out about this. ANTHONY MASON: Yes. VLADIMIR DUTHIERS: So great. ANTHONY MASON: They-- GAYLE KING: Because people think they look so good together. VLADIMIR DUTHIERS: They do. ANTHONY MASON: Look great-- GAYLE KING: They're going to decide if there's a there. VLADIMIR DUTHIERS: Somebody said the queen is going to make them the new royals. ANTHONY MASON: And they're still buds. He went to her fiftieth birthday party last year. TONY DOKOUPIL: It could happen. ANTHONY MASON: All right. We'll be right back with Lizzo. GAYLE KING: Yay. (ANNOUNCEMENTS) *****************************************************************************(8:00 AM, EDT) GAYLE KING: It's Monday, January 20, 2020. Welcome back to CBS THIS MORNING on this Martin Luther King Day holiday. We're here. Glad to be here, too. I'm Gayle King. Ahead, the run up to President Trump's impeachment trial and what might happen when senators meet tomorrow. ANTHONY MASON: I'm Anthony Mason. Prince Harry says he and Meghan are changing their lives because they had no other option. We'll look at what they are giving up. TONY DOKOUPIL: And I'm Tony Dokoupil. Lizzo sits down with Gayle as we get started on the road to the Grammys. GAYLE KING: She's so fun. But first, here's today's Eye Opener @ 8. GAYLE KING: It will be a working holiday for President Trump and members of Congress who are preparing the case for removing him from office. WEIJIA JIANG: Over the weekend, the President's legal team revealed their main arguments that the entire process was tainted. SAVANNAH RUDICEL: Kansas City police are still investigating. The shooting started when the gunman fired into a line of people at the club. DAVID BEGNAUD: About a thousand people lined up. Many of them are wearing stickers that say "guns save lives." Across the street, a big banner with a picture of an assault rifle, "come and take it." ED O'KEEFE: People in Iowa and New Hampshire are very unlikely to care what the New York Times editorial board has to say, especially if they can't even pick one candidate. And now there is a new fight brewing between two contenders. TONY DOKOUPIL: It will be the San Francisco 49ers versus the Kansas City Chiefs in Super Bowl LIV, February 2nd in Miami. MAN #1: (SINGING) all the way to the White House. MAN #2: The LSU football team went viral for this video before their meeting with the President. WOMAN: The woman in the video, she's the wife of former LSU player Ben Bordelon. TONY DOKOUPIL: Who is their choreographer? ANTHONY MASON: Yes. GAYLE KING: Yes. That's what we need, another dance move I won't be able to learn. END 
