2020-05-10	The defining characteristic of the current national mood is profound uncertainty. We don't know how widespread the new coronavirus is. We don't know who may have it. The lack of information is a huge obstacle to resuming normal life. Donald Trump has reservations about the expansion of testing for the disease, because it raises the quantity of known infections. "If we did very little testing, we wouldn't have the most cases," he said Wednesday. "So, in a way, by doing all of this testing, we make ourselves look bad." With Trump, of course, optics are everything. In March, he didn't want a cruise ship with some ill passengers to disembark in California because it would boost the number of confirmed U.S. cases. "I like the numbers being where they are," he said. "I don't need to have the numbers double because of one ship that wasn't our fault." It was like trying to cure a fever by breaking the thermometer. This is just one of the many realities that the president doesn't understand about the pandemic. After backtracking on his plan to disband the White House Coronavirus Task Force, he tweeted that it would continue in operation but focus on "safety & opening up our country again" as well as "Vaccines & Therapeutics." What does that leave out? Testing. But a massive expansion of testing is the surest, safest way to speed our return to something resembling life as we knew it. A vaccine could take years to develop, and any big improvements in treatment may require time-consuming clinical trials to ensure safety and effectiveness. But testing could greatly reduce the need for them by greatly reducing transmission. And we know it could be deployed on a vast scale right away because other countries have already done it. The South Korean government responded to the pandemic by pushing private companies to quickly mass-produce test kits. "Korean officials opened 600 testing centers and pioneered the use of drive-through testing stations to reduce face-to-face contact indoors," reported Derek Thompson in The Atlantic, and "these pop-up centers offered patients 10-minute tests without forcing them to leave their cars." The results have been extraordinary. South Korea, with a population of 51 million, has recorded only 256 deaths from the disease -- compared with more than 77,000 in the United States, which has 331 million people. What's more, it achieved this low number without lockdowns -- allowing factories, theaters and restaurants to stay open. Testing is valuable in this fight for two big reasons. The first is that it facilitates the quarantining of everyone who tests positive. The second is that it allows tracing of those with whom they have come in contact, so that they can be tested promptly. But it has another virtue: giving people who test negative the confidence to mingle with others who also test negative. Even if routine dental visits were allowed, Nobel Prize-winning economist Paul Romer explained in an interview with The New Yorker, "I don't want to go back to the dentist's office in New York City until I know that he can show me a recent negative test, and he doesn't want me to come into his office until I can show him that I've got a recent negative test." As soon as both can get tested, they can proceed without much worry. Once tests are easily accessible, the fear of contagion will subside. Friends and relatives will feel comfortable getting together without masks and social distancing. Employees will be more willing to go back to work knowing their co-workers have tested negative. Restaurants, gyms and airlines might be allowed to operate without onerous restrictions by accepting only customers who can show recent confirmation that they are uninfected. This method isn't foolproof, because someone can test negative Monday and contract the virus Tuesday. But frequent testing on a mass scale would greatly reduce the chance that someone would unknowingly expose others. The federal government could come out ahead by putting money into making tests available at low cost to all. The recent shutdowns have cost trillions of dollars in government outlays and lost economic activity. If the federal government spent $100 billion to make tests available, as Romer suggests, it would recoup its investment many times over in a short time. Trump fears that more testing will make him look bad, but he's mistaken. Done enough, it could do him and the rest of us a lot of good. ---------- Steve Chapman, a member of the Tribune Editorial Board, blogs at www.chicagotribune.com/chapman . schapman@chicagotribune.com Twitter @SteveChapman CAPTION: Photo: Medical workers peer out from the tents before the start of coronavirus testing at the Vida Wellness Center in Little Village on Wednesday. ANTONIO PEREZ/CHICAGO TRIBUNE CREDIT: Steve Chapman
2020-05-08	They were mothers and fathers, daughters and sons. Many were proud grandparents. Two were sisters from a tight-knit South Side family. All were loved, relatives say, and will be forever missed. As the number of deaths attributable to COVID-19 ticks upward, the Tribune is working to chronicle those who have lost their lives in the Chicago area or who have connections to our region. These are some of those victims. \ JOHN LARRY SARTAIN, 77 From Des Plaines, died April 18. A gregarious Alabama native who rose each morning at 5 a.m. to read the Bible, John Larry Sartain "always loved to get a rise out of people," his daughter, Nicole Scholpp, recalled. "He had all these funny sayings: 'I'm fine as a froghair,'" Scholpp said. Or, she added, he would stand at the entrance to a Starbucks and say to a person about to enter: "Oh, they're out of coffee." "He just brought laughter into the world," she added. "That's what made him happy." A resident of Chicago's northwest suburbs, Sartain, who was known as Larry, died April 18 at Advocate Lutheran General Hospital in northwest suburban Park Ridge. He was 77. The Cook County medical examiner's office listed acute respiratory failure, a COVID-19 infection and dementia as causes of death. Born in Birmingham, Alabama, in 1942, Sartain moved to Chicago in his late teens or 20s, his daughter said, and settled in the city's Uptown neighborhood. There, he met his future wife of 51 years, Diane. Her parents owned the apartment building where they lived. From separate apartments, the two talked at night, communicating via the windows that faced an air shaft. "And love blossomed," Scholpp said. Sartain served in the U.S. Army in the 1960s. He was stationed in Korea, his family said. Over the years, his daughter said, he held many jobs, including selling State Farm insurance, delivering Dannon yogurt, washing windows and cleaning concrete. He and his wife lived in northwest suburban Des Plaines and in Elk Grove Village. Before his death, his daughter said, Sartain lived in the Generations at Oakton nursing and rehabilitation facility in Des Plaines. In addition to his wife and daughter, survivors include his son, Eric, and three grandchildren. Private services were held at the G.L. Hills Funeral Home in Des Plaines. A longtime fan of the University of Alabama Crimson Tide football team, Sartain was buried at Irving Park Cemetery wearing a camouflage green hat with the red Alabama "A" on the front. -- Blair Kamin  MORRIS LOEB, 90 From Northbrook, died April 7. Morry Loeb lived many lives across almost a century, with the final act of his 90 years landing on his birthday. Loeb was a performer, salesman, family man and executive. He wrote stories and plays. He trained for marathons. In his 80s, he was still heading into the office to mentor young colleagues and every day picking up his newspaper, reading cover to cover. His family said he was endlessly curious, never really finished. "He has lots of interesting stories because he's lived so many different lives," said his daughter Sandra Loeb. Morris Loeb -- known to many as "Morry" -- died April 7 of complications from the coronavirus. It was his 90th birthday. "He always felt like there was something else to experience or to do or to know or to hear about or investigate," his daughter Barbara Loeb said. "He still had an interest in what was going to happen next." In the early 1900s, Morris Loeb's parents emigrated from Russia and Poland. Loeb was born in Milwaukee and grew up on the West Side, attending Marshall High School. With his theatrical knack, Loeb loved making others laugh. He performed at Theater on the Lake and studied at Second City. His daughter Teri Sosa remembers film director William Friedkin casually visiting the apartment. Loeb married early, raised a family and launched into a professional career, starting as a salesman and becoming an executive vice president at United Insurance Company. He settled in Northbrook after his second marriage to Florence Anderson. Between the two marriages, he had three daughters and a son, who preceded him in death. Loeb was so proud of his children and grandchildren and all of their accomplishments, Sandra Loeb said. Her father never pursued an advanced degree, but he was able to watch his daughters become a lawyer, a physician and a professor. "A girl needed to have a profession, he used to say," said Sandra Loeb, an attorney. "That way I could marry whoever I want for love and not be dependent on some schmuck." The daughters said their father was progressive, a believer in equal rights for all people. His left leanings informed his life, Sosa said. He didn't shy from speaking truth to power. "What I really valued about him was the fact that he was just clear as a bell," said Sosa, the professor. "He was just smart as a whip." Her father's intellect was formidable, Sosa said. She delved into the family's genealogy, sharing information with her father about long-forgotten cousins, as well as relatives who were murdered in the Holocaust. Her father seemed curious about each new piece of his past, Sosa said, and wanted to know more. Loeb kept working through his mid-80s. His last job was for AccuQuote, an online insurance company. "At the time, I couldn't understand why someone so overqualified would want to come work for us," his former boss posted on social media. "But he just wanted to be able to have a meaningful way to continue to help people. And that's exactly what he did. Every day. "Honesty, integrity, and character matter," the post continued. "People can feel it. We felt it. His clients felt it. He was smart. He was knowledgeable. He cared. He lived his life following the golden rule, and he was a pleasure to be around. A true mensch. A gentleman. One of the really good guys." In his later years, Loeb kept in touch with his artistic side by participating in a writing group where he pulled from his own experiences to create plays and short stories. He kept attending shows at the Marriott Theatre in Lincolnshire or in the Loop. Sandra Loeb said one of the last shows she remembers seeing with him was "The Book of Mormon." "He loved it," she said. "He laughed louder than anyone in the audience." Morris Loeb also often had a response to whatever was happening on MSNBC. Or with the Bears. Sosa said she remembers visiting her dad when she was living in Philadelphia. "And I started cheering for the Eagles, and he just, oh, he let me have it," Sosa laughed. "Are you kidding me?" he said. "You've just been gone a few years and now you're an Eagles fan?" Now, she wishes there had been more time to say goodbye. "I will just miss the opportunity to know him more," Sosa said. In recent months, Loeb was living at the Warren Barr North Shore rehab facility. Sandra Loeb last saw her father during his brief stay at Highland Park Hospital before the shutdown. Sandra Loeb said she was working on finding a way to get him out of the North Shore facility when she received a call that his fever had spiked. Her father was taken to Glenbrook Hospital, where his condition deteriorated. Barbara Loeb, a doctor, said she worked as the go-between communicator for physicians and her family. The day he died, Barbara Loeb saw a cardinal in her backyard, a visit she saw as a possible sign of comfort. At her father's funeral at Montrose Cemetery, she read a poem about how past generations always find a way to carry forward. "Know that I am always with you," she began, continuing on to a small, masked crowd. "Even when you can no longer hear my voice or know my face. A loving part of you forever." The lilt of bagpipes from the funeral of a Chicago firefighter carried over to Loeb's burial site. "I like to think," the rabbi said, "that Morry, who loved to be the center of attention, perhaps would have appreciated the fanfare that is happening right now." -- Morgan Greene  JOSEPHINE TAPIRU, 56 From Chicago, died April 18. LUIS TAPIRU JR., 20 From Chicago, died April 14. Josephine Tapiru had been pulling extra shifts, working from 9 a.m. until sometimes 11 p.m., because the North Side nursing home was getting more and more short-staffed as co-workers fell ill. She kept a close watch on her temperature: still 98. Fine, she thought. After clocking out on April 3 from Park View Rehab, Tapiru told a friend her throat was getting sore and she was coughing. She stopped at a drug store, picked up a bottle of NyQuil and went to bed as soon as she got home. Sometime that night, she slipped into a coma. The world's novel coronavirus was beginning to take its terrible toll on her family. Tapiru was taken to the intensive care unit at St. Francis Hospital in Evanston. Her husband, Luis Tapiru Sr., would be admitted there within a week. Four days later, on April 14, their 20-year-old son Luis Tapiru Jr. was found dead on the couch of their home. Four more days passed and Josephine Tapiru died, too, without coming out of her coma. Friends and family waited nearly a week, when Luis Sr. was finally removed from a ventilator, to tell him about the deaths of his wife and son. The couple's lone surviving son watched the tragedy unfold from Ottawa, Canada, where most of his close friends and relatives live. "I can't be there right now, and that's the toughest thing,'' Justin Tapiru, 28, said April 24. "They were feeling fine. I haven't had time to think or grieve.'' His brother is one of the youngest people in Illinois to die from the disease. Luis Jr. had played football at Senn High School and seemed healthy, family and friends said. An autopsy found no underlying medical conditions that contributed to his death from COVID-19, a rare finding for someone so young. Josephine Tapiru had suffered from endometrial cancer, and it was listed as a contributing factor in her death, according to the Cook County medical examiner's office. She was 56. She and her husband had both worked as caregivers, in private homes and at long-term senior centers, though Luis Sr. had recently been working for a manufacturing company. Josephine Tapiru, a licensed practical nurse, worked at Park View Rehab in Edgewater, a short drive from the family's high-rise apartment, according to the family. "Good Jesus, it is really hard," said Josephine Tapiru's best friend, Joselyn Smith, crying. "I'm still denying it. But we have to move on. So we have to fight and move on. But it's just hard. I feel like I'm in a trance, that this is not so true. It's a big loss. It really happened so fast.'' On March 21, Josephine Tapiru was looking forward to her regular weekend chat with Smith. Catching up after a busy week was always fun, but this time she shared some disturbing news. "She was really so upset because one of her office mates was showing some symptoms of the virus,'' Smith said. "She was mad.'' Under state health guidelines, you were not supposed to work if you felt ill. "She was scared to death,'' said another close friend, Donna Oduca. Workers at the senior center wore masks, she said, but Tapiru was still worried. On April 1, Tapiru told friends that she was getting more and more worried as others on the staff called in sick and she was working longer hours. On the morning of April 4, her husband and son Luis Jr. went to work and assumed she was sleeping in because she had worked so late the night before. They checked in later in the day, but she didn't pick up the phone. Sometime after lunch, Luis Jr. called his father and rushed home to check on her. "My mom won't wake up,'' he frantically told Oduca, also a nurse, who lives nearby. "Call 911,'' she told him as she headed to the Tapirus' seventh-floor apartment in the 6800 block of North Kedzie Avenue. Using his CPR training from a job as a camp counselor, the son began chest compressions as Oduca walked in wearing "full PPE,'' she said. Josephine Tapiru remained unconscious as she was taken to St. Francis Hospital. The next day, the hospital called to say she had tested positive for COVID-19 and was on life support. "That was so sad,'' Oduca said. Luis Sr. began feeling ill on April 5. "Hey, I'm not feeling better,'' he told Oduca on April 10. Later that day, he was also taken to St. Francis and placed on a ventilator as he, too, tested positive for the virus. Oduca and her husband, Cezar, along with other friends and relatives, kept in close contact with Luis Jr., who remained at the family's home, and Justin. But they soon had trouble reaching Luis Jr. Normally, he would always text or call back. On April 14, Oduca and her husband called 911. A few minutes later, police called back. "They just said they found him on the couch, and he passed on,'' Oduca said. Four days later, on April 18, Josephine Tapiru was pronounced dead at St. Francis Hospital. For days, family kept the news of the deaths from Luis Sr., who remained on a ventilator and was not allowed visitors. Terrified he would find out on his own, Justin said he broke the news to his father on April 23 via video hook-up while his father was with a chaplain, a doctor and a nurse. Justin Tapiru says he will miss his little brother's maturity. "He was more of a big brother to me,'' he said. "When my mom got sick, I was sad and freaking out. I was in shock ... and Luis said: 'You know what? She's going to pull through this. She's the strongest woman we know.' His dream was to become a full-time Twitch streamer. But he had a backup plan: He would get a degree in communications. He loved pop music and electronic dance music. One of his favorite groups was Twice. He loved singing and even auditioned for "The Voice'' a few times, Justin said. He would have turned 21 in June. The brothers never got the chance to make birthday plans. Josephine and Luis Tapiru met in the Philippines and moved to Canada, where they both worked as caregivers. About 13 years ago, they moved to Chicago because "they wanted a better opportunity,'' Donna Oduca said. Both were praised in local obituaries for the care they gave to the elderly. Smith said she was like a sister, watching out for her and Oduca. "We were like the Three Stooges,'' she said. Smith, 45, an accountant who is working from home these days, recalled the first few weeks of the stay-at-home order. Josephine Tapiru would call her during her commute and say, "Be careful. Nobody's out here. It's scary outside. It's like a ghost town.'' -- Rosemary Sobol CAPTION: Photo: (John Larry Sartain) FAMILY PHOTO ; Photo: (Morris Loeb) FAMILY PHOTO ; Photo: (Josephine Tapiru) DONNA ODUCA ; Photo: (Luis Tapiru Jr.) DONNA ODUCA CREDIT: Blair Kamin, Morgan Greene, Rosemary Sobol 
2020-05-04	Before the traditional May 1 deadline to decide where she would go to college, Tiffany Tang had four schools to choose from. Then on Tuesday, UCLA emailed to offer her a spot off the waitlist. That evening, she received a call from a Houston area code -- an admissions officer from Rice. The next day, Cornell got in touch. Shaken by economic hardship, health fears and uncertainty about when campuses will reopen, a large number of high school seniors appear to be putting off a decision about where to go to college in the fall -- or whether to go at all. Admissions officers are reluctant to admit weakness, meaning there is little hard data at this point. But there are clear signs of concern about plummeting enrollment and lost revenue. Of some 700 universities with a May 1 acceptance deadline, which include many of the country's most competitive, about half have given students an extra month to decide, said Marie Bigham, founder of Accept, a college admissions reform group. Some schools are waiving deposit requirements, particularly for foreign students, who are especially valuable to universities because most pay full tuition. And experts say the number of wait-listed students who are getting offers shows that even some of the most selective schools are acting more aggressively to fill freshman classes. "People are coming off waitlists all over the place right now," said Debra Felix, a former admissions director at Columbia University who runs her own student advising service. Many students said they did not want to make a decision about the fall until they knew for sure whether campuses would reopen. Johnny Kennevan, a senior at Seneca High School in Tabernacle, New Jersey, was recruited to play basketball at York College in Pennsylvania. But his plans would likely change if the campus is still closed, he said. "It doesn't make sense to pay 20 grand to sit at my computer at home and take online courses," he said. "You can get the same education from a community college." The coronavirus pandemic hit at a time when American higher education, which employs about 3 million people nationwide, was suffering from a host of financial problems. Many liberal arts colleges have struggled to meet enrollment goals in recent years because of rising tuition costs, concerns about student debt and a shrinking population of young people. Since mid-March, when colleges abruptly shut down campus operations and moved to online learning, schools have announced hundreds of millions of dollars in losses and say that a $14 billion federal aid package will not be nearly enough to keep struggling schools afloat. Executives have taken pay cuts, endowments have shrunk, hiring has been frozen, and construction projects have stopped. But experts say that is only the beginning if schools cannot persuade students to return in the fall, when many campuses are bracing for the possibility that online learning could continue. Eric Nichols, the vice president of enrollment at Loyola University Maryland, a liberal arts college in Baltimore, said that he was getting questions from students about how to defer their acceptance or take a gap year and how long they can take to decide. "We think a lot of students won't have made up their minds even by the summer," he said. Universities are likely to be accommodating, Nichols said, because they would like a commitment, even if it is deferred. At the same time, if deferments start to affect the bottom line, schools might have to refuse. "It's honestly an issue that's never been a problem before," he said, "but this is uncharted territory, so we'll see." Colleges are particularly concerned about the loss of foreign students kept away by travel restrictions or a reluctance to leave their home countries during the pandemic. Indiana University's Bloomington campus has long been a popular choice for students from China, India and South Korea. But international enrollment deposits are lagging 22% behind the same time period in previous years, said John Wilkerson, the university's executive director of international admissions, although he cautioned that international students usually wait until the last minute to decide. Like many schools hoping that another month will help, Indiana University extended its acceptance deadline to June 1. And for international students, it has waived the enrollment deposit and made housing application fees refundable. For Tang, the high school senior who lives outside Albany, New York, and heard from three colleges where she was wait-listed it is some consolation that she can now choose between so many colleges. "Where I've imagined myself going for the past two months has just changed within, like, just two days," she said. CAPTION: Photo: While choosing from four schools, Tiffany Tang, of Loudonville, New York, was recently offered college admission off waitlists from UCLA, Rice and Cornell. SASHA MASLOV/THE NEW YORK TIMES CREDIT: By Anemona Hartocollis and Dan Levin, Dan Levin, The New York Times 
2020-05-03	US allows use of experimental drug to aid in virus recovery WASHINGTON -- U.S. regulators on Friday allowed emergency use of an experimental drug that appears to help some coronavirus patients recover faster. It is the first drug shown to help fight COVID-19, which has killed more than 237,000 people worldwide. The FDA said that Gilead Science's intravenous drug would be specifically indicated for hospitalized patients with "severe disease," such as those experiencing breathing problems requiring supplemental oxygen or ventilators. The FDA acted after preliminary results from a government-sponsored study showed that remdesivir shortened the time to recovery by 31% for hospitalized COVID-19 patients. The study of 1,063 patients is the largest and most strict test of the drug and included a comparison group that received just usual care so remdesivir's effects could be rigorously evaluated. Those given the drug were able to leave the hospital in 11 days on average versus 15 days for the comparison group. The FDA said that performance warranted Friday's decision, though regulators acknowledged "there is limited information known about the safety and effectiveness of using remdesivir." The drug's side effects include potential inflammation of the liver and problems related to its infusion, which could lead to nausea, vomiting, sweating and low blood pressure. The National Institutes of Health's Dr. Anthony Fauci said this week the drug would become a new standard of care for severely ill COVID-19 patients.  Duchess of Sussex dealt setback in lawsuit against newspaper LONDON -- The Duchess of Sussex lost an early round in a London court Friday when a judge dismissed part of her lawsuit against a British newspaper publisher that put out excerpts of a letter to her estranged father. Meghan sued Associated Newspapers for invasion of privacy and copyright infringement last year over articles in the Mail on Sunday that reproduced parts of the letter she wrote in August 2018 after the former actress known as Meghan Markle married Britain's Prince Harry. Judge Mark Warby threw out some of the causes of action argued in her lawsuit, including the claim that the newspaper publisher acted "dishonestly." Warby also struck the claim that Associated Newspapers deliberately "stirred up" a dispute between Meghan and her father, Thomas Markle.  NKorea report: Kim Jong Un makes public appearance SEOUL, South Korea -- North Korean state media says leader Kim Jong Un has made his first public appearance in 20 days. The Korean Central News Agency said Saturday that he attended a ceremony marking the completion of a fertilizer factory near the capital of Pyongyang. Photos from the ceremony weren't immediately released. Kim Jong Un was last seen during a ruling party meeting on April 11 to discuss coronavirus prevention. Speculation about his health swirled after he missed the April 15 celebration of the birthday of his late grandfather and state founder, Kim Il Sung. South Korea's government had downplayed rumors and unconfirmed reports that Kim was in poor health following a medical procedure.  NASA administrator urges launch spectators to stay home CAPE CANAVERAL, Fla. -- NASA and SpaceX on Friday urged spectators to stay home for the first home launch of astronauts in nearly a decade because of the pandemic. Top officials warned the public against traveling to Florida for the May 27 launch of two NASA astronauts aboard a SpaceX rocket to the International Space Station. For shuttle launches, hundreds of thousands of spectators descend on Kennedy Space Center and nearby beaches, said NASA Administrator Jim Bridenstine. "The challenge that we're up against right now is we want to keep everybody safe," he said. "And so we're asking people not to travel to the Kennedy Space Center." Bridenstine urged the public to watch the launch online or on TV from home.  Prison delayed for 2 in college bribery scandal An heir to the Hot Pockets fortune and a former investment executive who participated in the college admissions cheating scheme won't get to serve their punishments at home, but they can delay going to prison until this summer because of the pandemic, a judge has ruled. Michelle Janavs, whose family invented Hot Pockets, and Douglas Hodge, the ex-CEO of Pacific Investment Management Co., can remain free until at least June 30, U.S. District Judge Nathaniel Gorton ruled Thursday. Gorton denied their requests for home confinement, saying he will "not forfeit his obligation to impose a sentence that is warranted by a defendant's criminal conduct" despite the "evolving cause of concern" posed by COVID-19. Lawyers for Janavs and Hodge had argued it's too dangerous to send them to prison.  Lawsuit: DOE continued to garnish wages after order The U.S. Education Department has continued to garnish wages from workers who are behind on their student loan payments even after Congress ordered the agency to suspend the practice during the pandemic, a new lawsuit charges. The complaint, filed Thursday in federal court in Washington, alleges that thousands of workers are getting up to 15% of their pay held back because the Education Department failed to notify employers that they must stop withholding pay. It was filed by consumer and student advocacy groups on behalf of Elizabeth Barber, a 59-year-old home health aide in New York, and any others who have lost wages during the crisis. The department declined to comment on the lawsuit but said it has taken immediate action to halt garnishments.  In Honduras: References to the Honduran president appear throughout U.S. prosecutors' statements announcing drug trafficking charges against the former chief of Honduras' national police this week. For months, the U.S. Attorney's Office in Manhattan has been signaling that the ultimate objective of years of investigation and methodically built cases could be President Juan Orlando Hernandez. The president's brother, Tony Hernandez, has already been convicted and is awaiting sentencing next month. The president has always denied any ties to drug trafficking and did so again late Thursday, though most Hondurans long ago wrote off their president as corrupt. CAPTION: Photo: Pepper, a robot wearing a white surgical mask, greets Tokyo Gov. Yuriko Koike on Friday in the lobby of a hotel repurposed for mildly sick coronavirus patients. The switch is part of a new plan to free up beds at hospitals overburdened with more severe cases. EUGENE HOSHIKO/AP CREDIT: Staff and news services 
2020-05-03	One of the key conditions Gov. J.B. Pritzker says must be met before Illinois can lift its stay-at-home order is a comprehensive way to track, warn and quarantine everyone who has had significant contact with newly diagnosed COVID-19 patients. "Contact tracing is one of the most critical tools that we have to reduce our spread rate, speed up our diagnoses and seek to halt outbreaks before they happen," the governor said Friday during his daily briefing. But state, Chicago and Cook County public health leaders concede they're not yet ready to fully roll out a coronavirus contact tracing system. The big problems to solve? Finding enough workers and putting technology in place. Dr. Ngozi Ezike, director of the Illinois Department of Public Health, cited estimates that there need to be 30 contact tracers for every 100,000 people. That means more than 3,800 interviewers to handle the data, sleuthing and legwork necessary to trace contacts on the unprecedented scale needed during a pandemic caused by such a virulent disease. The city can't say how many people it has on the job, with officials noting there are people working on it from different divisions within the Chicago Department of Public Health and its health care allies. The county, meanwhile, says it has 29 people devoted to the effort but will need at least 300 to cover more than 2 million residents spread over 700 square miles of suburban Cook. And so state public health officials say the goal is for "some portion" of the program to be in place by late May, the current expiration date on Pritzker's stay-at-home order. "We don't necessarily have to have all of it by then," said Dr. Wayne Duffus, the acting state epidemiologist. The priority will be "critical areas," including nursing homes, long-term care facilities, prisons and jails, he said. Beyond that, the state is working on a standardized hiring process, an online training program and a computer app to help track cases and contacts, Duffus said. The bulk of public health system work in Illinois is done at the local level, so the state envisions its role as being "an operations manager" for contact tracing at the 97 county and regional health departments. Pritzker on Friday estimated the cost of the effort at $80 million. National experts agree that contact tracing is essential if states are to avoid another surge in COVID-19 cases and an overwhelming flood of patients into hospitals. Tools are limited to slow the virus's spread before the nation develops therapies and a vaccine, but social distancing remains effective, said Anita Cicero, deputy director of the Johns Hopkins Center for Health Security. "But as communities and economies need to relax some of those social distancing restrictions, testing and tracing the cases is the tool that we have right now that will be effective," she added. "And if communities aren't able to isolate the sick and quarantine those who are exposed, then rapid community spread is probably likely to increase again, which would bring us back to requiring the strict physical distancing measures."  What is contact tracing? Contact tracing in the U.S. dates back to at least the early 20th century, when it was used to limit the spread of communicable diseases such as smallpox and tuberculosis. Since then, it's been employed to control other scourges, including sexually transmitted diseases, measles and Ebola. The practice has been credited with limiting the spread of COVID-19 in other countries that quickly turned to the approach. That includes South Korea and Singapore, where the government used digital surveillance and enforcement methods that likely would meet stiff resistance here from privacy and freedom advocates. "So many diseases are highly communicable," said Dr. Jennifer Layden, chief medical officer for the Chicago Department of Public Health. "So contact investigations are part of the public health bread and butter." Here's how it works: When a confirmed case of COVID-19 is reported to the state, a contact tracer tracks down the sick person, or their relatives when the person is too ill to talk or has died from the disease. The interviewer tells them the patient should be isolated at home until they no longer are believed to be contagious. Sometimes, if the person doesn't have the capability to isolate on their own, they refer them to social service agencies that can help find alternative housing and delivery of food, medicine or health care services. The interviewer tries to determine who the patient had contact with up to two weeks prior to symptom onset. In some cases, a person may have no symptoms at all, making that calculation more difficult. The tracers then track down those contacts and attempt to speak with them. They suggest precautions to avoid spreading the disease and ask them to quarantine at home for two weeks from the time of contact with the infected person, or if they are sick, until they have fully recovered. Ideally, the tracers also would track down the contacts of everyone who is presumptively diagnosed with COVID-19, given that person could be spreading SARS-CoV-2 -- the virus that causes the disease -- before a test confirms they actually have it, experts said. "At the very first hint of somebody being ill, they need to immediately be put into isolation, even while they are awaiting their test results," said Dr. Rachel Rubin, the county public health department's senior medical officer. "Even if they did a test that went off to a lab, they can't even wait that two days to 10 days of getting that result, because in that intervening time when they are just beginning to get sick is when they are infecting everybody around them." Tracing work takes time, requires empathy and social skills, and can be emotionally taxing. "We're asking people to kind of recount stories that they have probably already told other physicians before, and sometimes we're asking family members to recount how their loved ones died," said Dr. Chen Wang, a preventive medicine fellow for the county health department who has been tracking down cases for a couple of months. "I've had cases where I called the phone number of that person who has passed away and I speak with their spouse. And their wife says, 'This was my husband I had been with for 60 years, and the longest time we every spent apart were those days that he was in the hospital.' And now the surviving spouse is back in their home alone." Despite the anxiety that can be involved, nearly everyone is cooperative with the efforts, Wang added. "People recognize that we're all in this together, and everyone has something that they can contribute," she said.  Efforts underway Pritzker and Illinois officials have looked to Massachusetts' partnership with global health nonprofit Partners In Health as a model. That northeastern state -- with a little more than half the population of Illinois but more COVID-19 cases and deaths, is deploying 1,000 contact workers. Johns Hopkins experts say even that likely won't be enough. Duffus, acting state epidemiologist, said one particular aspect of the Massachusetts program that he would like to implement in Illinois is the use of resource coordinators. Those workers are tasked with making sure people who test positive for COVID-19 have the food, medications and services they need to be able to self-isolate. "A resource coordinator is going to be crucial to the success of this because we can ask people to do things, but if their needs are not met, it's going to be very difficult for them," he said. Not all of the contact tracers would need a background in medicine or public health, Duffus said. They should be hired locally because they will have an easier time establishing trust with the people who they call, he added. The state also is looking at the use of technology to help with case tracking, with the possibility of an online application that would let people enter their symptoms and contacts so that workers can follow those leads. Illinois has been without a permanent state epidemiologist since Layden resigned at the end of February to become the city's chief medical officer. Duffus, a senior medical adviser in the Division of Global HIV and TB at the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, arrived April 5. At the time, the state had reported more than 11,000 known cases of COVID-19 and 274 deaths. Ezike said that there was no downtime because Illinois' public health department was covered by epidemiologists who have been CDC-trained and are longtime infectious disease experts. Chicago has been doing some contact tracing since the initial outbreak. But it has had to pick and choose what to focus on because of limited resources. "Certainly congregate settings where we're seeing a high level of spread, and that would be long-term care facilities, public shelters, jails, those outbreaks that are reported to us ... in a workplace are priorities," Layden said. "But we are really striving to get to a point -- I mean where there's review of the data and there's investigation into every case -- to the point where we are thoroughly investigating all the contacts is something we are striving to do," she said. The city is working to build partnerships with community health workers, students and others to expand the ranks of contact tracers, so when cases eventually decline they can work to prevent another flare-up, Layden added. Like the state, Chicago is searching for ways that technology might make the job easier and more efficient. While rolling out the Chi COVID Coach app, Dr. Allison Arwady, the city's public health commissioner, said city officials were looking at the possibility of using it to help track contacts and send warnings to contacts via text when someone contracts the virus. Cook County has focused its 29 contact tracers on nursing homes and group homes, as well as hospitalized patients, said Rubin, the health department's senior medical officer. When the surge starts to decline, the program will need to expand, she added. Rubin also said testing is not yet as widespread, quick and accurate as necessary to detect cases early, when a patient may be most contagious. And there needs to be a more thorough system for reporting test results to the state because not all health care providers are doing that, she said. "Once we reach a point where we can start doing more contact tracing, we really will need to ramp it up, because we want to stop that next surge ... from being as high and as steep," Rubin said.  A 'near miss' A Johns Hopkins study concluded the nation needs about 100,000 contact tracers, with more than 3,800 in Illinois. But Crystal Watson, the report's lead author, warned that "we also shouldn't delay in conducting tracing until we have a perfect testing system." In Chicago, Howard Brown Health has been doing contact tracing from the start. It was a natural for the nonprofit organization, which serves the LGBTQ community and other groups that face health care disparities. For many years, the organization has been contact tracing for sexually transmitted diseases, including AIDS, said Dr. John Schneider, an infectious disease specialist affiliated with the University of Chicago. Since early March, Howard Brown Health has interviewed about 300 people with COVID-19 and reached out to as many as 1,200 of their contacts. Schneider makes many of those calls, and described one situation that he described as "a near miss" where intervention may have come too late. He was talking to a woman who had COVID-19 and lived at home with her husband, son and daughter. Everyone but the daughter had become sick, so they sent her to live with relatives, including her grandparents. By the time she was tested -- and found to be infected with the virus despite having no symptoms -- the disease already had spread to others in her temporary home. "If I could have gotten to her three days earlier ... then I could have said, 'The daughter needs to stay home, keep her in a different room if asymptomatic, that's fine, but no one should be going to the grandparents right now,'" Schneider said. The case illustrates the need for doing contact tracing from the very moment of diagnosis, possibly at the lab where the person went for the test. Like the governor and the experts, Schneider believes contact tracing will be crucial to prevent or limit future outbreaks after the number of cases in the current surge diminishes. "We're entering a phase where it's really important, because then it starts to become more manageable, and then it has implications for keeping things open, keeping families healthy," he said. ---------- hdardick@chicagotribune.com dpetrella@chicagotribune.com CAPTION: Photo: Dr. John Schneider, a specialist affiliated with the University of Chicago, works Thursdayat the Howard Brown Health clinic. ANTONIO PEREZ/CHICAGO TRIBUNE CREDIT: By Hal Dardick and Dan Petrella 
2020-05-02	US allows use of experimental drug to aid in virus recovery WASHINGTON -- U.S. regulators on Friday allowed emergency use of an experimental drug that appears to help some coronavirus patients recover faster. It is the first drug shown to help fight COVID-19, which has killed more than 237,000 people worldwide. The FDA said that Gilead Science's intravenous drug would be specifically indicated for hospitalized patients with "severe disease," such as those experiencing breathing problems requiring supplemental oxygen or ventilators. The FDA acted after preliminary results from a government-sponsored study showed that remdesivir shortened the time to recovery by 31% for hospitalized COVID-19 patients. The study of 1,063 patients is the largest and most strict test of the drug and included a comparison group that received just usual care so remdesivir's effects could be rigorously evaluated. Those given the drug were able to leave the hospital in 11 days on average versus 15 days for the comparison group. The FDA said that performance warranted Friday's decision, though regulators acknowledged "there is limited information known about the safety and effectiveness of using remdesivir." The drug's side effects include potential inflammation of the liver and problems related to its infusion, which could lead to nausea, vomiting, sweating and low blood pressure. The National Institutes of Health's Dr. Anthony Fauci said this week the drug would become a new standard of care for severely ill COVID-19 patients.  Duchess of Sussex dealt setback in lawsuit against newspaper LONDON -- The Duchess of Sussex lost an early round in a London court Friday when a judge dismissed part of her lawsuit against a British newspaper publisher that put out excerpts of a letter to her estranged father. Meghan sued Associated Newspapers for invasion of privacy and copyright infringement last year over articles in the Mail on Sunday that reproduced parts of the letter she wrote in August 2018 after the former actress known as Meghan Markle married Britain's Prince Harry. Judge Mark Warby threw out some of the causes of action argued in her lawsuit, including the claim that the newspaper publisher acted "dishonestly." Warby also struck the claim that Associated Newspapers deliberately "stirred up" a dispute between Meghan and her father, Thomas Markle.  NKorea report: Kim Jong Un makes public appearance SEOUL, South Korea -- North Korean state media says leader Kim Jong Un has made his first public appearance in 20 days. The Korean Central News Agency said Saturday that he attended a ceremony marking the completion of a fertilizer factory near the capital of Pyongyang. Photos from the ceremony weren't immediately released. Kim Jong Un was last seen during a ruling party meeting on April 11 to discuss coronavirus prevention. Speculation about his health swirled after he missed the April 15 celebration of the birthday of his late grandfather and state founder, Kim Il Sung. South Korea's government had downplayed rumors and unconfirmed reports that Kim was in poor health following a medical procedure.  NASA administrator urges launch spectators to stay home CAPE CANAVERAL, Fla. -- NASA and SpaceX on Friday urged spectators to stay home for the first home launch of astronauts in nearly a decade because of the pandemic. Top officials warned the public against traveling to Florida for the May 27 launch of two NASA astronauts aboard a SpaceX rocket to the International Space Station. For shuttle launches, hundreds of thousands of spectators descend on Kennedy Space Center and nearby beaches, said NASA Administrator Jim Bridenstine. "The challenge that we're up against right now is we want to keep everybody safe," he said. "And so we're asking people not to travel to the Kennedy Space Center." Bridenstine urged the public to watch the launch online or on TV from home.  Prison delayed for 2 in college bribery scandal An heir to the Hot Pockets fortune and a former investment executive who participated in the college admissions cheating scheme won't get to serve their punishments at home, but they can delay going to prison until this summer because of the pandemic, a judge has ruled. Michelle Janavs, whose family invented Hot Pockets, and Douglas Hodge, the ex-CEO of Pacific Investment Management Co., can remain free until at least June 30, U.S. District Judge Nathaniel Gorton ruled Thursday. Gorton denied their requests for home confinement, saying he will "not forfeit his obligation to impose a sentence that is warranted by a defendant's criminal conduct" despite the "evolving cause of concern" posed by COVID-19. Lawyers for Janavs and Hodge had argued it's too dangerous to send them to prison.  Lawsuit: DOE continued to garnish wages after order The U.S. Education Department has continued to garnish wages from workers who are behind on their student loan payments even after Congress ordered the agency to suspend the practice during the pandemic, a new lawsuit charges. The complaint, filed Thursday in federal court in Washington, alleges that thousands of workers are getting up to 15% of their pay held back because the Education Department failed to notify employers that they must stop withholding pay. It was filed by consumer and student advocacy groups on behalf of Elizabeth Barber, a 59-year-old home health aide in New York, and any others who have lost wages during the crisis. The department declined to comment on the lawsuit but said it has taken immediate action to halt garnishments.  In Honduras: References to the Honduran president appear throughout U.S. prosecutors' statements announcing drug trafficking charges against the former chief of Honduras' national police this week. For months, the U.S. Attorney's Office in Manhattan has been signaling that the ultimate objective of years of investigation and methodically built cases could be President Juan Orlando Hernandez. The president's brother, Tony Hernandez, has already been convicted and is awaiting sentencing next month. The president has always denied any ties to drug trafficking and did so again late Thursday, though most Hondurans long ago wrote off their president as corrupt. CAPTION: Photo: Pepper, a robot wearing a white surgical mask, greets Tokyo Gov. Yuriko Koike on Friday in the lobby of a hotel repurposed for mildly sick coronavirus patients. The switch is part of a new plan to free up beds at hospitals overburdened with more severe cases. EUGENE HOSHIKO/AP CREDIT: Staff and news services 
2020-04-22	Canadian police say 22 victims after rampage in Nova Scotia TORONTO -- Canadian police said Tuesday they believe there are at least 22 victims after a gunman wearing a police uniform shot people in their homes and set fires in a rampage across rural communities in Nova Scotia over the weekend. The Royal Canadian Mounted Police said they have recovered remains from some of the destroyed homes. Earlier, authorities had said at least 18 were killed in the 12-hour attack. Officials said the suspect, identified as 51-year-old Gabriel Wortman, was shot and later died Sunday. Authorities did not give a motive for the killings. The dead include a 17-year-old as well as a police officer, a police news release said. All the other victims were adults and included both men and women. There were 16 different crime scenes in five different communities in northern and central Nova Scotia, it said. "Some of the victims were known to Gabriel Wortman and were targeted while others were not known to him," the police statement said. Authorities also confirmed Wortman was wearing an authentic police uniform and one of the cars he used "was a very real look-alike RCMP vehicle." "This is an unprecedented incident that has resulted in incredible loss and heartbreak for countless families and loved ones. So many lives will be forever touched," the police statement said. In an earlier news release authorities had said they believed there were 23 victims but Royal Canadian Mounted Police spokesman Daniel Brien later clarified the death toll included 22 victims and the gunman.  S. Korea downplays concerns over health of Kim Jong Un SEOUL, South Korea -- South Korean officials reported no unusual activity in North Korea on Tuesday following unconfirmed media reports that leader Kim Jong Un was in fragile health after surgery. But the possibility of high-level instability raised troubling questions about the future of a nuclear-armed state that has been steadily building an arsenal meant to threaten the U.S. mainland amid stalled talks between Kim and U.S. President Donald Trump. South Korea's presidential office said Kim appeared to be handling state affairs as usual and it had no information about rumors regarding his health. But many will be watching closely for any signs of trouble in North Korea, and whether it will address the reports -- something it has not yet done.  Dutch court OKs euthanasia in advanced dementia cases THE HAGUE, Netherlands -- The Netherlands' highest court ruled Tuesday that doctors can carry out euthanasia in patients with advanced dementia if the patient has earlier made a written directive. The Supreme Court ruling solidifies in law a practice that already was being carried out on rare occasions in the Netherlands. Dutch euthanasia advocacy group NVVE welcomed the ruling, saying in a statement that the decision should help doctors "to feel strengthened and supported if they want to carry out euthanasia on a patient with dementia." The case before the Supreme Court revolved around a district court's acquittal from last year of a doctor who in 2016 carried out a directive for euthanasia on a 74-year-old woman.  Former UCLA soccer coach to plead guilty in admissions scam The former University of California, Los Angeles men's soccer coach will plead guilty to taking $200,000 in bribes as part of the college admissions cheating scheme, federal prosecutors said Tuesday. Jorge Salcedo, 47, of Los Angeles, will admit to getting bribes in exchange for helping get one male and one female student into the school as fake soccer recruits. He will plead guilty to a racketeering conspiracy charge, according to court documents. Salcedo was among 50 charged last year in the case that has embroiled the world of higher education. More than 30 wealthy parents, coaches at elite schools and others have already pleaded guilty to taking or paying bribes to rig college entrance exams or have students recruited to teams for sports they didn't play.  Missouri sues China over coronavirus pandemic COLUMBIA, Mo. -- The state of Missouri filed a lawsuit Tuesday against the Chinese government over the coronavirus, alleging that nation's officials are to blame for the global pandemic. The lawsuit, filed in federal court by the state's top prosecutor, alleges Chinese officials are "responsible for the enormous death, suffering, and economic losses they inflicted on the world, including Missourians." "The Chinese government lied to the world about the danger and contagious nature of COVID-19, silenced whistleblowers, and did little to stop the spread of the disease," Attorney General Eric Schmitt said in a written statement. Missouri Democratic Party Executive Director Lauren Gepford called the lawsuit a "stunt" by a Republican attorney general who is up for reelection.  UAW backs Democrat Biden for president DETROIT -- The United Auto Workers union is endorsing Democrat Joe Biden for President. The 400,000-member union says in a statement Tuesday that the nation needs stable leadership with less acrimony "and more balance to the rights and protections of working Americans." The union says Biden has committed to reining in corporate power over workers, encouraging collective bargaining, and making sure workers get the pay, benefits and protections they deserve. Biden also has committed to expand access to affordable health care, the union said. Union negotiators are in talks with Ford, General Motors and Fiat Chrysler about restarting U.S. factories that have been closed for the past month due to fears of spreading the coronavirus.  In London: Britain marked Queen Elizabeth II's 94th birthday with silence Tuesday, as the nation in lockdown amid the COVID-19 pandemic forgoes the usual gun salutes and ringing of bells. With thousands dead amid the outbreak, the monarch decided that the celebratory display of military firepower would not be appropriate. Nor will there be a celebratory peal of bells at Westminster Abbey, as the church where the queen was married and crowned is currently closed. The royal family took to social media to share images of Elizabeth as she marked the occasion -- but in keeping with social distancing rules, there were no visits. CAPTION: Photo: Sri Lankan Catholics priests stand Tuesday at the entrance of St. Anthony's church, one of the sites of the 2019 Easter Sunday attacks, on the anniversary of the bombings in Colombo, Sri Lanka. More than 260 were killed when three churches were attacked. ERANGA JAYAWARDENA/AP CREDIT: Staff and news services 
2020-04-21	While they are few in number, those who've decided it's their duty as Americans to protest coronavirus lockdowns are putting their self-interest over the health of others. Period. You can disagree with me and call me a liberal schmuck and stand by President Donald Trump and the protesters he's egging on all you want, but that won't change the fundamental facts of the coronavirus, how it spreads and where our country stands in dealing with the pandemic. In fact, by violating social-distancing rules, not wearing masks and encouraging like-minded folks to follow their lead, anti-coronavirus protesters are likely delaying the very thing they claim to desire: a reopening of America. Here are some facts the virus doesn't care whether or not you believe. Until there's widespread testing and contact tracing (tracking down and isolating everyone an infected person has come in contact with), it will be hard to prevent additional outbreaks or measure how many Americans have been infected. One of the most nettlesome problems with this virus is it can be spread by people who aren't showing symptoms. A new study of a town in Italy found 43.2% of people diagnosed with the virus were asymptomatic. According to an NPR report earlier this month, a third of the 82 people who tested positive for the coronavirus at a Washington state nursing home were "free of fever, malaise and coughing when they were swabbed for the virus, though most went on to develop symptoms." There are people in parts of the country saying "Well, no one around here has it." That's a statement based on zero factual evidence. People crowding around state capitol buildings calling for lockdowns to be lifted have no clue whether they're standing next to fellow protesters carrying the virus. As a country, we don't have the data to say any place is virus-free. Say you live in a small town in downstate Illinois. Nobody you know has gotten sick. That's certainly a positive sign. But do you have gas stations and restaurants in your town? Are you near an interstate that carries people from areas that have higher infection rates? Suppose someone from St. Louis is infected but not showing any symptoms, and that person decides to drive to Chicago and, on the way, pulls into at a truck stop just outside your town. Say two of your friends are there and they get exposed to that infected person in the truck stop diner. That's the first problem -- an asymptomatic person spreading the virus. The next problem is that coronavirus is highly contagious. Too many have equated the virus with the flu, thanks in part to Trump and other Republican lawmakers and conservative pundits making such comparisons. Hugh Montgomery, director of the Institute for Human Health and Performance at University College London, told a British television network the virus that causes COVID-19 is three times as infectious as the flu. That doesn't sound that bad, until you crunch the numbers. On average, a person with the flu will infect 1.3 people. So if you take that through 10 transmissions, one person will have infected about 14 people. "This coronavirus is very, very infectious, so every person passes to it three," Montgomery said. "Now that doesn't sound like much of a difference, but if each of those three pass it to three and that happens in 10 layers, I have been responsible for infecting 59,000 people." The "one passing it to three" is considered a high estimate. So say a person with coronavirus, on average, infects two people, a figure lower than epidemiological estimates. In 10 transmissions, one person would still be responsible for 1,024 other people getting the virus. "If you are irresponsible enough to think that you don't mind if you get the flu," Montgomery said, "remember it's not about you -- it's about everybody else." In February, a 61-year-old woman in South Korea tested positive for the coronavirus, at a time when the country had only 30 other cases. Hundreds from the woman's church wound up testing positive for COVID-19 and that one patient led to a massive outbreak. Just recently there have been coronavirus outbreaks at three Iowa food processing plants, a pork factory in South Dakota, a meat packing plant in Colorado and a wind power plant in North Dakota. What happens when there's an outbreak at a plant? It gets shut down. If one asymptomatic person at one protest has the coronavirus and spreads it to two more, then those two return to their hometowns and each spreads it to two more, you have the potential for another outbreak. And how will any state respond to a surge of new infections? By shutting down. I understand the worries protesters and many others are facing. My industry is being walloped by the coronavirus shutdown. Pay cuts, furloughs and layoffs are either happening or being weighed at news organizations across the country, including this one. I'd give anything for a swift return to normalcy. But until there's enough testing nationwide to allow public health officials to smartly and confidently start slowly easing restrictions, a rushed "great reopening" will almost certainly be followed by a less-great re-closing. If you want to protest something, protest the lack of adequate testing. Listen to governors, Democratic and Republican, saying it's the key to the realm. Help them push the federal government to recognize the urgency. But protest via phone calls and emails. Don't go out in large groups and think your chants will repel a virus. You put yourself at risk. You put others -- possibly hundreds of others -- at risk. And the end result may well be a longer lockdown time for everyone. ---------- rhuppke@chicagotribune.com CAPTION: Photo: A demonstrator leads protest chants during a rally Sunday in Olympia, Washington, against Gov. Jay Inslee's 'Stay Home, Stay Healthy' emergency order in response to the coronavirus pandemic. RUTH FREMSON/THE NEW YORK TIMES CREDIT: Rex W. Huppke 
2020-04-21	Influential Congressional Black Caucus PAC backs Biden's bid DETROIT -- The Congressional Black Caucus PAC endorsed Joe Biden's presidential bid on Monday, further cementing his support among the nation's influential black political leadership. The political action committee's unanimous endorsement came on the heels of several key nods of support among caucus leadership and members, including civil rights icon Rep. John Lewis of Georgia and caucus Chairwoman Rep. Karen Bass of California. The PAC is the caucus's separate campaign arm. "There's no question that Joe Biden is badly needed by this country," CBC PAC Chairman Rep. Gregory Meeks of New York said. "His leadership, his experience, his understanding on how to get things done and his ability to work and pull people together is needed now more than ever. We need someone that is a healer and not a divider, and that's Joe Biden." Biden, who is on the cusp of clinching the Democratic presidential nomination, had already scored key endorsements from 38 of the 54 members of the group, which is composed of most African American members of Congress. Black voters have long anchored the former vice president's White House bid with overwhelming support in South Carolina, on Super Tuesday and in Midwestern states like Michigan. But that was before the coronavirus pandemic disrupted the race, forcing several states with significant black populations, like Georgia, to postpone their primaries. African Americans have been disproportionately affected by COVID-19.  US report: Kim Jong Un in 'grave danger' after surgery SEOUL, South Korea -- The South Korean government on Tuesday was looking into U.S. media reports saying North Korean leader Kim Jong Un was in fragile condition after surgery. Officials from South Korea's Unification Ministry and National Intelligence Service said they couldn't immediately confirm the report. CNN cited an anonymous U.S. official who said Kim was in "grave danger." The Unification Ministry, which deals with inter-Korean affairs, said it couldn't confirm another report by Daily NK, which cited anonymous sources to report that Kim was recovering from heart surgery in the capital Pyongyang and that his condition was improving. Speculation on Kim's health was raised after he missed the celebration of his late grandfather and state founder Kim Il Sung on Wednesday.  Court: To help fight virus, Texas can ban medication abortions NEW ORLEANS -- Texas can ban medication abortions as part of the state's effort to fight the spread of the new coronavirus, a federal appeals court panel ruled Monday. The 5th Circuit Court of Appeals in New Orleans last week temporarily blocked the state's prohibition on medication abortions while it gave more consideration to the issue. The same panel, in a 2-1 decision, said Monday the state was within its rights to ban that -- and other abortion procedures -- as it sought to slow the use of masks, gowns and other protective medical gear. The majority opinion said a lower court erred by treating a medication abortion as "an absolute right." Clinics have argued that medication abortions do not require personal protective equipment.  Brazil's Bolsonaro calls for social isolation to end this week SAO PAULO -- Four days after firing his health minister amid the coronavirus pandemic, Brazilian President Jair Bolsonaro said Monday he wants social isolation policies to end nationwide this week, though many Brazilian states are committed to such policies. Nearly all states have stay-home measures in place, some slated to extend until mid-May. The country's top court has ruled governors and mayors can decide on social isolation measures regardless of the federal government's position. Bolsonaro, meanwhile, wants a quick reopening to stop the deterioration of Brazil's faltering economy. The Brazilian president favors a less restrictive model in which only those in high-risk groups would be quarantined at home until the end of the outbreak.  Burkina Faso killed 31 unarmed men, report says OUAHIGOUYA, Burkina Faso -- Burkina Faso's security forces reportedly killed 31 unarmed men in the country's north, according to a report on Monday by Human Rights Watch. The killings occurred on April 9 after the men were detained during a government counterterrorism operation in the town of Djibo, the report said. The West African nation continues to be wracked by violence linked to Islamic extremists and local defense militias, which has displaced nearly 840,000 people within Burkina Faso. The report's writers interviewed 17 people with knowledge of the killings and found all of the victims were ethnic Fulani. The Fulani have been increasingly targeted by the military and local defense militias for their alleged affiliation with Islamist groups.  Trump plans temporary suspension on immigration WASHINGTON -- President Donald Trump said late Monday he will sign an executive order "to temporarily suspend immigration into the United States" because of the coronavirus. "In light of the attack from the Invisible Enemy, as well as the need to protect the jobs of our GREAT American Citizens, I will be signing an Executive Order to temporarily suspend immigration into the United States!" Trump tweeted. He offered no details as to what immigration programs might be affected. The White House did not immediately elaborate. Trump has taken credit for his restrictions on travel from China and hard-hit European countries, arguing it contributed to slowing viral spread in the U.S. He's yet to extend those restrictions to other nations now experiencing virus outbreaks.  In Turkey: Turkey's president on Monday accused the Syrian government of taking advantage of the world's preoccupation with the coronavirus pandemic to increase attacks in rebel-held northwestern Syria in violation of a truce. In an address to the nation following a Cabinet meeting, President Recep Tayyip Erdogan threatened to take action if the alleged Syrian government violations in Idlib province continue. Erdogan's threat came amid reports of limited Syrian violations and exchanges of fire between troops and Turkey-backed opposition forces. The cease-fire deal was brokered March 5 between Russia and Turkey, which back opposing sides in the Syrian conflict. CAPTION: Photo: Stormy South: The heavily damaged home of Brian and Penny Templesis of Baxterville, Mississippi, is seen Monday, one day after a tornado hit. Suspected twisters and a house fire from a lightning strike left three people dead in Alabama, Mississippi and Georgia. CAM BONELLI/THE CLARION-LEDGER CREDIT: Staff and news services 
2020-04-20	Amid possible tornado threat, storms rake Southern states MONTGOMERY, Ala. -- High winds, hail and heavy rain pounded parts of Alabama on Sunday, as forecasters warned residents to brace for possible tornadoes and flooding later in the day across a wide swatch of the southern United States. Tornado watches covered a swath of east Texas and large parts of Louisiana and Mississippi on Sunday afternoon. More than 24,000 customers were without electricity early Sunday, according to www.poweroutage.us. It was the second Sunday in a row that the South was hit with severe weather. Four Alabama counties were under a flash flood warning through the late morning because of heavy rain: Bibb, Chilton, Coosa and Shelby, the National Weather Service said. High winds had uprooted trees and left blankets of hail on the ground in some areas, the National Weather Service reported. "Two to three inches of rain has already fallen and an additional one to two inches is possible," the agency said on its website. A second wave of storms was expected to develop Sunday afternoon and bring the risk of strong tornadoes into the evening, the National Weather Service said. Large twisters were a possibility for parts of Louisiana, Mississippi and Alabama. A zone from the Texas-Louisiana line that extends eastward across the southern parts of Mississippi, Alabama and into Georgia will be at greatest risk of severe weather and tornadoes. The area is home to more than 5 million people. Damaging winds and a tornado threat will also extend across Georgia and parts of South Carolina.  Biden wins mail-in Wyoming Democratic presidential caucus CHEYENNE, Wyo. -- Joe Biden has won Wyoming's Democratic presidential caucus, which had been postponed for two weeks and scaled back to just mail-in ballots because of the coronavirus pandemic, state party officials said Sunday. The results come less than two weeks after Bernie Sanders dropped out and endorsed Biden, who is the only candidate still actively seeking the Democratic nomination. Biden beat Sanders 72% to 28%. A total of 15,428 votes were cast. Biden gets 12 delegates and Sanders gets two. Biden led Sanders in the delegate count 1,305 to 939. The Biden and Sanders campaigns are in talks over allowing Sanders to keep some of his statewide delegates. The Wyoming Democratic Party announced the results after tabulating votes Saturday and auditing the results overnight.  Official: Police kill gunmanwho hijacked Dallas-area bus ROWLETT, Texas -- A man opened fire on a Dallas-area bus on Sunday, hijacking it with two people aboard and leading officers on a chase that ended in a shootout in which the man was killed and three officers were wounded, according to police officials. A man got on the Dallas Area Rapid Transit bus in Richardson, just north of Dallas, at around 11 a.m. and opened fire, shattering windows, a DART spokesman said. The man took the driver hostage and fired at DART officers who tried to stop the vehicle, said Garland police officer Pedro Barineau. Police eventually used a spike strip to stop the vehicle, Barineau said. The man continued firing as he exited the bus after it stopped, and officers returned fire, killing him, Barineau said.  North Korea denies that Kim sent Trump 'a nice note' SEOUL, South Korea -- North Korea on Sunday dismissed as "ungrounded" President Donald Trump's comment that he received "a nice note" from the North's leader, Kim Jong Un. Trump said during a press briefing on the coronavirus pandemic Saturday that "I received a nice note from him recently. It was a nice note. I think we're doing fine." Trump also defended now-stalled nuclear diplomacy with Kim, saying the U.S. would have been at war with North Korea if he had not been elected. North Korea's Foreign Ministry said in a statement that there was no letter addressed to Trump recently by "the supreme leadership," a reference to Kim. It said it would examine why the U.S. leadership released "the ungrounded story" to the media.  Iran admits encounter with US ship during a drill TEHRAN, Iran -- Iran's paramilitary Revolutionary Guard acknowledged Sunday it had a tense encounter with U.S. warships in the Persian Gulf last week, but alleged without offering evidence that American forces sparked the incident. The incident Wednesday saw the U.S. Navy release video of small Iranian fast boats coming close to American warships as they operated in the northern Persian Gulf near Kuwait, with U.S. Army Apache helicopters. In the Guard's telling, its forces were conducting a drill and faced "the unprofessional and provocative actions of the United States and their indifference to warnings." It said the Americans later withdrew. The Guard released no evidence to support its allegation, but did release a video showing an Iranian boat traveling in parallel with a U.S. warship.  Israelis accuse Netanyahu of endangering democracy TEL AVIV, Israel -- More than 2,000 Israelis took to the streets of Tel Aviv on Sunday, demonstrating against Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu's attempts to form an "emergency" government with his chief rival and accusing him of using the coronavirus crisis to escape prosecution on corruption charges. Demonstrators wore face masks and largely kept their distance from one another, in line with social-distancing rules, as speakers criticized Netanyahu's possible partnership with rival Benny Gantz. Gantz, who during three bitter elections over the past year vowed never to sit in a government with Netanyahu due to his legal problems, announced last month that he had accepted the prime minister's suggestion to form an "emergency" government.  In Yemen: Yemen's rebels on Sunday detained a former culture minister and writer who was a vocal critic of their rule, his family and lawyer said. The rebels, known as Houthis, stormed Khalid al-Rwaishan's home in a suburb of the capital Sanaa at dawn, seizing documents. Al-Rwaishan was then taken to an undisclosed location, said his lawyer, Waddah Qutaish. The former minister's son, Waddah al-Rwaishan, confirmed the arrest, saying that the Houthis "abducted" him. A spokesman for the Houthi rebels did not respond to phone calls seeking comment. Khalid al-Rwaishan served as culture minister in 2006 in the government of former President Ali Abdullah Saleh. CAPTION: Photo: Ecumenical Patriarch Bartholomew I, left, the spiritual leader of the world's Orthodox Christians, leads the Orthodox Easter service Sunday at the Patriarchal Church of St. George in Istanbul, which was held without worshippers to help contain the coronavirus. SAHIN ERDEM/EPA CREDIT: Staff and news services 
2020-04-20	As half the world is placed under stay-at-home orders to combat COVID-19, a few pastors in the U.S. are keeping churches open despite advisories against public gatherings; some Christian worshippers came together recently for in-person Easter services, Hasidic Jews have ignored social distancing rules at funerals and a church community in South Korea and Muslim pilgrims in India and Malaysia have become vectors of disease transmission. All proclaim greater trust in God than in clinicians and assert the salutary effects of religious practices in the face of a global pandemic. By no means are all religious communities ignoring health risks. Islamic jurists around the globe have moved to close mosques -- including the holiest sites of Islam in Mecca, Medina and Jerusalem -- and most churches and synagogues have firmly closed their doors. Yet some leaders and communities seem out of step with the reality of the pandemic. Rather than pursuing aggressive or confrontational tactics, state and public health authorities need to form alliances with these faith communities. And doing this in a way that builds trust is critical to the fight against COVID-19. First, authorities need to acknowledge the role religious communal life and practices play in the lives of individuals, especially during times of uncertainty and fear. They must work with religious leaders so that they can better understand the rationale behind the social constraints. That will empower religious leaders to frame these policies within a religious worldview and design creative solutions. Some churches have moved sermons and worship services online so that members can remain connected. In Muslim circles, scholars have taken care to message that while the communal obligation of Friday prayers is suspended, the individual obligation of midday prayers continues. Forums dedicated to dialogue and understanding between religious and public health experts can thus generate creative solutions that recognize religious theologies of healing, promote spiritual health and acknowledge the gravity of the COVID-19 pandemic. Secondly, religious sites should be leveraged toward public health interventions. There is a long history of faith-based health partnerships in the U.S., and these collaborations can be mobilized toward improving community health. Churches and mosques could serve as sites for drive-thru testing, and their online forums could be used for health education. In this way, religious communities can be activated to help address gaps in testing and knowledge. Finally, state authorities need to partner with religious authorities in their communications. Formal statements and press briefings where public health, state and religious authorities speak in a unified voice can go a long way to address lack of trust and experiences of marginalization. Just as business leaders have been brought in to address the economic aspects of this crisis and to voice their commitment to work with the government to tackle it, religious leaders can speak to the spiritual dimensions of the crisis and voice support in helping confront it. Faith-based understanding of illness through history gives important context that must not be ignored. Even today, many faiths continue to maintain a theology of healing where the Divine controls disease -- including onset and cure. Statements from the Prophet Muhammad convey that God sends sickness and grants recovery, and both Islam and Christianity recognize Jesus' role as a healer. If one believes that COVID-19 is a manifestation of divine will, then appealing to God to protect one from catching it -- or to heal one afflicted by it -- makes sense. And this turning to the divine becomes all the more appealing when one recognizes the many unknowns surrounding COVID-19; there is no known vaccine, no sure way to obtain a diagnosis given the scarcity of tests and no definitive timeline for when this crisis will end. Some religious adherents find it difficult to follow the logic that food markets and health care institutions that cater to the physical health of individuals are classified as essential services and thus exempted from stay-at-home orders and closure, while religious institutions that nourish the spirit are not. They feel skeptical that public health and state authorities have their best interests at heart and they prefer to prioritize religious practices that have long sustained them. In the words of one mosque elder, "If we are going to die, then we might as well die in prayer." Science shows that spirituality bolsters health. Individuals connected to religious communities tend to live longer, likely due to the social support offered in such communities and the strong positive coping mechanisms religious beliefs and practices offer. Now is the time to leverage the strength of those communities in the face of this crisis. ---------- Aasim I. Padela, M.D., M.Sc., is a University of Chicago Medicine emergency medicine physician, community health researcher and bioethicist. He is also an expert at the Institute for Social Policy & Understanding. CREDIT: By Aasim I. Padela 
2020-04-19	Mark Weidemaier is scanned daily upon entering KIA Champions Field, and it doesn't bother him one bit. "We're probably in the safest place in the world," Weidemaier, a coach for the KIA Tigers, said Friday morning before an intrasquad game in Gwangju, South Korea. "We're playing baseball." Weidemaier, 65, a former scout and coach for nine major-league teams, expressed optimism that the Korea Baseball Organization will start exhibition play Tuesday and open the season May 5, about 3 1/2 months after the coronavirus outbreak hit the country. "It's pretty much business as usual," Weidemaier said. "The government has done a great job of testing. We get body scanned as soon as we walk into the stadium. The front office workers wear masks." Weidemaier, however, wonders if Major League Baseball will play this season, based on what he has seen of the United States on CNN compared with the progressive steps taken in Korea. "One thing is for sure," Weidemaier said, "a lot of things are going to change." Tigers workouts are "what you see in a normal spring training," Weidemaier said. But he anticipates that they'll play home games in front of 20,500 empty seats as a safety measure. Weidemaier, who worked as an advance scout for the White Sox in the late 1990s and has worked in the Far East before this season, was aware that some Korean players wore masks during workouts in Seoul, which is about four hours north of Gwangju. That hasn't been the case with the Tigers, but manager (and former Giants and Diamondbacks slugger) Matt Williams, the coaching staff -- which includes former Cubs first baseman Hee Seop Choi as hitting coach and former Mets pitcher Jae Weong Seo as pitching coach -- players and support staff have practiced social distancing with few exceptions, such as handshakes and an occasional hug. The team started testing all employees, and any with a fever was sent home and quarantined. Signs are posted throughout the Tigers clubhouse and dugout emphasizing social distancing. "You've got to go out and eat at some point," Weidemaier said. "But you just adhere to social distancing and keep your fingers crossed. "The testing has been great." The coronavirus has been in the minds of the Tigers since they departed for Fort Myers, Fla., to start spring training Jan. 28 -- eight days after the first case was diagnosed in Korea, according to the World Health Organization. The Tigers, who have won 11 Korea Series titles since the league's inception in 1982, played 20 exhibition games and were ready to return March 6 but stayed in Florida for health and safety reasons. The family of one of the players was part of a Daegu, South Korea, church community that the virus infected, and the family remains quarantined in the city of nearly 2.5 million, Weidemaier said. Despite the delay, the Tigers found some independent-league teams to play in Florida before returning to Korea on March 16. "We were ready to play (by March 6)," Weidemaier said. "It's been a grind to keep guys mentally sharp." The Tigers returned to their homes immediately and were not quarantined upon arriving from the U.S. The team also has emphasized to Americans Preston Tucker, Drew Gagnon and former Cubs minor-leaguer Aaron Brooks and their families to limit travel from their apartments to the ballpark. "Some teams let their American players go home to the states, and they had to go into quarantine when they returned," Weidemaier said. "We've been very fortunate here." CAPTION: Photo: The LG Twins play an intrasquad game in an empty ballpark on April 5 in Seoul, South Korea. The game was aired through the team's YouTube channel. LEE JIN-MAN/AP CREDIT: By Mark Gonzales 
2020-04-16	Richest countries will freeze poorer nations' debt payment JOHANNESBURG -- The world's richest countries agreed Wednesday to freeze poor nations' debt obligations, shortly after nearly 20 European and African leaders made a joint appeal for a massive international effort to boost Africa's coronavirus response, saying that "only a global victory that fully includes Africa can bring this pandemic to an end." Finance ministers of the G-20 group of major economies, which includes the U.S., China, India and others, said they will immediately put on hold poor countries' obligations to service debt they owe. The statement issued after a video conference put to rest concerns that China would block such a measure, which is aimed at helping the poorest nations focus their spending on health care and assistance to vulnerable people to contain the outbreak and its fallout. The joint appeal signed by the leaders of France, Ethiopia, Germany, South Africa and other nations, published in the Financial Times, had called for dramatic measures that include an immediate moratorium on all debt payments, public and private, until the pandemic is over. While the G-20 did not specify how many countries would benefit, French Finance Minister Bruno Le Maire said 76 countries were eligible for the moratorium, including about 40 in sub-Saharan Africa. Debt payments worth $20 billion will be suspended, including $8 billion owed to private creditors and $12 billion owed to other countries, he said. An additional $12 billion in debt payments to multilateral institutions like the World Bank are also under consideration for a debt freeze.  High turnout in South Korean election despite pandemic fears SEOUL, South Korea -- Millions of South Koreans wore masks and disposable gloves as they voted in parliamentary elections Wednesday, the highest turnout in nearly three decades despite the coronavirus. The government resisted calls to postpone the elections billed as a midterm referendum on President Moon Jae-in, who enters the final two years of his single five-year term grappling with a historic public health crisis that is unleashing massive economic shock. Exit polls conducted by TV stations indicated that Moon's Democratic Party and a satellite party it created to win proportional representative seats would combine for a majority in the 300-seat National Assembly. The long lines followed record-high early voting Friday and Saturday, and defied expectations of a low turnout.  FDA OKs low-cost ventilator developed by U. of Minnesota MINNEAPOLIS -- The U.S. Food and Drug Administration on Wednesday approved a low-cost ventilator developed by the University of Minnesota. The FDA authorized use of the compact device, known as the Coventor, that was developed and designed by a team of university researchers, a medical school resident and an engineer. The developers hope the Coventor will be used in clinical settings where traditional ventilators are unavailable. "With FDA authorization, we are closer to that happening," said Stephen Richardson, a cardiac anesthesiology fellow in the Medical School, M Health Fairview. Ventilators are used to help increase blood oxygen levels and have been in short supply as hospitals deal with COVID-19.  Students could take SAT at home if schools remain closed A home version of the SAT college entrance exam is being prepared in case schools remain closed into the fall, College Board officials said Wednesday as they announced the cancellation of June testing. Instead of a paper-and-pencil test given under proctors' supervision, the home version would be digital and rely on "remote proctoring." That could include using the computer's camera and microphone to monitor movement or talking, College Board President Jeremy Singer said on a conference call with reporters. Coronavirus-related school closures forced cancellation of spring testing for 1 million first-time test-takers, the majority of them juniors planning to enter college in 2021, officials said. The national June 6 session is the latest to be canceled.  DOJ watchdog reviewing prisons for virus safety WASHINGTON -- The Justice Department's inspector general will conduct remote inspections of Bureau of Prisons facilities to ensure they are following best practices to mitigate the spread of the coronavirus after hundreds of federal inmates tested positive for the virus. The review announced Wednesday comes as the federal prison system struggles with a growing number of coronavirus cases and complaints from inmates, advocacy groups and correction officers about how officials are handling the pandemic among their 122 facilities. Attorney General William Barr recently sent some of his closest advisers to federal prisons identified as coronavirus hot spots, a Justice Department official said. The attorney general's counselors were sent to observe the conditions on the ground firsthand and report back to Barr.  Calif. to give cash payments to immigrants hurt by virus SACRAMENTO, Calif. -- California will be the first state to give cash payments to immigrants living in the country illegally who are hurt by the coronavirus, offering $500 apiece to 150,000 adults who were left out of the $2.2 trillion stimulus package approved by Congress. Many Americans began receiving $1,200 checks from the federal government this week, and others who are unemployed are getting an additional $600 a week from the government that has ordered them to stay home. But people living in the country illegally are not eligible for any of that money, and advocates have been pushing for states to fill in the gap. Wednesday, Gov. Gavin Newsom announced he would spend $75 million of taxpayer money to create a Disaster Relief Fund for immigrants living in the country illegally.  In Iran: The death toll in Iran from the coronavirus pandemic is likely nearly double the officially reported figures, due to undercounting and because not everyone with breathing problems has been tested for the virus, a parliament report said. Iranian health officials offered no comment on the report, which represents the highest-level charge yet from within the Islamic Republic's government of its figures being questionable, something suspected by international experts. Iran on Wednesday put the death toll at 4,777, out of 76,389 confirmed cases of the virus. The report, released Tuesday, comes as Iranian President Hassan Rouhani continues to push for a slow reopening of the country's economy. CAPTION: Photo: People stop in front of Notre Dame Cathedral as the bells ring Wednesday to mark the one-year anniversary of its blaze. A year after the devastating fire, the restoration of cathedral has been suspended by a lockdown in Paris to battle the coronavirus. CHRISTOPHE ENA/AP CREDIT: Staff and news services 
2020-04-16	To get personal protective equipment for state workers on the front lines of the coronavirus pandemic, the governor of Illinois has had to spend nearly $2 million on charter flights that will haul "millions of masks and gloves" -- from China. That's ridiculous. And it should make you mad. The Federal Emergency Management Agency last week agreed to buy 750,000 coronavirus test kits -- from South Korea. That's also ridiculous. And it should also make you mad. In the span of eight days -- from last Tuesday to this Tuesday -- the coronavirus killed five times as many Americans as terrorists did on 9/11. Five times. In just those eight days, 14,974 souls gone. And America, self-branded as the most-powerful country on the planet, is chartering flights to bring masks and gloves in from China? The U.S. government is buying test kits from South Korea because we can't manufacture our own quickly enough? What's happening in this country right now -- from the lack of widespread testing to states bidding against each other for safety gear to keep health care workers and first responders healthy -- is outrageous. It's a disgrace. There's no reason, more than three months into this pandemic, that the governor of any state should be having to hunt down gloves and masks in far-flung places. American companies should long ago have started producing the personal protective equipment that's needed, as well the testing kits that are desperately needed to get a hold on this outbreak. From the jump, President Donald Trump has had the power, through the Defense Production Act, to unleash the might of America's manufacturing companies. Instead, he has been hesitant to use that power, costing states money, time and, undoubtedly, lives. From the Tribune report on Gov. J.B. Pritzker's chartered flights: "Had the president directed American companies to produce more masks, ventilators and other equipment, 'we wouldn't be paying $5 or $6 sometimes for an N95 mask that in a normal circumstance costs 85 cents or a dollar,' " Pritzker said. On Tuesday, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention reported that as of April 9, more than 9,000 health care workers had contracted the coronavirus. And 27 had died from COVID-19. The agency said those numbers are "likely an underestimation." Let's not beat around the bush: our federal government has responded to the coronavirus outbreak with rank incompetence. The seriousness of the virus was grossly downplayed through much of January. Any additional time the country gained from Trump's decision to ban some travelers from China (more than 40,000 travelers from China arrived in the U.S. after the "ban" was in place) was wasted in a feckless February. And now? Now we have governors who know they're largely on their own, a stunning lack of coronavirus testing nationwide and the world's largest coronavirus death toll. As of Tuesday night it was 25,992 people. We lost 2,977 people on Sept. 11, and having lived through that day, I recall the fear that swept across America as we collectively processed such a massive loss. But I also remember anger. We were livid over the attack, united in our outrage and determined to do whatever was necessary to prevent it from happening again. The deaths from the coronavirus pandemic have eclipsed the toll of that awful day. And we have ample fear and frustration. But I don't see the anger. Maybe it's muted because we're locked down and socially distanced. Maybe it's because we're so fiercely divided, with loyalty to the president driving individuals and even entire states to treat a virus like something that can be beaten with stubborn defiance and good ol' American gumption. It's ridiculous. This isn't a game. The president can stand in the White House briefing room each day for however many hours he wants and blabber lies and blame everyone -- governors, China, the media, Barack Obama, Nancy Pelosi -- until he turns from orange to blue. But until governors don't have to fetch basic supplies from China, until there's enough testing and contact tracing to allow medical experts to safely guide us out of our lockdown, Trump's words mean even less than usual. Consider this: According to NBC News, during Trump's more than two-hour coronavirus press briefing Monday, a lie-filled circus of distortions and narcissism, there were 93 coronavirus deaths reported. Forty-two in California. Sixteen in Georgia. Eight in Washington. Seven in Kentucky. Six in Delaware. Five each in New Mexico and South Carolina. And four in Alabama. That's over the course of just a couple hours. That should make you mad. It should hurt, the same way the lives we lost in one day in 2001 hurt. As we did then, we should unite to do everything humanly possible to prevent more deaths. As we did then, we shouldn't accept failure. Failure is the governor of any state spending $2 million on charter flights to get equipment from China that should be made here in America. Failure is promising a virus test to anyone who wants one and not keeping that promise Failure is exactly what we have right now. And that should make you blood-boiling mad. ---------- rhuppke@chicagotribune.com CAPTION: Photo: Sample testing devices used in diagnosing the novel coronavirus are checked on a production line as they are prepared to be included in kits near Cheongju, south of Seoul. ED JONES/AFP CREDIT: Rex W. Huppke 
2020-04-15	Angel the goat is due in May to give birth at the same high school where she was born three years ago, on a sprawling 78 acres in Chicago's Mount Greenwood. Students had been looking forward to delivering the baby goat -- or goats -- themselves, an accomplishment they've been working toward at Chicago High School for Agricultural Sciences. But like prom and other milestones, it's a moment they may miss while schools are closed amid the coronavirus pandemic. During the teachers strike in October, students kept a rotation to care for the school's animals: a dairy cow, a potbelly pig, a turkey pardoned by an alderman back in November for the school's annual Thanksgiving dinner, 60 chickens, two alpacas, four pygmy goats and Angel. Sometimes the students also raise cattle and pigs. But in the spirit of social distancing, they're leaving their charges in the hands of Shane Blake, a 24-year-old neighbor who attended Chicago Ag and Southside Occupational Academy. Blake became familiar with the farm on grade school field trips. He always knew he wanted to go back after finishing high school; it's become his favorite place. Now he gets a ride in the morning from his father, Pat Blake, and walks home in the afternoon. He brings back eggs every now and then. Pat, a retired firefighter, said working with animals has been meaningful for Shane, who has autism and would keep more to himself before. "It's been therapeutic for him, without a doubt. He really came out of his shell," Pat said. "Coming from introverted to outward expression, it's like night and day (since) starting to work with animals." Shane Blake's dream is to have his own farm someday. "Farmer in the Dell," Shane said. His mom used to call him that. "I'd raise my own animals and grow my own food." He's already a Special Olympics gold medalist in horse riding and past Illinois Outstanding Rider of the Year. Blake said he enjoys spending time outside and finds being around animals "very soothing." He knows Angel, but the pigs and horses are his favorite. Last year he watched the birth of more than a dozen piglets, and when the school gets more, he's going to name them. He has some names picked out already: Daisy, Rex, Jake. Principal William Hook said the school was supposed to get pigs this month, including a pregnant sow, so the students could deliver and inoculate piglets. "Unfortunately, they may not get a chance to do that if we don't come back in the spring," he said. But whenever they do, he said, "I could get a pregnant sow on a moment's notice." The school partners with a farm in Sugar Grove that donates the animals, he said. Blake takes pride in his work and was honored when Hook asked him about taking responsibility for the animals during the school closures. "Great feeling," he said. When Blake was a student at Chicago Ag, Hook noticed him excel in animal science. "He was a rock star there," Hook said. "He's a conscientious worker and I'm lucky to have him. ... When he came here as a freshman, he was very introverted, he spoke very little, but you can really now see him open up." Hook described Blake's way with animals: "They love him. He's got a real gentle way about him, pretty nonchalant. He walks in, the little goats flock to him. ... He cares for the animals and they respond in kind." When Blake went on to Southside Occupational, which teaches transitional and vocational skills, he kept going back to the farm school, which paid him as a student worker. He's now on staff. Of the nine agriculture teachers, seven are also former students, Hook said. When Hook took over as principal 13 years ago, he learned animal care along with the students. He was a senior at Bogan High School when Chicago Ag opened in 1985, and went on to study economics at Northwestern University. About a third of the students end up pursuing careers in agriculture, Hook said. Students in the food science pathway make pesto with basil from their aquaponics lab and zucchini bread with their own produce and eggs. For their capstone project, students in the horticulture pathway designed a garden for the Chicago Flower and Garden Show that was due to take place at Navy Pier in March but was canceled. Hook is hoping to figure out a way that students can still build the garden they envisioned. In the meantime, the school's greenhouses are filled with more plants than he's ever seen before, and he's not sure if the school will be able to hold its annual Mother's Day plant sale. The ag school also has a seasonal farm stand and a 3-acre market garden where students grow peppers, onions, tomatoes and other vegetables. Proceeds from sales directly support students for things like college trips and study abroad opportunities. Every summer, Hook said the school flies students to an engineering camp at California Polytechnic. It gets students to Nebraska each year for a cattle drive. This spring, students were booked on trips to South Korea, Panama and Europe, but those were called off. On a typical school day, students rotate farm responsibilities, but during nonschool hours, student workers are paid. Though the hands-on elements of the school can't be replicated online, the school, like the rest in Chicago Public Schools, began official remote learning Monday. "It's difficult," Hook said. "We miss our students, we miss our staff. ... Maybe they miss being at school. It's a big part of their lives. It's a difficult time, trying to make a remote learning plan that still has value when they return, not to have to go back over stuff that they missed." It remains to be seen whether school will resume before Angel gives birth. Angel mated with a goat from Vincent High School of Agricultural Sciences in Milwaukee. "We said, 'We'll just leave them out in the field and see what happens,'" Hook said. A science class tested Angel and found out she was pregnant. ---------- hleone@chicagotribune.com CAPTION: Photo: Shane Blake, formerly a student and now an employee at Chicago High School for Agriculture Sciences, fills a basket with eggs at school's chicken coop.; Photo: Goats climb atop a step stool Friday at the Chicago High School for Agriculture Sciences. While the school is closed, the animals are under the care of Shane Blake.; ANTONIO PEREZ/CHICAGO TRIBUNE PHOTOS CREDIT: By Hannah Leone 
2020-04-15	Court: Medication abortions allowed in Texas in pandemic AUSTIN, Texas -- A federal appeals court panel ruled that medication abortions, in which pills are taken to terminate a pregnancy, can be provided in Texas during the coronavirus pandemic. The ruling Monday from a three-judge panel of the 5th U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals was among several developments in Republican-led states where governors have sought to prohibit almost all abortions by classifying them as elective procedures that should be put off during the virus outbreak. Texas Republican Gov. Greg Abbott issued an executive order last month that bars nonessential medical procedures so that health resources can go to treating coronavirus patients. Texas' Republican attorney general has said that providing abortions other than for an immediate medical emergency would violate the order. But a three-judge panel of the 5th U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals said that medication abortions can go forward. In a concurrence, Judge James L. Dennis wrote that Texas' move to ban medication abortions "is a strong indication that the enforcement is pretextual and does not bear a 'real or substantial relation' to the public health crisis we are experiencing." Also Monday, a 10th U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals panel upheld a lower-court order that overturned an Oklahoma ban. The 6th U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals also declined to hear an appeal by Ohio Attorney General Dave Yost seeking to reverse a judge's temporary restraining order allowing abortion facilities in the state to continue performing surgical abortions.  President's rollback of school nutrition rules vacated by court NEW YORK -- After making a brief comeback on school lunch menus, white bread and other refined grains may be vanishing again when schools reopen after a federal court vacated the Trump administration's rollback of school nutrition standards. The district court in Maryland said the administration did not give adequate public notice of the change, which had gone into effect for this past school year. The ruling was in response to a lawsuit brought by the Center for Science in the Public Interest and Healthy School Food Maryland and represented by Democracy Forward. The U.S. Department of Agriculture said it does not comment on ongoing litigation and it's unknown how the agency will proceed. The agency oversees the national school lunch and breakfast programs.  North Korea fires barrage of missiles from ground and air SEOUL, South Korea -- A barrage of North Korean missiles fired from the ground and fighter jets splashed down on the waters off the country's east coast Tuesday, South Korea's military said, a show of force on the eve of a state anniversary in the North and parliamentary elections in the South. The back-to-back launches were the latest in a series of weapons tests that North Korea has conducted in recent weeks amid stalled nuclear talks and outside worries about a possible coronavirus outbreak in the country. North Korean troops based in the eastern coastal city of Munchon first launched several projectiles Tuesday morning, South Korea's Joint Chiefs of Staff said in a statement. The weapons flew at a low altitude off the North's east coast, a South Korean official said.  Judge gives state of Alabama ownership of last US slave ship BIRMINGHAM, Ala. -- The last slave ship known to have landed in the United States more than 150 years ago has a new owner: The state of Alabama. A federal judge granted ownership of the Clotilda shipwreck to the Alabama Historical Commission in a one-page order released Monday. The decision by U.S. District Judge Kristi DuBose means the state will have final say over remnants of the ship, found on a muddy river bottom north of Mobile and publicly identified last year. The Clotilda, a Gulf schooner, sailed to West Africa on an illegal trip financed by a white businessman as a nation divided over slavery was building toward Civil War. It delivered 110 kidnapped Africans to Mobile before it was burned in a bayou in 1860 to hide evidence of the crime.  Cardinal links corruption to child abuse charges CANBERRA, Australia -- Cardinal George Pell has linked his fight against corruption in the Vatican with his prosecution in Australia for alleged child sex abuse. Pell was regarded as the third highest-ranking Vatican official in 2018 when he became the world's most senior Catholic to be convicted of child sex abuse. He served 13 months in prison before Australia's High Court last week acquitted him of molesting two choirboys in St. Patrick's Cathedral in Melbourne while he was archbishop of Australia's second-largest city in the 1990s. Pope Francis' former finance minister said in a television interview broadcast Tuesday that some church officials believed he was prosecuted by Australian authorities because of the trouble he had caused in the Vatican by his implementation of financial reforms.  Congress delays return to DC until at least May 4 WASHINGTON -- The Senate on Tuesday joined the House in delaying its next meeting in Washington, citing the need to protect members from the coronavirus pandemic. The delay also gives lawmakers more time to consider ways to deliberate while social distancing, amid ongoing talks about how to prop up the hard-hit economy. Congress is stalled over the followup to the largest rescue bill in U.S. history. Progress is complicated by the ongoing need to stay apart, the advanced ages of many lawmakers and by President Donald Trump's insistence that social distancing be eased soon. On Monday, House leaders announced they would not meet before May 4. Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell on Tuesday did likewise, saying the move was based on advice from experts.  In the Persian Gulf: Armed men boarded a Hong Kong-flagged tanker ship Tuesday off the coast of Iran near the crucial Strait of Hormuz, holding the ship for a short time before releasing it amid heightened tensions between Tehran and the U.S., authorities said. No one immediately claimed responsibility for the seizure, though suspicion fell on Iran's paramilitary Revolutionary Guard. Iranian officials and state media did not acknowledge the incident and the U.S. Navy's Bahrain-based 5th Fleet did not respond to a request for comment. The incident comes after a private maritime intelligence firm warned of suspicious incidents in recent days near the strait. CAPTION: Photo: A Libyan man stands Tuesday at the site of shelling on the Arada residential area in Tripoli. The forces of Libyan military strongman Khalifa Haftar rained rockets on Tripoli after being ousted by government loyalists from strategic towns west of the capital. MAHMUD TURKIA/GETTY-AFP CREDIT: Staff and news services 
2020-04-13	I am hearing from readers who whether it's time to start reinvesting in the stock market. Unfortunately, I can't predict the tops and bottoms of markets. I do believe, however, the prospects for the stock market a year from now are good. But a conservative approach is called for. I hope my readers have followed my advice not to have all of their investments in the stock market. I have argued repeatedly that even retirees should have significant investment in stocks, but I also declare that investing a significant portion of your portfolio in bonds is prudent. That approach can soften your losses in a bear market, which is where we are now. But how long will it last? In a recent interview in Barron's, Ed Yardeni, the well-respected market analyst, shared some observations that make a great deal of sense to me. Yardeni, who until the coronavirus pandemic had been quite bullish, believes the bear market will likely last at least until the middle of 2020 and anticipates that the pandemic will have a significant impact on the global economy. He believes that there will be a significant drop in consumer confidence; as a result of extreme measures that governments throughout the world have been taking, people are going to fear the worst, focus on bad news and ignore areas of progress. The problem is that that fear is spreading much faster than the actual virus. He said he thinks that we will see a global recession, which will include Japan and Germany, and predicts a severe recession in Italy. Based on the experiences in China and South Korea, he believes the virus will dissipate significantly by the middle of the year and the bear market in stocks should end around then. He estimates that S&P profits for the for the first half of the year will be flat, yet he believes the U.S. economy will show a 2% real gain in gross domestic product in 2020. He doesn't believe that the Saudis and Russians will continue to keep oil prices low for very long because they can't afford to. A 30% drop from the top of the S&P 500 brings the level to 2,300-2,400. He had anticipated, before the pandemic, that the S&P 500 would reach 3,500 by year-end. Now he believes that won't happen until 2021. So, back to the question readers have been asking me: Should they be buying stocks now? Yardeni believes, if you have cash, this is time to buy quality names, such as some of the dividend-yielding stocks. In the past, I have recommended that readers consider Vanguard's Dividend Appreciation Index Fund (VDADX). The fund currently has a yield of approximately 1.9%, an expense ratio of 0.08% and a five-year annualized return of approximately 9%. You can re-invest the quarterly dividends back into the fund or request that you receive the dividends. Some of my readers have indicated they have significant holdings in money market funds and other short-term investments such as Treasury bills, and that they are ready to reinvest in the stock market. Others want to increase the proportion of common stocks in their portfolios. Others continue to dollar-cost average into stocks, which I do and recommend. Specifically, dollar-cost average to reinvest in diversified index funds or ETFs over an extended period, even as long as a year. It is hard to predict how quickly the stock market will recover, and this conservative approach allows you to take advantage of opportunity prudently. ---------- Elliot Raphaelson welcomes your questions and comments at raphelliot@gmail.com. CAPTION: Photo: (Trader working at the New York Stock Exchange on March 18, 2020) JOHANNES EISELE/GETTY-AFP CREDIT: By Elliot Raphaelson 
2020-04-03	For weeks, officials from the White House to Chicago's City Hall told people that wearing a face mask in public isn't necessary as the novel coronavirus spread -- and that it could even cause more harm than good. But other countries took a different route, especially some Asian nations -- including South Korea, Hong Kong and Singapore -- where mask wearing became common practice. In Europe, the Czech Republic went so far as to require that people wear masks when they venture from their homes. Public health officials in those nations contend that widespread mask use limited the scope of their outbreaks, or "flattened the curve" in pandemic parlance. Medical professionals are taking notice, and some are now pressing for more frequent mask wearing. Writing in the British medical journal The Lancet, a group of scientists suggested "universal use of face masks could be considered if supplies permit." The supply question is key, especially amid a grave shortage of the masks used by front-line medical workers in the United States. Advocates say they aren't encouraging people to buy specialized N95 respirator masks or even regular surgical masks. Clean, homemade cloth masks that cover the nose and mouth will do the trick, they say. "I think if everyone used masks, it would decrease the amount of transmission of the virus," said Dr. Rahul Khare, CEO of the Innovative Express Care immediate care facility on the North Side. "By putting a face mask over your nose and mouth, you're decreasing the amount of the virus particles and therefore decreasing transmission rates." Khare said he wants government officials to switch gears and advise people to wear masks if they must leave their homes. The White House on Thursday was finalizing a recommendation that many U.S. residents wear face coverings when they go out, according to published reports, and Los Angeles Mayor Eric Garcetti urged his city's residents to wear masks outside. The science is not definitive, and experts' opinions are not unanimous. Surgeon General Jerome Adams this week was still expressing deep reservations during an appearance on television's "Fox & Friends." And even those who advocate for wearing masks don't want people to feel like they can ignore stay-at-home orders if they use a mask. Nevertheless, medical opinions and government advice appear to be shifting. After discouraging people early in the pandemic from hoarding masks that are in short supply and badly needed by medical personnel, Gov J.B. Pritzker on Wednesday said "we're thinking about" advising people to wear masks. "I would not discourage people from wearing masks, and in fact I think that there's some evidence to show it can be effective," Pritzker said. Dr. Allison Arwady, director of the Chicago Public Health Department, also began to soften her earlier stance that masks won't help much and could even cause people to touch their face more frequently -- a big no-no given the highly contagious nature of the virus. Arwady said new studies have concluded that some people who are infected with the new coronavirus have no symptoms. But they can still spread the virus, making others sick, and wearing a mask could reduce that risk, she said. "We'll continue to make changes to our recommendations if we think that's necessary," she said Wednesday. "Stay tuned." She made her comments at a news conference called by Mayor Lori Lightfoot, who quickly stepped up to the microphone to make sure people understand that even if the advice changes, people must still try to stay at home, wash their hands frequently and absolutely not leave the house if they are feeling sick. "I don't want people to think that the mask makes them invincible, because it doesn't," Lightfoot said. "I don't want people to be misled that simply because you wear a mask you are fine going out and not practicing any of the other guidance that goes along with that." Asked why the advice is shifting, Khare and other experts said authorities were initially afraid of people buying up medical-grade masks. They also were worried about sowing fear, he said. Potential hoarding of the high-quality masks -- such as the N95 respirator masks the world is learning so much about these days -- is indeed a concern, said Dr. Robert Murphy, executive director of the Institute for Global Health at the Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine. "The hospitals can't even get the damn masks," he said, calling the shortage "a national disgrace and embarrassment." Khare said he's not suggesting that people go out and buy medical-quality masks, but rather that they should fashion their own. While not as protective as the masks used in hospitals and clinics, homemade fabric versions could still reduce the spread of the virus. "Bandanas, cloths, anything you put over your nose and your mouth," Khare said. As the idea of wearing a mask spreads, many businesses and groups have begun posting tutorials on how to make masks at home. Some groups have begun coordinating efforts to sew homemade masks. The idea of wearing a mask, Murphy said, is not to protect oneself but to protect others. "Originally, we were not recommending that because it does not protect the person wearing the mask from getting infected," Murphy said. "What the mask does is protect the people around you in case you are infected and don't know it." "People will think, 'I have the mask, I'm not going to get it,' " Murphy added. "That's not why you wear the mask. You wear the mask because you might have it and give it to somebody else." And the days of trying to avoid frightening the populace are over, Khare said. "We're here and we know what this virus is doing now," said Khare, adding that he believes wearing a mask also provides some protection from getting infected. "And looking at the science, I think it's clear that the risks of wearing masks is very low, and the benefits of wearing masks is very high." ---------- hdardick@chicagotribune.com CAPTION: Photo: Jimmy Smart, 32, wears a mask while walking in Chicago's Streeterville neighborhood. ARMANDO L. SANCHEZ/TRIBUNE ; Photo: Two men wear medical masks while walking along the Lakefront Trail last month. JOHN J. KIM/CHICAGO TRIBUNE CREDIT: By Hal Dardick; Chicago Tribune's Dan Petrella and Gregory Pratt contributed. 
2020-03-31	Feds revoke reservation status for Mass. tribe's 300 acres BOSTON -- A tribe is losing reservation status for its more than 300 acres in Massachusetts, raising fears among Native American groups that other tribes could face the same fate under the Trump administration. The Mashpee Wa-mpanoag tribe was notified late Friday by the federal Bureau of Indian Affairs that it will be rescinding its reservation designation and removing the land from federal trust, according to Cedric Cromwell, the tribe's chairman. He said the move is "cruel" and "unnecessary" as the tribe and others across the nation are struggling to respond to the coronavirus pandemic on their sovereign lands. "Talk about being blindsided. It was a sucker punch in the face from the bully you thought was your friend," he said Monday. "I thought they were calling to see how we're doing in all of this. To do it at 4 p.m. on a Friday during a pandemic? That's sneaky." The U.S. Department of the Interior, which oversees Native American affairs, is obligated by a recent federal court decision to remove the special land designations, which were bestowed in 2015 under then-President Barack Obama, according to Conner Swanson, an agency spokesman. In February, the U.S. Court of Appeals in Boston upheld a lower court decision declaring the federal government had not been authorized to take land into trust for the Cape Cod-based tribe The Mashpee Wa-mpanoag tribe declined to challenge that decision, but Cromwell argues a separate lawsuit filed in federal court in Washington, D.C., is still pending.  Judge halts lawsuits against local Boy Scout councils DOVER, Del. -- A Delaware bankruptcy judge has granted a request by the Boy Scouts of America to halt lawsuits against local Scout councils as the BSA works on its bankruptcy plan to set up a compensation fund for thousands of men who were molested as boys by Scout leaders. The judge on Monday approved a proposed consent order that had been agreed to by the BSA and official bankruptcy committees. In doing so, the judge overruled an objection by attorneys for one abuse survivor who wanted to pursue their lawsuit against a council in New York and former Scoutmaster Douglas Nail. Nail, who was sentenced to 10 years in prison for possession of child pornography in 2004, is accused of molesting a former Boy Scout over a period of several years in the 1980s.  Afghan officials say Taliban attacks kill 11 troops, police KABUL, Afghanistan -- Taliban attacks in Afghanistan's north and south have killed at least 11 Afghan soldiers and policemen, the country's Defense Ministry and a provincial official said Monday. The Taliban have not claimed responsibility for the latest attacks. According to the Defense Ministry, the insurgents targeted a military checkpoint in a multipronged attack in southern Zabul province Sunday night, killing at least six troops. In northern Baghlan province, at least five members of the security forces were killed and six others were wounded when their checkpoint came under a Taliban attack on the outskirts of the provincial capital, Pulikhomri, said Mabobullah Ghafari, a provincial council member. That attack also took place Sunday.  Phoenix officer killed, 2 others wounded; gunman killed PHOENIX -- Authorities said a 22-year-old man fatally shot a Phoenix police commander and wounded two officers as they tried to remove him from a home after his roommates complained he was acting erratically. Cmdr. Greg Carnicle, a 31-year police veteran who was set to retire in the fall, and two other officers were shot Sunday after Jacob Emry Mcilveen refused to leave, a police spokeswoman said. Mcilveen remained in the home several hours after the injured officers were removed. He eventually walked out of the home armed with a handgun and was killed by police. Officer Marissa Dowhan, a three-year police veteran, and Officer Alicia Hubert, who has nearly two years of service, are expected to survive, officials said.  N. Korea says US clearly doesn't want nuclear talks SEOUL, South Korea -- North Korea said Monday that "reckless remarks" by Secretary of State Mike Pompeo made it clear that Washington has no intention of resuming nuclear talks, and warned that it is now compelled to pay back "the pains the U.S. has imposed on our people." After a teleconference of foreign ministers of the Group of Seven leading industrial nations last week, Pompeo told reporters the international community must remain united in urging North Korea to return to nuclear talks. Pompeo's remarks showed the U.S. has no strategy to stop "a countdown of confrontation," North Korea said. The statement said Pompeo's comments "seriously impaired the signboard of dialogue put up by the U.S. president as a decoy to buy time and create the environment favorable for himself."  Museum says Van Gogh painting stolen overnight THE HAGUE, Netherlands -- A painting by Dutch master Vincent Van Gogh was stolen in an overnight smash-and-grab raid on a museum that was closed to prevent the spread of the coronavirus, police and the museum said Monday. The Singer Laren museum east of Amsterdam said that "The Parsonage Garden at Nuenen in Spring 1884" by the Dutch master was taken in the early hours of Monday. Museum General Director Evert van Os said the institution that houses the collection of American couple William and Anna Singer is "angry, shocked, sad" at the theft. The value of the work, which was on loan from the Groninger Museum in the northern Dutch city of Groningen, was not immediately known. Van Gogh's paintings, when they come up for sale, fetch millions at auction.  In Kentucky: He drew the president's wrath for seeking to slow congressional approval of a $2.2 trillion coronavirus-relief package, and now U.S. Rep. Thomas Massie, R-Ky., is boasting of his tactic and hauling in campaign cash for his reelection bid. Massie's campaign said Monday it had raised more than $110,000 over three days when the congressman was in the spotlight for his failed bid to force a roll-call vote on the bill. He was the only member of Congress willing to stall the package. The congressman said he was just trying to hold up what he considers to be an unconstitutional vote for a wasteful bill. But the stalling tactic prompted President Donald Trump to denounce Massie as a "third rate Grandstander." CAPTION: Photo: Pandemic shutdown: Israeli security forces arrest an Ultra-Orthodox Jewish man as they close a synagogue Monday in the Mea Shearim neighborhood in Jerusalem amid efforts to curb the spread of the COVID-19 pandemic. AHMAD GHARABLI/GETTY-AFP CREDIT: Staff and news services 
2020-03-30	Ex-FDA chief: Distancing must continue until infection slows WASHINGTON -- Aggressive social distancing measures should stay in place until there is "sustained reduction" in the number of COVID-19 cases for 14 days, former FDA commissioner Scott Gottlieb said Sunday. "So 14 days after you start to see a sustained reduction in the number of daily cases, that's the point at which you can contemplate lifting some of these measures that we have in place right now, some of these very aggressive social distancing measures," Gottlieb said on CBS's Face the Nation. "But you need to do it very gradually." Cases in the U.S. continue to escalate, as the number of deaths doubled to over 2,100 in two days. Gottlieb is a physician and one of the authors of a report released Sunday by the conservative think tank American Enterprise Institute that spells out a four-phase plan for navigating the COVID-19 pandemic. He was head of the Food and Drug Administration under President Donald Trump until last April. Another author of the report, Mark McClellan, is a former commissioner of the FDA and former administrator for the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services. "You need to have the ability to test the population widely so you can determine who has the infection, who doesn't, and use case-based interventions, where you isolate individual people," Gottlieb said. "You also want good information about where the virus is spreading. You need to be testing very widely to know where the virus is spreading." Gottlieb, now a fellow with AEI, has been a public voice during the coronavirus crisis.  Country singer Joe Diffie dies of coronavirus complications NEW YORK -- Country singer Joe Diffie, who had a string of hits in the 1990s with chart-topping ballads and honky-tonk singles like "Home" and "Pickup Man," has died after testing positive for COVID-19. He was 61. Diffie on Friday announced he had contracted the coronavirus, becoming the first country star to go public with such a diagnosis. Diffie's publicist said the singer died Sunday in Nashville, Tennessee, due to complications from the virus. Diffie, a native of Tulsa, Oklahoma, was a member of the Grand Ole Opry for more than 25 years. His hits included "Honky Tonk Attitude," "Prop Me Up Beside the Jukebox (If I Die)," "Bigger Than the Beatles" and "If the Devil Danced (In Empty Pockets)." Diffie is survived by his wife, Tara Terpening Diffie, and seven children from four marriages.  Serial killer dubbed 'Grim Sleeper' dies in Calif. prison SAN QUENTIN, Calif. -- Lonnie Franklin, the convicted serial killer known as the "Grim Sleeper" who preyed on the women of South Los Angeles for more than two decades, has died in prison. He was 67. California corrections officials said Franklin was found unresponsive in his cell at San Quentin State Prison on Saturday evening. An autopsy will determine the cause of death; however, there were no signs of trauma, corrections spokeswoman Terry Thornton said. Franklin had been on death row since August 2016 for the deaths of nine women and a teenage girl. Most of the victims were fatally shot at close range, though two were strangled. The killer earned his moniker because of the apparent hiatus from the late 1980s to 2002.  Stranded ship awaits Panama passage, faces doubts in Florida PANAMA CITY -- The Panama Canal Authority says two cruise ships carrying more than 1,800 passengers and crew, including some infected with COVID-19, had begun transiting the canal. The announcement came after the passengers on the Zaandam and its sister ship the Rotterdam received mixed signals about their fate. While Panamanian officials said they would let the ships through the canal, Holland America Lines said it had not been given official permission and the mayor of Fort Lauderdale, Florida, said he didn't want it to dock near his city as planned, at least without extensive precautions. Holland America Lines said Friday that four people aboard the Zaandam had died -- though the cause was not reported -- and at least two had tested positive for COVD-19.  N. Korea fires missiles amid coronavirus worries SEOUL, South Korea -- North Korea on Sunday fired two suspected ballistic missiles into the sea, South Korea and Japan said, continuing a streak of weapons launches that suggests leader Kim Jong Un is trying to strengthen domestic support amid worries about a possible coronavirus outbreak in the country. South Korea's Joint Chiefs of Staff said it detected the projectiles flying from the North Korean eastern coastal city of Wonsan into the waters between the Korean Peninsula and Japan on Sunday morning. The projectiles flew about 143 miles at a maximum altitude of 19 miles, the statement said. The military described the launches as "very inappropriate" at a time when the world is battling the coronavirus outbreak. It urged North Korea to stop such military action.  US-led forces pull out of 3rd Iraqi base this month BAGHDAD -- The U.S.-led coalition in Iraq withdrew Sunday from a military base in the country's north that nearly launched Washington into an open war with neighboring Iran. The K1 Air Base is the third site coalition forces have left this month, in line with U.S. plans to consolidate its troops in two locations in Iraq. A rocket attack on the base in late December killed one American contractor and lead to a series of tit-for-tat attacks between the U.S. and Iran-backed Iraqi militia groups. The attacks culminated in the U.S.-directed killing of top Iranian Gen. Qassem Soleimani and a senior Iraqi militia leader, Abu Mahdi al-Muhandis. Coalition forces handed over the K1 base in the northern Iraqi province of Kirkuk to Iraq's military, according to a coalition statement.  In Thailand: Officials in Thailand say a riot at a prison in a northeastern province was set off when inmates plotting to escape spread false rumors that several prisoners were infected with the coronavirus. Fires were set in parts of Buriram Prison during a riot on Sunday in which about 100 prisoners took part, and gunshots were fired in the operation to quash the violence. The facility houses about 2,100 inmates. Corrections Department Director-General Narat Sawettanan said no one was killed but several people were injured. Thai media reported five people hurt. Seven inmates were recaptured, said Narat. It was not clear if any others were still at large. CAPTION: Photo: The solitude of prayer: A woman prays during the Sunday Mass celebrated by priests from the roof of the church San Gabriele dell'Addolorata in Rome amid the spread of the COVID-19 pandemic in Italy. TIZIANA FABI/GETTY-AFP CREDIT: Staff and news services 
2020-03-30	Ex-FDA chief: Distancing must continue until infection slows WASHINGTON -- Aggressive social distancing measures should stay in place until there is "sustained reduction" in the number of COVID-19 cases for 14 days, former FDA commissioner Scott Gottlieb said Sunday. "So 14 days after you start to see a sustained reduction in the number of daily cases, that's the point at which you can contemplate lifting some of these measures that we have in place right now, some of these very aggressive social distancing measures," Gottlieb said on CBS's Face the Nation. "But you need to do it very gradually." Cases in the U.S. continue to escalate, as the number of deaths doubled to over 2,100 in two days. Gottlieb is a physician and one of the authors of a report released Sunday by the conservative think tank American Enterprise Institute that spells out a four-phase plan for navigating the COVID-19 pandemic. He was head of the Food and Drug Administration under President Donald Trump until last April. Another author of the report, Mark McClellan, is a former commissioner of the FDA and former administrator for the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services. "You need to have the ability to test the population widely so you can determine who has the infection, who doesn't, and use case-based interventions, where you isolate individual people," Gottlieb said. "You also want good information about where the virus is spreading. You need to be testing very widely to know where the virus is spreading." Gottlieb, now a fellow with AEI, has been a public voice during the coronavirus crisis.  Country singer Joe Diffie dies of coronavirus complications NEW YORK -- Country singer Joe Diffie, who had a string of hits in the 1990s with chart-topping ballads and honky-tonk singles like "Home" and "Pickup Man," has died after testing positive for COVID-19. He was 61. Diffie on Friday announced he had contracted the coronavirus, becoming the first country star to go public with such a diagnosis. Diffie's publicist said the singer died Sunday in Nashville, Tennessee, due to complications from the virus. Diffie, a native of Tulsa, Oklahoma, was a member of the Grand Ole Opry for more than 25 years. His hits included "Honky Tonk Attitude," "Prop Me Up Beside the Jukebox (If I Die)," "Bigger Than the Beatles" and "If the Devil Danced (In Empty Pockets)." Diffie is survived by his wife, Tara Terpening Diffie, and seven children from four marriages.  Serial killer dubbed 'Grim Sleeper' dies in Calif. prison SAN QUENTIN, Calif. -- Lonnie Franklin, the convicted serial killer known as the "Grim Sleeper" who preyed on the women of South Los Angeles for more than two decades, has died in prison. He was 67. California corrections officials said Franklin was found unresponsive in his cell at San Quentin State Prison on Saturday evening. An autopsy will determine the cause of death; however, there were no signs of trauma, corrections spokeswoman Terry Thornton said. Franklin had been on death row since August 2016 for the deaths of nine women and a teenage girl. Most of the victims were fatally shot at close range, though two were strangled. The killer earned his moniker because of the apparent hiatus from the late 1980s to 2002.  Stranded ship awaits Panama passage, faces doubts in Florida PANAMA CITY -- More than 1,800 passengers and crew -- some infected with COVID-19 -- stranded off Panama were receiving mixed signals Sunday about the chance for finally reaching port in Florida. While Panamanian officials said they would let the two ships transit the Panama Canal, the cruise company said it had not been given permission and Fort Lauderdale's mayor said he didn't want it to dock near his city as planned, at least without extensive precautions. The ship, which had been unable to put into any port since mid-March, had been stranded off the coast and its operator, Holland America Lines, said Friday that four people aboard the ship had died -- though the cause was not reported -- and at least two had tested positive for COVD-19.  N. Korea fires missiles amid coronavirus worries SEOUL, South Korea -- North Korea on Sunday fired two suspected ballistic missiles into the sea, South Korea and Japan said, continuing a streak of weapons launches that suggests leader Kim Jong Un is trying to strengthen domestic support amid worries about a possible coronavirus outbreak in the country. South Korea's Joint Chiefs of Staff said it detected the projectiles flying from the North Korean eastern coastal city of Wonsan into the waters between the Korean Peninsula and Japan on Sunday morning. The projectiles flew about 143 miles at a maximum altitude of 19 miles, the statement said. The military described the launches as "very inappropriate" at a time when the world is battling the coronavirus outbreak. It urged North Korea to stop such military action.  US-led forces pull out of 3rd Iraqi base this month BAGHDAD -- The U.S.-led coalition in Iraq withdrew Sunday from a military base in the country's north that nearly launched Washington into an open war with neighboring Iran. The K1 Air Base is the third site coalition forces have left this month, in line with U.S. plans to consolidate its troops in two locations in Iraq. A rocket attack on the base in late December killed one American contractor and lead to a series of tit-for-tat attacks between the U.S. and Iran-backed Iraqi militia groups. The attacks culminated in the U.S.-directed killing of top Iranian Gen. Qassem Soleimani and a senior Iraqi militia leader, Abu Mahdi al-Muhandis. Coalition forces handed over the K1 base in the northern Iraqi province of Kirkuk to Iraq's military, according to a coalition statement.  In Thailand: Officials in Thailand say a riot at a prison in a northeastern province was set off when inmates plotting to escape spread false rumors that several prisoners were infected with the coronavirus. Fires were set in parts of Buriram Prison during a riot on Sunday in which about 100 prisoners took part, and gunshots were fired in the operation to quash the violence. The facility houses about 2,100 inmates. Corrections Department Director-General Narat Sawettanan said no one was killed but several people were injured. Thai media reported five people hurt. Seven inmates were recaptured, said Narat. It was not clear if any others were still at large. CAPTION: Photo: The solitude of prayer: A woman prays during the Sunday Mass celebrated by priests from the roof of the church San Gabriele dell'Addolorata in Rome amid the spread of the COVID-19 pandemic in Italy. TIZIANA FABI/GETTY-AFP CREDIT: Staff and news services 
2020-03-22	Netanyahu proposes stepping down in power-sharing deal JERUSALEM -- Israel's prime minister said Saturday that he is ready to step down next year as part of a proposed power-sharing agreement with his chief rival meant to steer the country through the coronavirus crisis and end a year-long political deadlock. Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu made his proposal during a nationally televised interview, calling for the formation of a three-year "emergency" unity government with the rival Blue and White Party. Netanyahu said he would remain as prime minister for the first year and a half, and allow Blue and White leader Benny Gantz to assume the post for a second year-and-a-half term in September 2021. He said each party would have an equal number of seats in the Cabinet. "I will give up the prime minister's post in another year and a half," Netanyahu said. Yair Lapid, a senior Blue and White leader, dismissed Netanyahu's unity offer as insincere. "Next week, we will go to choose a new parliament speaker and work to battle coronavirus for the good of the people," he said. Israel is facing a growing threat from the coronavirus pandemic. It has detected nearly 900 cases and on Friday reported its first death. Blue and White has accused Netanyahu of using the coronavirus crisis to undermine the country's democratic institutions and try to derail his scheduled trial on corruption charges. Senior members of Gantz' party have expressed skepticism at previous power-sharing overtures by Netanyahu, concerned that he would not follow through on his promises.  North Korea fires 2 projectiles into sea amid virus pandemic SEOUL, South Korea -- North Korea on Saturday fired two presumed short-range ballistic missiles into the sea, South Korea's military said, as it continues to expand military capabilities amid deadlocked nuclear negotiations with the Trump administration and a crippling global health crisis. South Korea's Joint Chiefs of Staff said the projectiles were fired from an area around a county in western North Korea. They flew 255 miles cross-country before landing in the sea. Seoul's military urged the North to immediately stop its "very inappropriate" military demonstrations when the world is struggling to cope with the coronavirus pandemic. The North conducted two previous rounds of similar short-range launches and other military exercises earlier this month.  6th body recovered following torrential rainfall in Indiana LAUREL, Ind. -- The body of a 13-year-old boy was recovered Saturday in a southeastern Indiana creek, the last of six people presumed to have drowned when two vehicles were swept off a roadway after torrential rainfall deluged the region's hill country, authorities said. The boy's body was found in Sanes Creek, where the bodies of his sisters, ages 7 and 4, and the siblings' mother, Felina Lewis, 35, of Laurel, Indiana, were recovered Friday, said Franklin County Coroner Brian Baxter. The children's names were not expected to be released, he said. The victims from the other vehicle were identified as Shawn Roberts, 47, and Burton Spurlock, 48, both of Laurel. Baxter said autopsies were pending on all six victims.  Shiao to be named acting head of counterterrorism center WASHINGTON -- Lora Shiao, a career American intelligence officer, will be the next acting director of the National Counterterrorism Center, the government's central clearinghouse for intelligence on terrorist threats, Trump administration officials said on Saturday. Shiao replaces Russell Travers, who was abruptly replaced last week amid planned cutbacks by the acting director of national intelligence, Richard Grenell. Shiao will begin serving as acting director on April 3, a spokeswoman for Grenell, Maura Beard, said in an email. Shiao has been executive director, or chief administrative officer, of the counterterrorism center since March 2019. She will become the center's first female director.  Bolivia tribunal recommends delaying elections Bolivia's Supreme Electoral Tribunal on Saturday recommended that elections scheduled for May 3 be delayed as the government imposes restrictions in an attempt to curb spread of the coronavirus. The tribunal announced a 14-day suspension of preparations for the elections, coinciding with a lockdown ordered by interim President Jeanine ez that includes a stay-at-home order, domestic travel limits and a halt to international flights. Bolivia has confirmed 19 cases of the virus that causes COVID-19. Bolivia's congress would have to enact legislation to select a new date for the elections, according to tribunal president Salvador Romero. Last month, the tribunal rejected the candidacy of former President Evo Morales for a Senate seat because he does not reside in Bolivia.  1 killed, 4 hurt during protest at prison in Sri Lanka COLOMBO, Sri Lanka -- One prisoner was killed and four others wounded Saturday when guards opened fire after tensions flared during a protest by prisoners in a facility in north-central Sri Lanka, police said. Tensions erupted when prison guards tried to control the protest in Anuradhapura prison, police said in a statement. In the commotion, some attempted to flee the facility, and guards opened fire to prevent them from escaping, the statement said. Five prisoners were wounded and taken to a hospital, where one died, the statement added. Police said no one escaped and security has been fortified. Senaka Perera, president of the Committee for Protecting Rights of Prisoners said prisoners were protesting congested conditions amid coronavirus fears.  Strong quake in Greece: An earthquake with a preliminary magnitude of 5.6 struck northwestern Greece early Saturday, causing damage to buildings but no reported injuries. The Athens Geodynamic Institute said the quake's epicenter was 7 miles from the western seaside town of Parga, and 196 miles west-northwest of Athens. Local media said the quake sent people running into the street, while several old and uninhabited houses were reported to have collapsed in the nearby village of Kanalaki. Less severe damage was also reported in newer houses, with broken windows and plaster falling off walls. Greece is a highly seismically active area. CAPTION: Photo: A florist gives flowers to a health worker Saturday at Burgos Hospital in northern Spain. Spain has the second-highest number of coronavirus infections in Europe -- behind Italy. CESAR MANSO/GETTY-AFP CREDIT: Staff and news services 
2020-03-20	There's nothing exceptional about the situation confronting the Music Box Theatre and its sister companies, Music Box Films and Doppelgnger Releasing. This week in pandemic disorder, everyone I talked to for this story -- one among so many unfolding in Chicago civic life and culture -- used the words "scared" and "scary" to describe their livelihoods and the threatening economic aftermath of the coronavirus, which claimed its first Illinois fatality Tuesday. The movie theaters are closed now in Chicago. On Tuesday the Music Box offices, located in the West Loop not far from all the restaurants no longer open for in-dining business, were down to three staff members. William Schopf, president, was one. Brian Andreotti, Music Box Films head of acquisitions and theatrical distribution as well as the programming director for the Music Box Theatre on Southport Avenue, was another. Lisa Holmes, home entertainment sales director, was No. 3. "We're rotating, taking turns coming in," she said. Later than some, earlier than others, the Music Box Theatre closed its doors Monday night. This was after the last of the 24 moviegoers attending the 9 p.m. "Lifeforce"screening, the unplanned finale of the 70 Millimeter Film Festival, left the building. The gorgeously acted Chicago-made feature "St. Frances" was supposed to premiere at the Music Box Friday. Now it'll have to wait. Schopf said he'll cover Music Box staff wages during the shutdown, at least through April 3. "It looks like we'll be able to give them enough work, spring cleaning, stuff we'd be doing anyway, to get to half (wages)," he said. "And then I'll pay them the rest." He paused before adding: "Depending on how long it goes." The tentative April 3 reopening date, Schopf said, feels more unlikely every hour. "I don't think this will be limited to two, three weeks; I think it's going to be three, four months," he said. "It could crash our local and national economy. We're going to have to do something to take care of people." Another deliberative pause, then: "But we'll do our part." Here's the week that was: On Thursday Illinois Gov. J.B. Pritzker and Chicago Mayor Lori Lightfoot set seating capacity for public gatherings at 250. State and city mandates, often struggling to coordinate efforts and messages, wobbled downward from there, moving quickly to 100-person capacity, then to 50. Now the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention guidelines, defaulting to the White House recommendations, urge no more than 10 per gathering. Some cities, notably Los Angeles and New York, took the initiative to close movie theaters and other businesses ahead of the curve that we, as a nation, were already behind. Chicago was more of a piecemeal scenario, with national chains AMC, Regal, Cinemark and Landmark closing down their national and local screens on varying timelines. Meantime, nonprofit Chicago organizations such as Facets, or (under the School of the Art Institute of Chicago auspices) the Gene Siskel Film Center, or (hosted primarily by Northeastern Illinois University) the Chicago Film Society announced temporary closings. Local film festivals scheduled for late March, April and May also postponed indefinitely, including the Chicago Latino Film Festival, the Onion City Film Festival and a Music Box staple, the Chicago Critics Film Festival. Music Box operations manager Ryan Oestreich said Tuesday that he and Schopf initially believed aggressive cleaning measures and social-distancing seating of 250 or less was enough -- and were in fact within guidelines. The response from Music Box passholders and members, eager to soak up the widescreen nostalgia of the 70MM screenings as a kind of temporary last hurrah, was "overwhelming," Oestreich said. Over and over, he heard from patrons: "So glad you're staying open!" Many theater staffers, though, felt less than glad and increasingly unsafe. By the weekend minds were changed and the doors closed Monday night. Reached at the Music Box offices Tuesday, Andreotti recapped a lousy day: "We were a few days away from publishing our schedule for the next few months. We've been continually revising. Now we're postponing entirely." He has been calling distributors about their plans for films originally scheduled to play the Music Box and other specialty houses nationwide in the coming weeks. Some titles are being held until summer -- or fall. "Even when the theater does reopen," Andreotti said, "we'll be starting cold. No trailers to get people interested in advance. It's going to be a long time before audiences start coming back." With the major international film festivals canceled or pending, finding and competing for promising imports or American indies has suddenly become a different ballgame. "The most common place for us to acquire films," Andreotti said, referring to the Music Box Films distribution arm, "is a prestigious festival like South by Southwest (which canceled earlier this month) or the Cannes Film Festival (held each year in May, though it's nearly certain to cancel). If Cannes doesn't happen, exhibitors and programmers around the world won't see the films. "A lot can be done online and streaming. But you're missing the launch, the buzz created when something enters the global marketplace in a big way." Look at "Parasite," this year's top Oscar winner, from South Korea. It premiered last May at Cannes. It won the Palme d'Or. In commercial theatrical release, it made a quarter-billion dollars worldwide. Imagine if "Parasite" had never been experienced or judged with a crowd. "If everyone in their home offices around the world watched 'Parasite' in isolation," Andreotti said, "it would've been a very different story." For now, said Holmes, the company is directing Music Box members and fans and cinema aficionados to Music Box Direct. There's a free 30-day trial offer, she says, with a boutique menu (90 titles) of U.S. and foreign-language fare: miniseries from Europe, splatter films and tender, highly worthwhile literary biopics such as "Becoming Astrid." "We've got the home entertainment side of things to help fill the gap," Holmes said. Late Tuesday I talked to one more Music Box fixture: house organist Dennis Scott, who has been affiliated with the theater he loves since 1992. Before the shutdown, as part of the theater's 70MM festival, Scott performed a Jerry Herman medley ahead of "Hello, Dolly!"; late '20s and early '30s tunes as a prelude to "The Untouchables"; and, for "Once Upon a Time ... in Hollywood," an all-1969 arrangement of pop hits. "We're in scary new territory here," said Scott, a self-described optimist. "The Music Box is a survivor, and so am I." Amid a week built on quicksand and a barrage of ever-tightening options, scored by a soundtrack made up of the sound of doors closing, Oestreich said he hasn't seen a movie in a long time. I asked him what he'd like right now. "You know what I'd like?" he said. "I bet a lot of people feel this way: I'd love to walk into a movie theater and let what's on the screen be my center of attention." ---------- Michael Phillips is a Tribune critic. mjphillips@chicagotribune.com Twitter @phillipstribune CAPTION: Photo: The Music Box Theatre in Chicago closed its doors Monday night after a 9 p.m. showing was completed. WES POPE/CHICAGO TRIBUNE ; Photo: Lisa Holmes, home entertainment sales director, speaks on the phone at her desk at Music Box Films. ERIN HOOLEY/CHICAGO TRIBUNE; Photo: Curtains close on Music Box Theatre; Along with all Chicago movie theaters, the Lakeview landmark closed this week. The April 3 reopening date feels more unlikely every hour, the company's president said. (News section, Page 1) CREDIT: Michael Phillips 
2020-03-20	Drive-thru coronavirus testing will be coming soon to a Walmart parking lot in west suburban Northlake, according to city officials, as efforts grow to expand testing to major retail sites across the country. In a written statement Thursday, officials said the store on North Avenue was designated as a drive-up testing site but had no information on when testing would begin, operation times or the testing process. Walmart officials said the retailer is looking at several Chicago-area sites for a pilot program but would not confirm the Northlake location was among them. A section of the Northlake Walmart parking lot was cordoned off Thursday morning with yellow caution tape. Several police barricades lined the perimeter of the site, and two solar traffic message boards were on the property. Also Thursday, Gov. J.B. Pritzker announced he was enlisting the Illinois National Guard in the state's efforts to test for the novel coronavirus, which causes the potentially deadly disease known as COVID-19. "Earlier this week, I activated the first members of the Illinois National Guard mission to join the fight against COVID-19," Pritzker said at his daily news briefing on the virus. "They bring to our preparations key capabilities in logistics, in transportation and even in medical specialties, allowing us to expand testing while ensuring our testing can be administered in the safest possible way." Pritzker said that although the federal government is setting up drive-thru testing operations in other states, that is not yet happening in Illinois. "Instead, we're having our National Guard be part of efforts to help hospitals and other health care centers stand up those drive-thru capabilities. So, we'll be using the National Guard to assist other health care workers in that endeavor." The efforts to facilitate more coronavirus testing comes as the nation struggles to test people for the new virus, which has sickened thousands across the country. In Illinois, four people have died from COVID-19 as of Thursday afternoon, according to state health officials. Politicians and medical providers have criticized the federal government for its slow rollout of drive-up testing stations, even as other countries like South Korea and Germany have already been testing in this manner for weeks. The method allows suspected patients to be tested inside their vehicles to minimize the spread of the highly contagious virus. President Donald Trump announced in a news conference last week that drive-up coronavirus testing stations would soon be available in the parking lots of major American retailers, such as Walmart, Target, CVS and Walgreens. "We've been in discussions with pharmacies and retailers to make drive-thru tests available in the critical locations identified by public health professionals," Trump said March 13. "The goal is for individuals to be able to drive up and be swabbed without having to leave your car." Several Chicago-area hospitals are also launching drive-up testing stations. Advocate Lutheran General Hospital in northwest suburban Park Ridge began the program Wednesday, though patients must have a doctor's order and an appointment. In Northlake on Thursday, one Walmart customer said she was pleased at the prospect of coronavirus testing near the store, praising the plan to widen access to tests. "I think there should be more testing available," said Christine Sanchez, of west suburban Melrose Park. "At this point, they should be testing everyone." Walmart did not answer questions about who would qualify to be tested at these screening sites or offer more details on the specific testing process. "We are pleased to support efforts to expand the availability of drive-thru testing in communities impacted by COVID-19," a Walmart statement said. "We are looking at several pilot sites in the Chicago area, but final decisions on testing locations will come from public officials." Pritzker activated 43 airmen from the Peoria-based 182nd Airlift Wing's Medical Group on Monday to help with the escalating number of COVID-19 patients. The unit includes doctors, nurses and nurse practitioners, but it's mostly composed of medical technicians trained and certified in procedures such as blood draws, swab testing and immunizations, as well as maintaining medical records. CREDIT: By Angie Leventis Lourgos, Hal Dardick and Dan Petrella 
2020-03-19	Just past a sign advertising "drive-thru COVID-19 testing," a medical provider in full protective gear -- a blue gown, gloves, hair covering and face mask -- walked up to the driver's side of a brown Honda Civic. The testing site area -- a small white tent erected in the parking lot of Advocate Lutheran General Hospital in northwest suburban Park Ridge -- was cordoned off with yellow caution tape, and the worker maintained a distance of several feet. As the state and the nation struggle to make testing for the new coronavirus more widely available, Advocate Aurora Health has begun to offer drive-thru screenings at several of its Chicago-area hospitals, though only by appointment for patients with physician authorization. The in-vehicle testing method, which involves a nasal swab, is designed to efficiently screen more patients while mitigating the spread of the highly contagious virus. With the disease already sickening thousands across the country, medical providers and politicians alike have called out federal officials for the slow launch of drive-thru screening in the U.S. compared with other nations, including South Korea and Australia. Dr. Ronald Hershow, an infectious disease expert at the University of Illinois at Chicago, called the rollout of coronavirus testing in the U.S. a "disappointment" in comparison with other countries fighting the pandemic. "Testing is such a central feature of responding to an outbreak because it's part of surveillance," he said in an interview Wednesday. "If we don't know where (cases are) occurring, we can't appropriately apportion prevention and treatment resources." Hershow said ideally anyone with symptoms would be able to get tested rather than focusing on only the most at-risk populations, as is the case now. Fighting the pandemic is more complicated because it's also the season for other respiratory viruses. "That's the beauty of drive-thru testing," he said. "You're in the safety of your own car. That why that model is so attractive. You'll be doing more harm than good if you pack waiting rooms with sneezing people, some of whom might have COVID-19 -- a minority ... at this point, but they're packed into a waiting room with people who have other viral disease who may be susceptible to COVID-19." Locally and across the country, medical providers are seeking innovative ways to combat the health crisis while limiting patient and health care worker exposure, including expanded use of telemedicine and tented screening sites outside main hospitals. Several states opened their first drive-thru coronavirus testing sites this week, including Florida and Alaska, as well as Washington, D.C. Other states like Connecticut, Washington and Colorado were experimenting with drive-thru testing for health care workers earlier this month. South Korea launched drive-thru stations in February, part of the nation's system for providing large-scale testing on a level unavailable in the United States. These roadside facilities often allow anonymous screenings, and in one South Korean city, a temporary site in a public parking lot reportedly tested more than 100 residents in a day, according to Reuters. In Illinois, 288 cases of coronavirus have been confirmed as of Wednesday, and one death has been linked to the new disease, which originated in Wuhan, China, in December and has since sickened more than 200,000 people around the globe. Illinois became the first state to test for the new coronavirus in February; other states had a lag time of several weeks before they were able to provide testing at their public health labs. At Advocate Lutheran General Hospital on Wednesday, a half-dozen signs dotting the property directed patients to the drive-thru coronavirus testing site. The test is intended only for sick patients, said Dr. Robert Citronberg, director of infectious diseases at Advocate Lutheran General. "This is not designed to test what we call the worried well," he said. The line on Wednesday morning was only about two or three cars, and there didn't appear to be a long wait. All drive-thru patients must first call their physician and then make an appointment, according to Advocate officials. Several drivers were turned away from the Park Ridge site on Wednesday because they didn't have appointments. Dmitra Miller, 43, from Chicago's West Side, said she had heard reports of drive-thru testing and pulled up, but was told she needed to call her doctor first and make an appointment. Miller, who was wearing a face mask, said she's had symptoms of the highly contagious new virus and was frustrated that it isn't easier to get tested. "There should be a better setup," she said, adding that she plans to try to come back to Lutheran General later. Christine Palmieri, 42, of the Lakeview neighborhood said that after seeking testing for some days, she was successfully tested at Lutheran General's drive-thru on Wednesday. The process took about five minutes, she said. First she pulled up in her vehicle to a white tent, and a health care worker checked to make sure she had a physician's order; then she drove a little farther to a second white tent at the site, where other medical providers swabbed each of her nostrils in a circular motion for about 10 seconds, which she described as uncomfortable. "I'm very lucky to get tested," she said. "We've come in contact with people who are immunocompromised; I want to know what to tell them." The Advocate hospital system is in the process of expanding drive-thru testing to more sites, officials said. Last week, Advocate Good Shepherd Hospital in northwest suburban Barrington began a pilot drive-thru program in an ambulance bay on its property. Another medical provider, Family First Medical Group in south suburban Evergreen Park and Mokena, began providing curbside coronavirus testing at both locations Monday, according to marketing director Ryan Dawson. As the number of local coronavirus cases surged recently, the smaller south suburban medical provider decided safe and convenient drive-up testing was the best way to serve the community, he said. The testing process only takes a few minutes and doesn't require patients to exit their vehicle; a phone screening followed by a video visit is required first. "It became apparent that this is the best thing our patients need right now," Dawson said. ---------- eleventis@chicagotribune.com CAPTION: Photo: Drive-thru COVID-19 testing, which involves a nasal swab, takes place at Advocate Lutheran Hospital in Park Ridge on Wednesday. E. JASON WAMBSGANS/CHICAGO TRIBUNE ; Photo: People drive through a COVID-19 testing site at Advocate Lutheran Hospital in Park Ridge on Wednesday. E. JASON WAMBSGANS/CHICAGO TRIBUNE CREDIT: By Angie Leventis Lourgos, Lisa Schencker and Peter Nickeas 
2020-03-15	As cases of coronavirus infection proliferate around the world and governments take extraordinary measures to limit the spread, there is still a lot of confusion about what the virus does to people's bodies. The symptoms -- fever, cough, shortness of breath -- can signal any number of illnesses, from flu to strep to the common cold. About 5,800 people have died worldwide and over 155,000 people have been infected. There have been more than 50 deaths in the United States and over 2,000 Americans have been infected. Here is what medical experts and researchers have learned about the progression of the infection caused by this new coronavirus -- and what they still don't know. How does this coronavirus cause infection? COVID-19 is spread through droplets transmitted into the air from coughing or sneezing, which people nearby can take in through their nose, mouth or eyes. The viral particles in these droplets travel quickly to the back of your nasal passages and to the mucous membranes in the back of your throat, attaching to a particular receptor in cells, beginning there. Coronavirus particles have spiked proteins sticking out from their surfaces, and these spikes hook onto cell membranes, allowing the virus's genetic material to enter the human cell. That genetic material proceeds to "hijack the metabolism of the cell and say, in effect, 'Don't do your usual job. Your job now is to help me multiply and make the virus,' " said Dr. William Schaffner, an infectious disease specialist at Vanderbilt University Medical Center in Nashville, Tennessee. How does that process cause respiratory problems? As copies of the virus multiply, they burst out and infect neighboring cells. The symptoms often start in the back of the throat with a sore throat and a dry cough. The virus then "crawls progressively down the bronchial tubes," Schaffner said. When the virus reaches the lungs, their mucous membranes become inflamed. That can damage the alveoli or lung sacs, and they have to work harder to carry out their function of supplying oxygen to the blood that circulates throughout our body and removing carbon dioxide from the blood so that it can be exhaled. "If you get swelling there, it makes it that much more difficult for oxygen to swim across the mucous membrane," said Dr. Amy Compton-Phillips, chief clinical officer for the Providence Health System, which included the hospital in Everett, Washington, that had the first reported case of coronavirus in the country, in January. The swelling and the impaired flow of oxygen can cause those areas in the lungs to fill with fluid, pus and dead cells. Pneumonia, an infection in the lung, can occur. Some people have so much trouble breathing, they need to be put on a ventilator. In the worst cases, known as Acute Respiratory Distress Syndrome, the lungs fill with so much fluid that no amount of breathing support can help, and the patient dies. What trajectory does the virus take in the lungs? Dr. Shu-Yuan Xiao, a professor of pathology at the University of Chicago School of Medicine, has examined pathology reports on coronavirus patients in China. He said the virus appears to start in peripheral areas on both sides of the lung and can take a while to reach the upper respiratory tract, the trachea and other central airways. Xiao, who also serves as the director of the Center For Pathology and Molecular Diagnostics at Wuhan University, said that pattern helps explain why in Wuhan, where the outbreak began, many of the earliest cases were not identified immediately. The initial testing regimen in many Chinese hospitals did not always detect infection in the peripheral lungs, so some people with symptoms were sent home without treatment. "They'd either go to other hospitals to seek treatment or stay home and infect their family," he said. "That's one of the reasons there was such a wide spread." A recent study from a team led by researchers at the Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai in New York found that more than half of 121 patients in China had normal CT scans early in their disease. That study and work by Xiao show that as the disease progresses, CT scans show "ground glass opacities," a kind of hazy veil in parts of the lung that are evident in many types of viral respiratory infections. Those opaque areas can scatter and thicken in places as the illness worsens, creating what radiologists call a "crazy paving" pattern on the scan. Are the lungs the only part of the body affected? Not necessarily. Compton-Phillips said the infection can spread through the mucous membranes, from the nose down to the rectum. So while the virus appears to zero in on the lungs, it may also be able to infect cells in the gastrointestinal system, experts say. This may be why some patients have symptoms like diarrhea or indigestion. The virus can also get into the bloodstream, Schaffner said. The U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention says that RNA from the new coronavirus has been detected in blood and stool specimens, but that it's unclear whether infectious virus can persist in blood or stool. Bone marrow and organs like the liver can become inflamed too, said Dr. George Diaz, section leader for infectious diseases at Providence Regional Medical Center in Everett, Washington, whose team treated the first U.S. coronavirus patient. There may also be some inflammation in small blood vessels, as happened with SARS, the viral outbreak in 2002 and 2003. "The virus will actually land on organs like the heart, the kidney, the liver, and may cause some direct damage to those organs," Schaffner said. As the body's immune system shifts into high gear to battle the infection, the resulting inflammation may cause those organs to malfunction, he said. As a result, some patients may endure damage that is inflicted not just by the virus but by their own immune system as it rages to combat the infection. Experts have not documented whether the virus can affect the brain. But scientists who studied SARS have reported some evidence that the SARS virus could infiltrate the brain in some patients. Given the similarity between SARS and COVID-19, the infection caused by the new coronavirus, a paper published last month in the Journal of Medical Virology argued that the possibility that the new coronavirus might be able to infect some nerve cells should not be ruled out. Why do some people get very ill but most don't? About 80% of people infected with the new coronavirus have relatively mild symptoms. But about 20% of people become more seriously ill; and in about 2% of patients in China, which has had the most cases, the disease has been fatal. Experts say the effects appear to depend on how robust or weakened a person's immune system is. Older people or those with underlying health issues, like diabetes or another chronic illness, are more likely to develop severe symptoms. Xiao conducted pathological examinations of two people in China who went into a hospital in Wuhan in January for a different reason -- they needed surgery for early-stage lung cancer -- but whose records later showed that they had also had coronavirus infection, which the hospital did not recognize at the time. Neither patient's lung cancer was advanced enough to kill them, he said. One of those patients, an 84-year-old woman with diabetes, died from pneumonia caused by coronavirus, Xiao said the records showed. The other patient, a 73-year-old man, was somewhat healthier, with a history of hypertension that he had managed well for 20 years. Xiao said the man had successful surgery to remove a lung tumor, was discharged, and nine days later returned to the hospital because he had a fever and cough that was determined to be the coronavirus. Xiao said that the man had almost certainly been infected during his first stay in the hospital, since other patients in his post-surgical recovery room were later found to have the coronavirus. Like many other cases, it took the man days to show respiratory symptoms. The man recovered after 20 days in the hospital's infectious disease unit. Experts say that when patients like that recover, it is often because the supportive care -- fluids, breathing support and other treatment -- allows them to outlast the worst effects of the inflammation caused by the virus. What do scientists still not know about coronavirus patients? A lot. Although the illness resembles SARS in many respects and has elements in common with influenza and pneumonia, the course a patient's coronavirus will take is not yet fully understood. Some patients can remain stable for over a week and then suddenly develop pneumonia, Diaz said. Some patients seem to recover but then develop symptoms again. Xiao said that some patients in China recovered but got sick again, apparently because they had damaged and vulnerable lung tissue that was subsequently attacked by bacteria in their body. Some of those patients ended up dying from a bacterial infection, not the virus. But that didn't appear to cause the majority of deaths, he said. Other cases have been tragic mysteries. Xiao said he knew a man and woman who got infected but seemed to be improving. Then the man deteriorated and was hospitalized. "He was in ICU, getting oxygen, and he texted his wife that he was getting better, he had good appetite and so on," Xiao said. "But then in the late afternoon, she stopped receiving texts from him. She didn't know what was going on. And by 10 p.m., she got a notice from the hospital that he had passed." CAPTION: Photo: A patient rests at a temporary hospital set up for COVID-19 patients earlier this month at a sports stadium in Wuhan, the epicenter of China's outbreak, in Hubei province. GETTY-AFP ; Photo: National Guard members hand out bags of food to residents near a containment zone set up to halt the spread of coronavirus Thursday in New Rochelle, a suburb of New York City. SPENCER PLATT/GETTY ; Photo: Soldiers in protective gear spray disinfectant as part of preventive measures against COVID-19 in Daegu, South Korea. YONHAP CREDIT: By Pam Belluck, The New York Times 
2020-03-15	Tom Hanks had a cold, or so he thought: slight fever, body aches, chills, the usual. In the United States, those symptoms may not be enough to get tested for the new coronavirus. But he and his wife, Rita Wilson, who also felt sick, weren't at home -- they were in Australia. Here, testing is free and widely available, thanks to early and coordinated planning for a pandemic. On Thursday, Hanks said he and his wife had seen the efforts firsthand, as they tested positive for the virus. "The Medical Officials have protocols that must be followed," Hanks wrote in an announcement he posted on Twitter, choosing capital letters for his new acquaintances. "We Hanks' will be tested, observed and isolated for as long as public health and safety requires." Hanks is now the public face of a pandemic's widening reach. What was once a national problem for China, where the virus originated and soon killed thousands, has become an international stress test for public health performance. Some countries, like the United States, are looking increasingly ill prepared, or, in the case of Italy, fighting to avoid being overwhelmed. Others, like South Korea, moved quickly to test and isolate huge numbers of people and appear to be bringing their outbreaks under control. Although Canada has relatively few cases, so far, its testing system is also well developed, a result of the SARS outbreak in the country 17 years ago, when 44 people died and 438 were infected. Australia, with more than 130 cases and three deaths, has not yet been put to the same kind of test as Italy or South Korea. But health officials are determined to be ready for whatever comes -- heads down on their spreadsheets, trying to stay calm in a battle where planning ahead and avoiding drama mean victory. Prime Minister Scott Morrison, still bruised from a failure to react quickly to the country's bush-fire crisis this summer, set an emergency coronavirus plan in motion Feb. 28. Rather than play down the risks or promise that the problem would fade in a month or two -- as President Donald Trump did -- Morrison was one of the first world leaders to declare that the virus would span the planet. "We believe the risk of global pandemic is very much upon us," he said weeks ago, as cases were just starting to rise quickly outside China. "And, as a result, as a government, we need to take the steps necessary to prepare for such a pandemic." That same day, state and territory health ministers met to discuss plans for testing, stockpiling medication and opening special clinics that would keep potential coronavirus patients out of regular emergency rooms. The officials have continued to meet regularly. "In terms of the amount of time and human hours that have gone into the planning, it's massive," said Ian Mackay, a virologist at the University of Queensland who has been involved. "It's been going on all year, really, and entire lives have gone into just planning and coordinating. It's been all-consuming." Testing has been a priority from the beginning. Days after China shared the genome of the virus, Australia's private testing industry -- which handles everything from blood tests to stool samples -- was mobilized, with the government making tests free through Medicare, the national health care plan. Public health officials set up a national hotline for people who think they might have the virus. States have set up webpages with locations for coronavirus testing, which has mostly been taking place in hospital wards set apart from regular emergency rooms. In the United States, little if anything about the process has been efficient or convenient. Tests have been slow to arrive across the country, in part because of a manufacturing problem, according to the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Criteria for who should be tested have been widened only recently. At first, the CDC recommended testing only those who had traveled to Wuhan, China, or had contact with a suspected coronavirus case and had a fever or respiratory symptoms. In late February, the guidelines were relaxed, but a patient still had to be hospitalized to be eligible for a test. Vice President Mike Pence announced March 3 that the CDC would lift those restrictions, granting tests if a physician ordered them, but doctors were asked to keep certain factors in mind before doing so. And laboratories are still reporting that the demand for testing is greater than the supply. In Australia, shortages have been rare, and contact tracing has been comprehensive. On Thursday, Annastacia Palaszczuk, the premier of Queensland, the state where Hanks is hospitalized, said there were 27 people confirmed to have the coronavirus there, and in every case, "we know the origin of where they have come from." She did not say whether Hanks and Wilson had contracted the virus in Australia or brought it from the United States. Mackay, the virologist, noted that Wilson, an actress and singer, had recently performed a concert in Beverly Hills, California, on a date within the incubation period for the virus. Hanks is in Australia shooting a film about Elvis Presley with Australian director Baz Luhrmann; there were reports that at least one other person on the set had tested positive. Palaszczuk said everyone who had come into contact with Hanks and Wilson would have to self-isolate, and she promised that they would be well treated. They were two of seven new cases reported in Queensland on Thursday, and they are officially listed as being in stable condition at Gold Coast University Hospital, where they are being kept in isolation. Under the protocols Hanks referred to on Twitter, doctors and health officials will regularly check on them. "I'm very confident that we have world-class doctors that are determined to look after them and give them the best possible care," Palaszczuk said. She then added a warning: "What this signals is that this coronavirus can happen to anyone," she said, adding: "We need the public to be listening to the authorities, listening very closely and adhering." Which is what Hanks and Wilson seem to be doing: taking direction from medical officials. In 2013, Hanks disclosed he has Type 2 diabetes. "They're not tripping, but they're going through the necessary health precautions, obviously," their son Chet Hanks said in a message on Instagram. "I don't think it's anything to worry about." CAPTION: Photo: Two-time Academy Award winner Tom Hanks and his actress-wife, Rita Wilson, tested positive for COVID-19. AMY SUSSMAN/GETTY CREDIT: By Damien Cave, The New York Times 
2020-03-14	China is starting to get back to work. More than six weeks after its leaders virtually shut down the world's second-largest economy to stop a relentless coronavirus outbreak, factories are reopening and offices are starting to fill. That's little solace to Zhang Xu. Piles of windshields -- some broken, others new and ready to be installed -- sit untouched at his car repair shop in a blue-collar neighborhood in Shanghai. One of his two employees is still stuck in a faraway village. But that matters little, because Zhang has no customers. "If we don't get sales, the distributor won't be able to order more from the factory, and the factory won't be able to produce," Zhang said. Stopping the Chinese industrial machine was painful for China and for the world -- and restarting it may be even harder. Factories are well short of full capacity. Even the most successfully restarted cities are only halfway back. Tens of millions of laborers cannot get to work. Even when workers come back, Chinese businesses may find overseas demand slumping for their exports because of worsening coronavirus epidemics in other countries. China's difficulties could hold lessons for other countries looking for answers to the outbreak. Looking for a way to slow the virus without sinking the economy, the United States on Wednesday blocked travelers from Europe, and President Donald Trump has said he wants to get consumers spending more. The Italian government imposed travel restrictions Monday on the entire country. Other places, like South Korea, have intensified testing and monitoring without trying to shut down their industrial engines. Unquestionably, China has made progress starting up again. As supply chains in the West began to run dry, airfreight rates from China jumped suddenly last week, according to TAC Index, an air cargo pricing data company in Hong Kong. Beijing has unleashed a series of measures to get offices and factories humming again. Bankers describe almost daily phone calls from regulators, telling them to show leniency on debt repayments, particularly from smaller businesses. More than 50 million migrant workers have not yet returned to their jobs, according to official data. Some remain in quarantine. Others are stranded in rural areas where bus service has not resumed. Many are not yet needed by employers. Factory owners face still one more problem: slowing global demand for the goods China makes. The coronavirus outbreak is threatening global growth, which could slow factories just as they restart. "If the demand shock is not addressed fast, then it could become a problem," said Cao Heping, a Peking University economist. CREDIT: By Keith Bradsher, The New York Times 
2020-03-13	Rush University Medical Center on Thursday began testing suspected coronavirus patients inside tents erected in a repurposed ambulance bay, part of the hospital's ongoing effort to help prevent the spread of this highly contagious new virus. Rather than sitting in a general waiting room, those with influenza-like symptoms will be diverted to the ambulance bay, which hospital officials refer to as "forward triage." Patients will then be given a mask, seated in chairs spaced 6 feet apart and assessed by health care workers wearing full protective gear -- including gowns, gloves, face masks and eye protection, said Dr. Paul Casey, Rush acting chief medical officer and an emergency room physician. "This is part of what Rush was specifically built for, emergency preparedness," he said. "What we've learned about the experience throughout the world is that the more we can stay one step ahead of this, the more we can mitigate the spread of coronavirus." Hospitals here and across the country are adopting new measures to help combat coronavirus, which has so far sickened more than two dozen in Illinois and more than 100,000 worldwide, prompting the World Health Organization to declare the disease a pandemic earlier this week. The University of Washington Medical Center ? Northwest earlier this month opened a drive-thru coronavirus testing site for employees exhibiting upper respiratory symptoms. Other countries such as South Korea and Germany are also offering testing in this manner, where patients drive up to health care providers and are swabbed without having to leave their vehicles. Some health care providers -- including Rush -- are relying more on telemedicine to screen for coronavirus, offering services remotely in an attempt to free up medical resources while mitigating the spread of the disease. "We encourage health care providers to look at telemedicine or other ways to connect with patients for assessment without having the worried-well flood facilities and tie up health care providers," said Melaney Arnold, spokeswoman for the Illinois Department of Public Health. She said the state is evaluating resources and emergency supplies at hospitals across the state, numbers which change frequently. A daily electronic reporting system also tracks hospital beds, she added. "At this time we have no reports of a shortage of supplies," Arnold said. Many hospitals and health systems are focused on keeping their own workers safe amid the outbreak. More than 120 health care workers at UC Davis Medical Center in California were under self-quarantine after possible exposure to a coronavirus patient last month. National Nurses United, a nationwide union representing registered nurses, has argued U.S. hospitals are unprepared to handle the coronavirus epidemic. The union -- which represents more than 6,000 nurses in Illinois -- organized about a dozen rallies and protests at medical facilities across the country Wednesday to demand more protections for health care workers; locally, the union also held a vigil Wednesday at Stroger Hospital of Cook County. At Rush, the tented space is separate from the rest of the hospital, isolating folks who might have coronavirus from other hospital patients, particularly those who are more at-risk such as the elderly or individuals with underlying medical issues, Casey said. Air inside the tent is also exhausted outside, further limiting exposure for the rest of the hospital. The designated area also limits hospital staff contact with those who are ill, keeping health care workers healthier, Casey added. "That keeps our staff safe from contracting the upper respiratory disease, whether that's influenza or coronavirus," he said. The concept of "forward triage" was implemented in 2012 and designed for many types of emergencies, from health epidemics to contamination disasters to incidents with mass casualties. "In this case, we're using it for coronavirus, but there's a potential to use for many different pandemic or disaster scenarios," Casey said. Rush last week treated a patient with coronavirus -- a university student who contracted the disease while studying abroad in Italy. He was discharged to recover under home quarantine. Casey noted that most coronavirus patients will not require hospitalization; he encouraged anyone concerned about possible coronavirus symptoms or exposure to contact medical providers through video appointments via telemedicine, rather than showing up at the hospital. Many other local hospital systems say they're prepared for the public health crisis. The University of Chicago Medicine says patients and visitors should expect additional screenings and the possibility of more visitor restrictions as the outbreak evolves. "In the coming weeks, we anticipate a surge in demand for our medical care, particularly in our already-busy emergency rooms and intensive care units," a spokeswoman for the medical provider said. "We encourage those with less severe illnesses and injuries to consider seeking care in non-hospital settings, if possible." Dr. Sharon Welbel, director of infection control and hospital epidemiology at Cook County Health, said the health system has trained over 1,000 health care workers, from nurses to transporters, to help manage the epidemic. Cook County health is working with their hospitals to figure out floor plans and designate wards to use if there is a sudden increase in cases, she said. Arnold added that health providers across the state are ready to handle this type of outbreak. "Public health departments, hospitals and emergency medical services statewide prepare year round, and have for many years, for emergency events -- including mass casualty events, earthquakes, flooding and pandemics," said Arnold. ---------- eleventis@chicagotribune.com CAPTION: Photo: Emergency room nurses familiarize themselves with a special isolation bay for suspected coronavirus patients at the Emergency Center at Rush University Medical Center. ZBIGNIEW BZDAK/CHICAGO TRIBUNE CREDIT: By Angie Leventis Lourgos and Sophie Sherry 
2020-03-11	In a moment of looming crisis, there are two reactions that should be avoided. The first is panic. The second is complacency. Faced with the coronavirus epidemic, the president, many other officials -- including those in Chicago -- and the general public are avoiding the first mistake by falling into the second. A look elsewhere shows the folly of relying on hope as a strategy. On Jan. 31, Italy had two confirmed cases of COVID-19. By Tuesday, it had more than 10,000. South Korea has gone from one on Jan. 20 to more than 7,400. The disease, once it emerges, spreads rapidly, even in the face of efforts to contain it. And the efforts to contain it in this country have been tardy and feeble. The Trump administration dallied for weeks before putting someone (Vice President Mike Pence) in charge of the federal response. Time after time, President Donald Trump has minimized the risk and claimed everything was under control, cultivating a false sense of security. On Feb. 27, Trump tweeted "Only a very small number (of cases) in U.S., and China numbers look to be going down." The next day, he blurted, "It's going to disappear. One day it's like a miracle, it will disappear." The virus hasn't disappeared, and the number of cases was small then because there was so little testing. Since then, the number has risen more than tenfold. Even that figure is a gross undercount because testing has been so sparse. So far, fewer than 8,500 people have been tested in this country -- while South Korea has been testing 15,000 per day. The numbers in China, where the virus was first detected, have indeed fallen, but only after the government took draconian measures: locking down 50 million people in Hubei province and canceling sports events, closing theaters and extending school breaks throughout the country. In contrast, life in the U.S. has gone pretty much as though we enjoy an inborn immunity. One obvious remedial step is banning large gatherings. But here in Chicago, as of Tuesday, the St. Patrick's Day Parade is supposed to take place Saturday, bringing more than 300,000 people into tight proximity in a frolicsome atmosphere. The South Side Irish Parade will step off Sunday. The March 22 Shamrock Shuffle, an 8K race that draws 30,000 runners and lots of spectators, is still a go. Some big conventions, notably South by Southwest in Austin, have been called off. Same with Boston's St. Patrick's Day parade. Bernie Sanders and Joe Biden took the responsible step of canceling rallies Tuesday. But across America, theaters, concerts and other events are mostly going on as usual. NBA and NCAA basketball games are being played before crowds of fans. Likewise with the NHL. In Italy, by contrast, the great majority of soccer matches are taking place without spectators. Similar polices are in effect in Spain, Portugal and France. One U.S. exception: A high-level professional tennis tournament in Indian Wells, California, was canceled. No one wants to see restrictions that prevent Americans from enjoying experiences that involve large crowds. In reality, though, the epidemic is likely to make restrictions unavoidable at some point. The earlier such policies are adopted, the better the disease can be contained and the sooner we can all return to normal. The natural tendency of people is to put off unpleasant actions in the hope that they won't be needed. The prospect that strong steps would push the economy into a recession also gives pause to policymakers. But there is no reason to believe the U.S. can escape the full force of this outbreak. Dragging our feet allows it to grow more rapidly and do more damage -- in sickness and death for people, in costs to health care providers, governments and individuals, and in the disruption of everyday life. Scott Gottlieb, who was commissioner of the Food and Drug Administration under Trump, offered a stiff dose of reality Sunday on CBS News' "Face the Nation": "I think no state and no city wants to be the first to basically shut down their economy. But that's what's going to need to happen. States and cities are going to have to act in the interest of the national interest right now to prevent a broader epidemic. Close businesses, close large gatherings, close theaters, cancel events." This is a necessity that most Americans have yet to grasp or accept. It's easy, confronted with a danger of uncertain impact, to mock those calling for such steps as alarmists. But at the moment, if you're not alarmed by the coronavirus, you're not paying attention. ---------- Steve Chapman, a member of the Tribune Editorial Board, blogs at www.chicagotribune.com/chapman. schapman@chicagotribune.com Twitter @SteveChapman13 CAPTION: Photo: Empty chairs and tables at a restaurant Tuesday in St. Mark's Square in Venice. Italy has been put on lockdown due to the coronavirus. ANTEO MARINONI/LAPRESSE CREDIT: Steve Chapman 
2020-03-10	As the coronavirus spreads, Delta Air Lines is suspending its Atlanta-to-Rome flights. Atlanta-based Delta had already reduced its Atlanta-to-Rome route to fewer flights per week and suspended some other services to Italy. The airline says it will suspend the Atlanta-to-Rome route from March 11 through April 30 due to the continued spread of COVID-19, or the coronavirus. Its normal spring flight schedule from Atlanta to Rome is five flights a week in March and daily flights in April. The only remaining Delta flights to Italy until April 30 will be New York to Rome flights. The airline said passengers whose flights are affected can rebook on alternate flights, get refunds or contact Delta to discuss other options. Delta is also extending its suspension of flights between New York and Milan until May 20. The last Delta flight from Milan to New York operated March 3. Other cuts include delaying the launch of summer season flights, which begin April 1, from Detroit to Rome until May 1 and from New York to Venice until May 21. There have been more than 9,000 cases of COVID-19 reported in Italy. A number of towns in northern Italy have been put under quarantine. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention is advising travelers to avoid nonessential travel to Italy. The Trump administration has raised its travel warning to "do not travel" to the regions in South Korea and Italy most affected by coronavirus. For Italy, the State Department issued a do-not-travel advisory for Lombardy, where Milan is the capital, and Veneto. Passengers coming to the United States from Italy and South Korea are being screened. Delta waived change fees for bookings to Italy, China and South Korea before announcing it was suspending flights to China and reducing flights to South Korea and Italy. A change fee waiver allows travelers to avoid flying to areas with coronavirus outbreaks or avoid the risk that the airline may cancel the flights. CREDIT: By Kelly Yamanouchi, Cox Newspapers 
2020-03-09	Oil falls 25% as another week of virus-fueled trading begins NEW YORK -- Oil prices are plunging amid worries that an OPEC dispute will lead an economy weakened by COVID-19 to be awash in an oversupply of crude. Brent crude, the international standard, lost $11.44, or 25.3%, to $33.83 per barrel, as of 10:27 p.m. Eastern time on Sunday in electronic trading in London. Benchmark U.S. crude fell $10.77, or 26.1%, to $30.49. The dramatic losses follow a 10.1% drop for U.S. oil on Friday, which was its biggest loss in more than five years. Prices are falling as Saudi Arabia, Russia and other oil-producing countries argue how much to cut production in order to prop up prices. Demand is falling as people cut back on travel worldwide. The worry is that the coronavirus will slow economies sharply, meaning even less demand. It's been a brutal and dizzying couple weeks for financial markets worldwide. Since setting its record last month, the U.S. stock market is down 12.2% on worries about how much corporate profits will fall because of COVID-19. The virus usually leaves people with mild to moderate symptoms, but because it's new, experts can't say for sure how far it will spread and how much damage it will do to health and to the economy. If the number of new infections slows in other parts of the world as it has in China, if the U.S. jobs market remains as solid as it's been and if all the unease in markets ends up creating just a short-term dip in confidence among shoppers, all this may recede quickly. "There are more if's than at any other time in this 11-year bull market," say strategists at BTIG.  Cruz, Gosar to self-isolate after contact with man with virus Sen. Ted Cruz, of Texas, and Rep. Paul Gosar, of Arizona, say they are isolating themselves after determining they had contact at a political conference with a man infected with the coronavirus. Cruz says he had brief contact with the man at the Conservative Political Action Conference nearly two weeks ago and would spend the next few days at his home in Texas until a full 14 days had passed since their interaction. Gosar says he had sustained contact with the man at CPAC and that he and three members of his senior staff are under self-quarantine. His office will be closed for the week. Besides Cruz and Gosar, the CPAC schedule lists three other senators and 12 House members who were scheduled to speak. They include congressman Mark Meadows, of North Carolina, who has since become the White House chief of staff.  South Dakota Sioux tribe set to vote on legalizing marijuana SIOUX FALLS, S.D. -- Members of the Oglala Sioux Tribe will vote this week on legalizing medical and recreational marijuana on South Dakota's Pine Ridge Reservation in an initiative that many hope will bring an economic boost to one of the nation's poorest areas. Neither South Dakota nor nearby Wyoming and Nebraska have legalized marijuana, and tribal leaders think pot could rake in millions of dollars. If the measure is approved, the Oglala Sioux Tribe would become the only Native American tribe to set up a cannabis market in a state where it's otherwise illegal. "People will be coming in from all directions to get their medicine," said Ricky Gray Grass, a tribal leader. The Oglala Sioux Tribe is poised to test federal and state policy.  Bill would lift yoga ban in Ala. schools, but don't say 'namaste' MONTGOMERY, Ala. -- Alabama lawmakers might lift a decades-old ban on yoga in public schools, but the bill would keep the greeting "namaste" on the forbidden list. The bill by Rep. Jeremy Gray, a Democratic legislator from Opelika, is on the proposed debate agenda Tuesday in the Alabama House of Representatives. The bill says local school systems can decide if they want to teach yoga, poses and stretches. However, the moves and exercises taught to students must have exclusively English names, according to the legislation. It would also prohibit the use of chanting, mantras and teaching the greeting "namaste." The Alabama Board of Education in 1993 voted to prohibit yoga, hypnosis and meditation in public school classrooms.  S. Korea: North fires 3 unidentified projectiles SEOUL, South Korea -- North Korea fired three unidentified projectiles off its east coast Monday, South Korea's military said, two days after the North threatened to take "momentous" action to protest outside condemnation over its earlier live-fire tests. Seoul's Joint Chiefs of Staff said in a statement it has detected the three launches made from a town in the North's South Hamgyong province. It said South Korea's military is monitoring additional launches. In the past 10 days, North Korea said leader Kim Jong Un supervised two rounds of live-fire artillery exercises in its first weapons tests since late November. South Korea and some European countries protested against the second North Korea drills that they believe involved ballistic missile launches in a violation of U.N. resolutions.  Amid tensions, fire damages Greek island refugee center ATHENS -- A fire broke out at a refugee center on the Greek island of Lesbos, Greece's firefighting service said Sunday, causing considerable damage to a warehouse but no injuries. It was the second fire at an installation built for migrants, after a reception center was burned down by unknown perpetrators on March 2. The warehouse, which contained furniture and electrical appliances, was destroyed, a firefighting spokesman told The Associated Press on condition of anonymity, because an investigation into the fire is ongoing. The blaze at the refugee center came amid a tense standoff between Turkey and the European Union over who is responsible for the millions of migrants and refugees in Turkish territory and the thousands who have massed at the Greek border.  In Austria: Six people were killed in two avalanches in the Austrian Alps on Sunday, Austrian authorities said. Five snowshoers who were hiking in central Austria were hit by one avalanche at about 9:30 a.m., Austria's APA news agency reported. Several people witnessed the avalanche and immediately informed emergency services, but the hikers, believed to be from the Czech Republic, were already dead by the time rescuers got to them. There had been high winds and heavy snowfall in the area over the past few days. And in southwestern Austria, a police officer who was undergoing Alpine training was killed when he was hit by another avalanche. CAPTION: Photo: A picture of two victims of the downing of Malaysia Air Flight MH17 is placed Sunday amid 298 empty chairs -- one for each victim -- in a park opposite the Russian embassy in The Hague, Netherlands. The plane was taken down by a missile over Ukraine in 2014. PETER DEJONG/AP CREDIT: Staff and news services 
2020-03-09	Oil falls 20% as another week of virus-fueled trading begins NEW YORK -- Oil prices are plunging amid worries that an OPEC dispute will lead an economy weakened by COVID-19 to be awash in an oversupply of crude. Brent crude, the international standard, lost $8.77, or 19.3%, to $36.50, as of 7:23 p.m. Eastern time on Sunday after earlier touching its lowest price since early 2016. Benchmark U.S. crude fell $8.11 to $33.17. The dramatic losses follow a 10.1% drop for U.S. oil on Friday, which was its biggest loss in more than five years. Prices are falling as Saudi Arabia, Russia and other oil-producing countries argue how much to cut production in order to prop up prices. Demand is falling as people cut back on travel worldwide. The worry is that the coronavirus will slow economies sharply, meaning even less demand. It's been a brutal and dizzying couple weeks for financial markets worldwide. Since setting its record last month the U.S. stock market is down 12.2% on worries about how much corporate profits will fall because of COVID-19. The virus usually leaves people with only mild to moderate symptoms, but because it's new, experts can't say for sure how far it will ultimately spread and how much damage it will do, both to health and to the economy. If the number of new infections slows in other parts of the world as it has in China, if the U.S. jobs market remains as solid as it's been and if all the unease in markets ends up creating just a short-term dip in confidence among shoppers, all this may recede quickly. "There are more if's than at any other time in this 11-year bull market," say strategists at BTIG.  2 charged in attack on Spanish speakers head to Mass. court BOSTON -- Two Massachusetts women charged with assaulting a woman and her teenage daughter for speaking Spanish in public last month are scheduled to be arraigned on hate crime charges, prosecutors said. Jenny Leigh Ennamorati and Stephanie Armstrong, both 25 and both of Revere, are expected in court Monday to answer to felony charges of violating a person's constitutional rights with bodily injury, and misdemeanor assault and battery, according to the Suffolk district attorney's office. The victims, who have not been publicly identified beyond their last name, Vasquez, were attacked Feb. 15. The suspects shouted, "This is America," and told them to "speak English" and "go back to your (obscenity) country" as they punched, kicked and bit them, the mother said.  South Dakota Sioux tribe set to vote on legalizing marijuana SIOUX FALLS, S.D. -- Members of the Oglala Sioux Tribe will vote this week on legalizing medical and recreational marijuana on South Dakota's Pine Ridge Reservation in an initiative that many hope will bring an economic boost to one of the nation's poorest areas. Neither South Dakota nor nearby Wyoming and Nebraska have legalized marijuana, and tribal leaders think pot could rake in millions of dollars. If the measure is approved, the Oglala Sioux Tribe would become the only Native American tribe to set up a cannabis market in a state where it's otherwise illegal. "People will be coming in from all directions to get their medicine," said Ricky Gray Grass, a tribal leader. The Oglala Sioux Tribe is poised to test federal and state policy.  Bill would lift yoga ban in Ala. schools, but don't say 'namaste' MONTGOMERY, Ala. -- Alabama lawmakers might lift a decades-old ban on yoga in public schools, but the bill would keep the greeting "namaste" on the forbidden list. The bill by Rep. Jeremy Gray, a Democratic legislator from Opelika, is on the proposed debate agenda Tuesday in the Alabama House of Representatives. The bill says local school systems can decide if they want to teach yoga, poses and stretches. However, the moves and exercises taught to students must have exclusively English names, according to the legislation. It would also prohibit the use of chanting, mantras and teaching the greeting "namaste." The Alabama Board of Education in 1993 voted to prohibit yoga, hypnosis and meditation in public school classrooms.  S. Korea: North fires 3 unidentified projectiles SEOUL, South Korea -- North Korea fired three unidentified projectiles off its east coast Monday, South Korea's military said, two days after the North threatened to take "momentous" action to protest outside condemnation over its earlier live-fire tests. Seoul's Joint Chiefs of Staff said in a statement it has detected the three launches made from a town in the North's South Hamgyong province. It said South Korea's military is monitoring additional launches. In the past 10 days, North Korea said leader Kim Jong Un supervised two rounds of live-fire artillery exercises in its first weapons tests since late November. South Korea and some European countries protested against the second North Korea drills that they believe involved ballistic missile launches in a violation of U.N. resolutions.  Amid tensions, fire damages Greek island refugee center ATHENS -- A fire broke out at a refugee center on the Greek island of Lesbos, Greece's firefighting service said Sunday, causing considerable damage to a warehouse but no injuries. It was the second fire at an installation built for migrants, after a reception center was burned down by unknown perpetrators on March 2. The warehouse, which contained furniture and electrical appliances, was destroyed, a firefighting spokesman told The Associated Press on condition of anonymity, because an investigation into the fire is ongoing. The blaze at the refugee center came amid a tense standoff between Turkey and the European Union over who is responsible for the millions of migrants and refugees in Turkish territory and the thousands who have massed at the Greek border.  In Austria: Six people were killed in two avalanches in the Austrian Alps on Sunday, Austrian authorities said. Five snowshoers who were hiking in central Austria were hit by one avalanche at about 9:30 a.m., Austria's APA news agency reported. Several people witnessed the avalanche and immediately informed emergency services, but the hikers, believed to be from the Czech Republic, were already dead by the time rescuers got to them. There had been high winds and heavy snowfall in the area over the past few days. And in southwestern Austria, a police officer who was undergoing Alpine training was killed when he was hit by another avalanche. CAPTION: Photo: A picture of two victims of the downing of Malaysia Air Flight MH17 is placed Sunday amid 298 empty chairs -- one for each victim -- in a park opposite the Russian embassy in The Hague, Netherlands. The plane was taken down by a missile over Ukraine in 2014. PETER DEJONG/AP CREDIT: Staff and news services 
2020-03-08	You wake up with a sore, scratchy throat and begin coughing and sneezing. It's probably a run-of-the-mill cold, or it could be the beginning of a bout of seasonal flu. But with recent cases of the novel coronavirus, which causes COVID-19, surfacing in Illinois, some people are bound to wonder: Could this be the coronavirus? More than 100,000 infections have been reported worldwide, with substantial outbreaks in China, Italy, Iran, Japan and South Korea. More than 3,300 people have died. Six people have tested positive for the new coronavirus in Illinois, the most recent a CPS employee who had been on a cruise ship. Illinois is one of at least 21 states that have reported confirmed cases of coronavirus. At least 15 people in the United States have died from the disease as of March 6, 14 of them in Washington state. Here's what experts advise for Illinoisans who fear they are showing signs of coronavirus.  Call first If you are experiencing minor symptoms, don't just show up at a clinic, doctors say. "They should not see their doctor immediately," said Michael Ison, a professor of infectious diseases and organ transplantation at the Northwestern Feinberg School of Medicine. "They should call their doctor first." The primary care doctor will go over the patient's symptoms by phone and decide what to do next. If the symptoms are minor, the doctor's advice will likely be to stay home to avoid spreading any type of virus and call back if the symptoms get worse, Ison said. Experts still say the risk to average Chicagoans is low if they haven't had known contact with an infected person or traveled to an area with an active outbreak. The new cornonavirus can cause a more severe illness than a typical cold, but it initially manifests with many of the same symptoms, experts say. So doctors are unlikely to ask for COVID-19 testing if someone is only presenting with cold and flu symptoms and doesn't have any other reason to suspect they may have it. "It is hard to tell right now," said Susan Bleasdale, an infectious disease physician at the University of Illinois Hospital & Health Sciences System. "We're still in the middle of the flu season." The state has a hotline people can call with questions or to report suspected cases at 800-889-3931. They can call the Office of Consumer Health Insurance at 877-527-9431 about their health insurance coverage.  Getting the test After speaking with a patient, primary care doctors will decide whether to coordinate with public health officials to test for COVID-19. They will consider factors such as the severity of the symptoms, recent travel history and contact with people suspected to be infected. "The testing right now is prioritized for people who need hospitalizing for severe pneumonia," Bleasdale said. Patients will also likely be tested if they are showing signs of a respiratory illness and have traveled to certain areas such as China or Italy, or have had contact with an infected person. Everyone else will probably be told to stay home until their symptoms subside, doctors say. Patients who will be tested for the virus will get a nasal swab, experts say. Testing can only be done by public health officials, so it is paid for by the government. Doctors cannot order the test without coordinating with the Illinois Department of Health, and it is not billed to insurance, Ison said. In Illinois, tests are sent to one of three state-run labs in Chicago, Springfield or Carbondale, according to state health officials. If there is a presumptive positive result, specimens are sent to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention for confirmation. Public health officials here are also testing a random sample of negative seasonal flu tests for coronavirus to learn if and how COVID-19 is circulating here.  What happens next? If a patient is tested for the new coronavirus, state and local health departments will take action to mitigate the public health threat. Health officials will work with the patient to map out recent activity, try to identify people the patient has had contact with and, if necessary, test those people for COVID-19, Bleasdale said. Patients may isolate themselves at home if they aren't experiencing severe symptoms. They may be hospitalized if the symptoms are severe, she said. "They would be guided by the Department of Public Health and health care providers," Bleasdale said. As of Friday, about 220 people in Illinois had been tested for the virus. Of those, 180 have received negative results, and 35 were still pending. Doctors advise people to take regular precautions against viruses of all kinds, including frequently washing your hands, staying home from work or school when sick and covering your mouth when coughing and sneezing. ---------- mabuckley@chicagotribune.com CREDIT: By Madeline Buckley 
2020-03-08	Born and raised in Arraba, Israel, Palastinian-Israeli Nuseir Yassin currently resides in Singapore. Better known to millions of social media followers as Nas, he creates content about his travels, as well as educational videos on current topics such as the coronavirus. Yassin also is the author of "Around the World in 60 Seconds: The Nas Daily Journey -- 1,000 Days. 64 Countries. 1 Beautiful Planet" (HarperOne, $29.99). An edited version of our conversation follows. Q: What is your favorite vacation destination? A: I've traveled to over 60 countries and hundreds of cities, but there are still over 100 countries in the world I've still yet to see. So I can't give a definite answer! But that being said, I find myself thinking a lot about the Philippines. When I arrived there, the locals greeted us with an incredible, spontaneous reception (that) they organized on their own. It's an incredibly loving country. The great thing is that wherever I travel in the world, I'm bound to meet a Filipino -- (whether) in the U.S. all the way to a rural house in the north of Australia. Q: What's the best way to explore a new destination? A: Befriend a local. Ignore the islands, nature and landmarks. (Locals) will make sure you experience everything in their country the right way. Q: What untapped destination would you recommend? A: I can list many untapped destinations. Most of them would be called developing countries. When people hear developing, most people think dangerous, poor or dirty. In reality, many of these developing countries are in fact fantastic places to be. Sri Lanka is one good example. I was genuinely surprised to see how the country was developing so fast, that it had skyscrapers just five years after I last visited. Q: What's the most important thing you've learned from your travels? A: For three years, everything I owned fit into a small backpack: 10 T-shirts, a pair of pants, my laptop and camera equipment. These things passed the mountain test, which is something I ask myself five times before I make any purchase: Would you climb a mountain with said items? Traveling full time for three years has taught me that we actually don't need that many things to survive. I'm very mindful of what I purchase. It also saved me a lot of money. Q: Do you speak any foreign languages? A: I speak Arabic and Hebrew, they're my main languages. English was my third language and is my foreign language. I don't think I pick up new languages too easily. I trained for over 10 years by speaking English repeatedly to myself, just to make sure that I didn't have an accent. Q: What are your five favorite cities? A: I've visited a lot of cities, but the five most interesting ones to me were: Eliat (Israel). Chefchaouen (Morocco). Dharavi (India). Rawabi (Palestine). Quito (Ecuador). Q: Where have you traveled that most reminded you of home? A: The answer is weird, but I'd say North and South Korea. Their never-ending feud strongly reminds me of the Israel-Palestine conflict back home. Q: Where would you like to go that you have never been to before? A: Pakistan. I've always wanted to go there. But, unfortunately for me and my Israeli passport, going to Pakistan is virtually impossible. One day I'd like to change that. ---------- For more from the reporter, visit www.jaehakim.com. CAPTION: Photo: (Nuseir Yassin) MOUNT STUDIO, SINGAPORE CREDIT: By Jae-Ha Kim, Tribune Content Agency 
2020-03-06	When classes at Northwestern University adjourn for spring break in a couple of weeks, Tracy Zhang will likely be stuck on campus, searching for ways to keep busy and entertained, now that she can't travel abroad on an academic trip with her classmates. Zhang, who is from China, had signed up to visit Shanghai for a journalism course, but the excursion was called off in late January in response to the coronavirus outbreak. Though Zhang remained hopeful her professors could rearrange the itinerary, allowing the class to fly to Europe instead, even that backup option fell through Wednesday when Northwestern announced it was canceling all of its spring break trips to international destinations "due to multiple factors associated with the spread of COVID-19 here and abroad." "To be honest I was totally expecting this, so this announcement was almost like a relief for me," Zhang said in an email. "At the same time, I do feel more worried and unsettled because to me this would also mean the CDC/the school is not optimistic about the foreseeable future regarding COVID." Northwestern's decision to suspend the university-sponsored trips signifies the latest steps by colleges and universities to address the risk of travel for their students, including those participating in popular study abroad programs. While schools try to inoculate their campuses from the threat, the emergency measures are taking an emotional toll on students who have to cut formative study aboard experiences short on little notice or miss out on exploring new countries altogether. It's not clear when some of the programs will be rescheduled, if at all. Caroline Mroz, a junior at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, was completing a study-abroad program in Milan as fears of the coronavirus escalated and Italy began to see the highest number of infections outside Asia. U. of I. contacted students based in Italy on Saturday, saying that everyone was required to leave and finish the semester in the U.S. Mroz, who was taking classes at Bocconi University, said she wasn't scared of getting sick but feared she might be trapped in the country if lockdown procedures enacted by local officials prevented her from leaving. She arrived at her suburban home Sunday, after flying through Prague and London. She is self-isolating at home and is expecting to complete the rest of her classes online. Coincidentally -- despite Mroz having traveled thousands of miles to avoid the new coronavirus threat -- two of the five confirmed cases in Illinois are a married couple in her hometown of Arlington Heights. Though she's disappointed about how her program ended, Mroz said she's glad she found flights home and thankful for the experiences she was able to have. "It's something I've been looking forward to since I was in high school," said Mroz, a junior in the business school. "It's definitely unfortunate, and I don't think it's really hit me yet. Luckily I was able to do a lot of traveling in the time that I was there." Last week, Loyola University also required its students in Italy to return to the U.S., citing evolving guidance from the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Because of the last-minute changes, Loyola said in a post online that it was delaying midterm exams, which were supposed to commence this week, and creating "alternative and on-line academic programming." A spokesperson did not respond to additional questions. At the University of Chicago, academic programs in Hong Kong and Beijing have been closed since Jan. 28. A group of students who were supposed to go there for the spring quarter are being relocated to London. DePaul University has also canceled a faculty-led trip to Japan over their spring break, which starts March 21, and is monitoring travel conditions for other trips. Outside the programs in Italy, U. of I. is allowing any of its 850 students taking classes abroad to depart early and resume studies domestically. The school said in a post online that it would help reimburse students for airline tickets and determine ways for students to continue making academic progress. It was still working with study abroad partners to "provide information regarding final program fees and costs when available." In an effort to contain the spread of the virus, schools are advising students who have returned from an affected region to self-quarantine for two weeks before returning to campus activities. Many schools said absences from class during this time will be considered excused and accommodated. While most Northwestern students tend to study abroad at a different time of the year, the decision to cancel international spring break travel will affect 43 trips of varying sizes, according to spokesman Jon Yates. Up to 600 students take advantage of the international spring break tips in any given year, the vast majority of them being business students in the graduate school, Yates said. Other programs are offered through undergraduate classes and extracurricular activities. This year the break runs from March 21 to 30. Adina Barg, a junior at Northwestern, said she was devastated to learn that a trip to Morocco through Fiedler Hillel, a Jewish center on campus, was going to be canceled. Barg, a student leader for the trip, said she has been meeting with 15 other attendees for months in preparation for the cultural exchange experience. Students will be refunded for any expenses they put toward to trip, which cost about $1,500 before financial aid, according to Barg and the Hillel website. "It's upsetting," Barg said by phone Wednesday. "It's been kind of hard to process because I've been working on this spring break trip since May. ... It's kind of heartbreaking to see all of my hard work go down the drain." Despite the initial shock, Barg said she agrees that canceling was the right decision, given the health concerns about international travel. She's still trying to figure out a Plan B, but she said she was considering visiting Florida with a friend. "In terms of safety, that is far more important than anything," Barg said. "We don't know what would happen if we went. You never know who you are going to come across, so it's definitely for the better." A number of schools, including Northwestern, have already banned university-sponsored travel for faculty or students to China, Iran, Italy and South Korea, countries seeing the worst of the outbreak. NU officials said they "would prefer" that faculty and staff defer nonessential travel abroad and that any travel deemed essential would need approval from the dean or vice president. For Zhang, spring break is going to be more low-key than she initially imagined. Before the trip to China was scrapped, she was hoping to also meet up with her parents while in her home country. Now Zhang said she anticipates she will stay in her dorm for the break, even though dining halls will be closed. ---------- echerney@chicagotribune.com CAPTION: Photo: Northwestern sophomore Tracy Zhang, 19, had hoped to see her family in her native China during a school-sponsored trip to Shanghai over spring break, but it was canceled due to the coronavirus. CHRIS SWEDA/CHICAGO TRIBUNE CREDIT: By Elyssa Cherney 
2020-03-05	Major airlines are relaxing policies around flight change and cancellation fees and joining Chicago's airports in stepping up their cleaning efforts as the coronavirus continues to spread. The global travel industry has taken a hit from the novel respiratory virus known as COVID-19, which has killed 11 people in the U.S. and about 3,200 globally. Companies are restricting travel and pulling out of conferences to protect employees, and airlines are canceling flights to a growing number of affected areas. Here's what to know if you're thinking about planning a trip:  Some airlines are waiving change fees United Airlines is waiving flight change fees for any domestic or international flight purchased between March 3 and 31. Passengers who decide to cancel a flight have one year from when they purchased the original ticket to apply its value to a new flight with no fee. No advance notice is required. American Airlines is waiving change fees on any tickets purchased between March 1 and 16. Passengers must cancel at least 14 days before their flight to avoid the fees. Delta Air Lines is letting travelers make a one-time change to any international flight booked between March 1 and 31 with no fee. Customers flying to Shanghai or Beijing in China; Seoul, South Korea; and all locations in Italy can make a change at no fee through April 30. JetBlue was the first to announce broad suspensions of fees for changing or canceling flights. The policy covers flights before June 1, booked between Feb. 27 and March 11. The U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention currently recommends people avoid nonessential travel to China, Iran, South Korea and Italy, and advises older adults or people with chronic medical conditions to consider postponing travel to Japan. Data from travel app Hopper suggest people aren't avoiding travel, but they may be taking trips closer to home. Searches for flights from the U.S. to destinations in Europe and Asia were down roughly 6% and 23%, respectively, during the week ending March 2, compared with the first week of January. But searches for U.S. destinations grew 6.5% during the same period, suggesting people are shifting their focus to travel in the U.S. and Canada, said Hopper economist Hayley Berg.  Travel insurance options are limited If someone cancels a trip because they're worried about being exposed to an illness, standard trip cancellation policies rarely will cover those losses. Travelers can upgrade to policies that let them cancel a trip for any reason, but premiums can be 40% greater than those on standard packages, and they often only cover about 75% of the person's losses. Cancel-for-any-reason policies must be purchased at the time of booking or shortly thereafter. Some travel insurance providers have stopped offering those policies, but that doesn't mean travelers are out of luck. One insurance company reported there weren't many claims because travelers affected by the outbreak were being reimbursed by airlines and other travel suppliers, said Kasara Barto, spokeswoman for travel insurance website Squaremouth.  Chicago's airports are stepping up cleaning The Chicago Department of Aviation installed 109 new hand sanitizer stations in the city's airports, focusing on busy areas like food courts. Airport workers are cleaning surfaces in high-traffic areas more frequently. The extra cleaning initially focused on O'Hare International Airport's Terminal 5, which handles international flights. As of this week, it's expanded to all of O'Hare and Midway Airport, McGrath said. CTA officials said they were not doing anything out of the ordinary to respond to the coronavirus threat. A CTA spokesperson said in an email that the CTA cleans its vehicles daily, and also does "deep cleans" every two weeks.  Some planes are getting a deep clean Airlines say their cleaning routines follow guidelines from health officials. Planes get cleaned to varying degrees between flights, but Southwest Airlines, United and Delta all said their aircraft get an end-of-day cleaning that includes wiping hard surfaces with disinfectant. Some are adding extra measures, especially on flights from areas affected by the outbreak. United said it is "deep cleaning" any aircraft that carried a passenger later diagnosed with the COVID-19 virus. A deep clean, which normally happens every 50 to 55 days, includes washing ceilings and overhead bins and scrubbing the plane's interiors, said spokesman Charles Hobart. Delta began using machines that spray aircraft arriving in the U.S. from Asia with disinfectant in February. The new procedure makes sure the disinfectant reaches more surfaces than hand-wiping the aircraft, said Delta spokeswoman Adrian Gee. Flights from Italy to New York and Atlanta also get the "fogging" treatment, and Delta said it is working to get additional machines to use on planes arriving from more cities outside Asia with reported cases of the coronavirus. Cutlery, glassware and dishes are being sanitized before they're washed on Delta flights from Asia to the U.S., and linen and headphones are being cleaned separately from those on flights from other destinations.  Flight attendants are providing hand sanitizer The U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention said the risk of contracting an infection is low on an airplane but advises travelers to take precautions like avoiding contact with passengers who appear to be sick, washing hands frequently and using hand sanitizer. Delta said it is stocking more hand sanitizer, gloves and surgical masks on flights in and out of Asia and giving customers on long international flights amenity kits with hand sanitizer or cleansing towelettes. American is stocking extra hand sanitizer wipes at departure gates and in flight attendants' service kits on flights to and from Asia. It is also allowing flight attendants to wear masks on certain flights if that makes them more comfortable, executives said in a Feb. 28 letter to employees. Alaska Airlines said flight attendants can wear gloves during food and beverage service. The airline has temporarily stopped refilling used beverage cups, offering hot towels in first class and collecting recycling onboard, to reduce the number of times crew need to handle passenger items. It also stopped using fingerprint biometric scanners in airport lounges. Passengers can use antibacterial wipes to clean armrests and tray tables, but Alaska Airlines asked travelers not to use them on its leather seats, since they can damage the leather. The Association of Flight Attendants, a union representing flight attendants at airlines including United, said it's been working with airlines to encourage measures designed to prevent the spread of the virus, like making sure all flights are stocked with additional hand sanitizer, said spokeswoman Taylor Garland. ---------- lzumbach@chicagotribune.com CAPTION: Photo: Travelers wear protective masks Sunday as they walk through Terminal 5 at O'Hare International Airport in Chicago. NAM Y. HUH/AP ; Photo: Emily Blumberg, of Chicago, wipes down her surroundings on an American Airlines flight to Washington from Detroit Metro Airport in Romulus, Michigan, on Tuesday. ALYSSA SCHUKAR/THE NEW YORK TIMES CREDIT: By Lauren Zumbach; Chicago Tribune's Mary Wisniewski contributed. 
2020-03-05	Hours after Northwestern University announced it was canceling international spring break trips due to concerns about the coronavirus, school officials nixed another major campus event scheduled for this weekend: a 30-hour Dance Marathon that raises money for designated charities. In an email to students and faculty on Wednesday afternoon, school leadership said Dance Marathon won't be held because of uncertainty about the fast-spreading illness that has sickened thousands globally, resulting in death in some cases. "Given the prolonged duration of Dance Marathon, the close proximity of dancers and the strain it puts on participants, health experts thought those in attendance could have been at greater risk for illness had the event continued as planned," the email said. Officials did not release details about when or if the event would be rescheduled. Dance Marathon is a seminal experience for hundreds of Northwestern students, who work for much of the year to raise money for the charities and then stay up all night, dancing in a tent on campus, in a final effort to boost donations. Last year's event raised more than $1 million, according to a NU news release. This year's recipients, Children's Home & Aid and the Evanston Community Foundation, will still receive the money raised, officials said. Earlier in the day, Northwestern officials sent an email to students about the cancellation of international spring break trips. "This was a difficult decision made in consultation with numerous campus stakeholders," Northwestern officials said in a post on its website. "A number of schools and units are already enacting the travel recommendations, which may include developing local alternatives." As global concern about the coronavirus intensifies, colleges and universities nationwide are monitoring student travel, including popular study abroad programs and spring break trips. In Illinois last week, students who were studying in Italy through Loyola University Chicago and the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign were required to return home when the federal government put the country on its do-not-travel list because of a growing number of coronavirus infections. The outbreak also prompted University of Chicago to temporarily close its academic programs in Hong Kong and Beijing. In an email to Northwestern students and faculty on Wednesday, school President Morton Schapiro said international spring break trips were canceled "due to multiple factors associated with the spread of COVID-19 here and abroad." Northwestern typically offers a number of international spring break trips through classes, clubs and other extracurricular activities for both undergraduate and graduate students. This year the break runs from March 21 to 30. Earlier this week, the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign said all students studying abroad would be allowed to leave their programs early and return home to complete their studies. A number of schools, including Northwestern, have already banned university-sponsored travel for faculty or students to China, Iran, Italy and South Korea, countries seeing the worst of the outbreak. Many schools are also asking those who return to the U.S. to self-quarantine for 14 days before rejoining campus activities. NU officials said they "would prefer" that faculty and staff defer nonessential travel abroad and that any travel deemed essential would need dean or vice president approval. ---------- echerney@chicagotribune.com CREDIT: By Elyssa Cherney 
2020-03-04	In response to COVID-19 and its likely spread, the Field Museum of Natural History and the Art Institute of Chicago have banned staff from traveling to areas already profoundly affected by the coronavirus. At the Field, "until further notice staff cannot travel to or through any country rated with a Centers for Disease Control Travel Alert Level 3 (currently, China, Iran, Italy, South Korea)," said public relations and community awareness director Jaclyn Johnston via email Monday. "And staff returning from any country with a CDC Travel Alert Level 3 are being advised to stay home and monitor their health for up to 14 days." Since no staffers are currently abroad for work, these restrictions apply primarily to future travel, she said, adding that "any travelers returning from any country with a Travel Alert Level 2 (currently Japan) are being encouraged to monitor their health." The Art Institute's new rules are similar. "The museum has suspended travel to medium and high risk locations (as defined by the CDC), and we are encouraging staff to reschedule non-essential international travel," said Kati Murphy, a spokeswoman for the museum. Both institutions, like a range of other Chicago zoos and museums surveyed for this story, said they are keenly tracking the COVID-19 situation and the guidance that health authorities give. In other countries where the virus has spread rapidly -- as it is beginning to do in the U.S. -- authorities have moved to restrict public gatherings in order to limit potential contact and the disease's spread. "We are closely monitoring what city health officials are saying and recommending," Adler Planetarium spokeswoman Jennifer Howell said. "We will course correct as necessary to protect the health of both our staff and guests. We are emphasizing CDC best practices to prevent the spread of cold and flu." Meanwhile, within museum walls, the Field is "taking the necessary precautions to ensure our facilities are properly disinfected and cleaned to prevent the spread of illnesses," Johnson said. These aren't new protocols, but supervisors have "reiterated the importance of meeting the high standards of our typical protocols," she said. The Art Institute and Museum of Contemporary Art Chicago both said the viral outbreak has thus far had no impact on live performances planned in museum auditoriums or on art loans. "We are monitoring the situation closely," said the Art Institute's Murphy. "The safety of our visitors and staff is our first priority and we will continue to update our community as needed." ---------- sajohnson@chicagotribune.com Twitter @StevenKJohnson CAPTION: Photo: The Field Museum of Natural History is banning staff travel to coronavirus-plagued areas. ANTONIO PEREZ/CHICAGO TRIBUNE CREDIT: By Steve Johnson 
2020-03-04	A patient being treated at the University of Chicago Medical Center for a suspected coronavirus case has tested negative for the virus, hospital officials said Tuesday night. That leaves a total of four reported COVID-19 cases in Illinois. On Monday, the third and fourth cases in Illinois were reported: A husband and wife in their 70s both tested positive for coronavirus, but the results still needed to be confirmed by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. The man was being treated at Northwest Community Hospital and his wife was under quarantine at home, officials said. Two other cases in Illinois have been confirmed by the CDC. University of Chicago Medical Center spokeswoman Lorna Wong said the hospital has been "preparing for this eventuality" since coronavirus first became a global public health threat in January. "Senior hospital leadership and leaders from our infectious diseases and infection prevention teams, along with other expert clinicians, are working closely with local, state and federal health officials and continue to apply up to date recommended guidelines," she said in an emailed statement. On Monday, Arlington Heights School District 25 said two staffers and two students would be staying home as a result of possible exposure to a person who is related to a hospital worker who encountered a patient with coronavirus. At least 15 states have reported cases of coronavirus. At least nine people have died from the disease in Washington state, officials announced Tuesday. Several of the cases, and deaths, in Washington state have been among patients at a nursing facility. The disease has hit at least 70 countries, with 90,000 cases and 3,100 deaths. The vast majority of cases and deaths have been in China. While the number of new cases recorded daily in that epicenter country has declined for weeks, the virus continues to spread fast in South Korea, Iran and Italy, prompting increased travel warnings and restrictions. Most cases of COVID-19 seem to be mild, said Dr. Nancy Messonnier, director of the CDC's National Center for Immunization and Respiratory Diseases, during a call with reporters Tuesday. A report out of China suggests that serious illness occurs in about 16% of cases, though people who are older and have underlying health conditions, such as heart disease and diabetes, are about twice as likely to develop serious cases as younger, healthier people, she said. As of Monday evening, there were more than 100 cases of coronavirus in the U.S., including those who tested positive by their local health departments and those whose positive results have been confirmed by the CDC. Of those cases, 22 were travel-related, 11 were spread person-to-person and the causes of 27 others were still under investigation. An additional 48 cases were among repatriated Americans, such as from the Diamond Princess cruise ship. As of Monday, 102 people in Illinois had been tested for the virus. The state health department said Tuesday it was watching a total of about 250 people for symptoms, including some of those who've already been tested. The state has a hotline people can call with questions or to report suspected cases, 800-889-3931. They can call the Office of Consumer Health Insurance at 877-527-9431 about their insurance coverage. ---------- kdouglas@chicagotribune.com Twitter @312BreakingNews CAPTION: Photo: The University of Chicago Medical Center is shown in Hyde Park in Chicago on March 23, 2020. ZBIGNIEW BZDAK/TRIBUNE CREDIT: By Katherine Rosenberg-Douglas and Lisa Schencker 
2020-03-01	At AllCell Technologies' facility in Chicago's Back of the Yards neighborhood, dozens of employees are cranking out lithium-ion batteries, destined to power drones, electric vehicles and more. The key component of the rechargeable batteries comes from China and other Asian countries, where the coronavirus has caused factories to shut down or operate at reduced capacity, and travel restrictions have hindered shipping. Knowing the flow of parts could soon dry up, AllCell stocked up on materials to keep production going. That's "a big financial burden" for a 40-employee company, said CEO Said Al-Hallaj. "Who would have thought a small company from the South Side of Chicago would be impacted?" he said. "World trade wars, viruses, global epidemics. You would think, 'I don't have to plan for this, I'm not that big.' ... But that's not the case." The spread of the coronavirus -- and the effort to contain it -- is rocking supply chains around the world, and Chicago-area companies are not immune. They are searching for alternative suppliers while they worry about how much slowed -- or stopped -- production will affect their bottom lines and their workforces. Drug and medical device manufacturers in China are also being disrupted, causing shortages of certain medicines in the U.S. Disruptions from the coronavirus are predicted to limit the growth of the global average gross domestic product to 2.3% this year, its weakest mark since 2009, according to financial forecaster Oxford Economics. In the U.S., GDP growth is expected to slow to 1.5%. In a report, titled "No mask can prevent financial market contagion," Oxford Economics predicts that if the coronavirus outbreak becomes a global pandemic, it could lead to a recession. Few expect a quick resolution. Initially, the Lunar New Year celebration cushioned the economic fallout of the outbreak, as many factories and businesses in China typically close for one to two weeks for the holiday and workers travel home to visit family. American companies placed orders in advance of the holiday to ensure a steady supply. But that cushion is eroding. "We've been lulled into a false sense of security," said Justin Formella, chief strategy officer at MBX Systems, which provides server and computing equipment for streaming services, security companies and other customers. The Libertyville-based company stocked up on storage and graphic processing hardware from U.S. distributors. But Formella said access to those products is becoming constrained. "It's like when there's a tsunami, and you know a wave is coming," Formella said. "It's just delayed in how it's going to hit." The World Health Organization has confirmed more than 80,200 cases of the new coronavirus, called COVID-19, and about 2,800 people have died. Most of the cases have been in China. Though the epidemic appears to be slowing in China's Hubei province, the virus' epicenter, clusters of cases have popped up in Iran, South Korea and Italy. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention has advised travelers to avoid China and South Korea, and told older adults and those with chronic medical conditions to postpone nonessential travel to Iran, Italy and Japan. In the U.S., stocks tumbled for seven consecutive days over fears coronavirus might become a pandemic, marking its worst week since 2008. On Wednesday, health officials warned Americans to prepare for an outbreak. A total of 61 coronavirus cases have been confirmed in the U.S., according to data from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. On Saturday, health officials in Washington state reported the death of a person from COVID-19, the first such reported death in the United States. U.S. consumers are just beginning to see the effects of a disrupted global supply chain, but it's evident at companies of all sizes and in multiple industries. Apple, Microsoft and Macy's are among the large companies that have warned about the effects of the virus on their business. How quickly they, as well as small local businesses, can recover remains to be seen. The outbreak is affecting supplies of drugs and other medical products as well. The Food and Drug Administration said in a statement Thursday that a coronavirus-related disruption at a manufacturer in China is causing at least one drug shortage, though it did not say which drug. Northfield-based Medline Industries makes hospital supplies such as masks and gowns, among other products. A spokesman declined to give specifics about how the virus is affecting its business, but it said in a statement that restrictions on exporting certain items, such as face masks, could lead to shortages or delayed shipments throughout the industry. A large percentage of the protective equipment made in China is manufactured in the Hubei province, and the province has extended a mandatory factory closure through March 10, Medline said. "Other medical supplies manufactured in the Hubei province -- traditional wound care products, surgical drapes and gowns and some surgical pack components -- likely will be impacted by the events in China if the restrictions continue for an extended time," Medline said. Abbott Laboratories' manufacturing and research and development facilities in China are operational, spokeswoman Darcy Ross said in a statement. She declined to comment on whether the virus was affecting the north suburban-based company's supplies or sales. Much of Abbott's manufacturing in China focuses on its nutritional products, and China is a significant market for Abbott's infant formula business, said Debbie Wang, a senior equity analyst at Morningstar. She said Abbott's overall sales in the first quarter could be soft as a result of the virus. It's also possible that Abbott, which sells generic drugs outside the U.S., could, like other companies selling pharmaceuticals, have a tough time making those drugs because a number of active ingredients for medications come from China, she said. It's also possible, however, that Abbott could benefit, if it succeeds in making a test to diagnose the virus, she said. Abbott has confirmed it is working to develop a test. Outside of the medical industry, Logan Square-based Shop4ties had to turn away more than a dozen orders for apparel like ties and shirts because it wouldn't be able to deliver orders on time, including one $18,000 order due March 13, said CEO and co-owner Becky Feinberg-Galvez. All of the company's products are made in China. Though Feinberg-Galvez has been in regular contact with her suppliers, some factories didn't reopen until Feb. 17 or 18 and with only half their normal workforce, she said. A dye factory still hasn't reopened, she said. Shop4ties received its first shipment in about six weeks Monday and was able to fill two orders. In a typical month, the company would handle about 70 orders, Feinberg-Galvez said. "We were looking at big growth this year, but our first quarter is going to be 25 to 30% of what it was last year," she said. "It's hard to know what the long-term effect will be." Shop4ties' six full-time employees and three contracted graphic designers are fully aware of the situation, Feinberg-Galvez said. Without knowing how the outbreak will affect sales this year, they're working to mitigate what they can. she said. Managing the situation is about the only thing U.S. companies can do at this point, said Phillip Braun, a clinical professor of finance at Northwestern University's Kellogg School of Management. It's still unclear whether employers will resort to layoffs. "If this becomes a global pandemic, the results on economic growth are going to be even worse," he said. In South Elgin at Hoffer Plastics, the family owned custom injection molding company is awaiting four orders from a Chinese tool shop that was temporarily closed by the epidemic. The Shenzhen factory has only recently reopened with a reduced staff, likely delaying delivery of metal molds needed to make plastic components used in everything from dishwashers to auto engines. "From a production standpoint, we need one mold to make millions of parts," said Alex Hoffer, chief revenue officer. Among the orders Hoffer Plastics is awaiting is a mold to make a plastic tube for an oral hygiene product used in hospitals. The mold was to be delivered by March 30, with Hoffer set to begin production on a "hot timeline" for a Chicago-area medical equipment manufacturer. Delays on the $500,000 medical tube order could prove costly. "It won't jeopardize the whole order, but it will be lost revenue for us in 2020," Hoffer said. Hoffer Plastics employs 380 people working three shifts to produce about 3 billion parts a year, generating about $90 million in annual sales. The company is telling employees to stay vigilant and communicate about any changes in production or demand, Hoffer said. It's business as usual, but there's a heightened threat level in terms of uncertainty. Even companies with production in the U.S. have experienced coronavirus-related disruptions. Hazel Technologies, which makes a product that extends the shelf life of produce and other foods, was awaiting delivery on a machine needed to make some of its products when the travel restrictions hit, said co-founder and CEO Aidan Mouat. Unwilling to wait months, the Chicago company spent 10 times as much to buy the machine elsewhere, Mouat said. He said he had to reallocate resources from other projects to make that happen. Problems associated with the virus come at an inopportune time for companies that already have been forced to deal with tariffs on Chinese goods imposed by the Trump administration. "It's kind of a one-two punch," said Joe Born, CEO of Chicago-based Bluetooth speaker brand Aiwa. Born said he's seen prices that consumers pay for electronics hiked -- likely a result of the tariffs coupled with coronavirus issues -- and his company might have to do the same. A shipment of wireless earbuds that was set to arrive in early March will be delayed at least a month because of the coronavirus, Born said. Aiwa had to adjust marketing budgets and stop advertising that product. For some companies, lessons learned from the tariffs or changes made to ease their blow have proved helpful. Best Buy has seen a dip in inventory due to coronavirus disruptions in the supply chain, but its suppliers are prepared after handling uncertainty around the tariffs, CEO Corie Barry told CNBC. Vernon Hills toymaker Learning Resources stocked up on goods before the tariffs went into effect, reducing the coronavirus' interruption on all but a handful of new items, said CEO Rick Woldenberg . Factories the company works with in China are opening back up and restarting production. Some economists say tariffs could deliver a more serious blow to companies in Chicago and elsewhere because they are more permanent. "The virus is a temporary thing," said Lawrence Officer, an economics professor at the University of Illinois at Chicago. "In a few months, all will be back to normal." Experts say it is difficult to predict how long the effects of the supply chain disruption will ripple through the global economy. Those that haven't been hit hard are being cautious. During a call with investors Tuesday, Macy's CEO Jeff Gennette said the company had felt delays in production of merchandise made in China but "nothing concerning yet." Less than half of the products for Macy's-owned brands are made in China, but some of its vendors also source a significant percentage of their goods from there, he said. The company is also expecting reduced tourism in the United States to affect sales, but Gennette said it's too soon to estimate the outbreak's impact. "We're watching this one very, very carefully," he said. CAPTION: Photo: AllCell Technologies employees Barry Kirkman, left, and Robert Mallett work on rechargeable battery cells Wednesday in Chicago.; Photo: AllCell Technologies' Jerlene Jackson uses a heat gun to wrap rechargeable battery cells. AllCell has stocked up on materials during the virus outbreak.; Photo: AllCell's rechargeable battery cells come from China and other Asian countries, according to CEO Said Al-Hallaj.; ABEL URIBE/CHICAGO TRIBUNE PHOTOS CREDIT: By Ally Marotti, Lauren Zumbach, Lisa Schencker and Robert Channick 
2020-02-29	United Airlines announced Friday it won't restart flights between the U.S. and China until May and is paring back its schedule to other parts of Asia as the coronavirus epidemic spreads. The Chicago-based airline said it is reducing service to Tokyo, Osaka, Singapore and Seoul, offering fewer flights and smaller planes, beginning next month. "It is a fast-moving situation," United spokeswoman Leslie Scott said. "We are in daily contact with the CDC and other global health organizations as we continue to evaluate our schedule." While United halted flights to China in early February, this is the first time it has reduced capacity to other Asian destinations as a result of the growing epidemic, Scott said. The airline has seen a 75% drop in demand for its Asian routes, outside of China, in the wake of the coronavirus outbreak, according a filing Monday with the Securities and Exchange Commission. Before the suspension of service, United had about 12 flights each day between the U.S. and China, including flights connecting Chicago to Beijing and Shanghai at O'Hare International Airport. The additional reduction in service will cancel the O'Hare to Tokyo Narita route from March 8 to March 27. United is scheduled to resume flights between Chicago and Tokyo on March 28, when it will switch to Tokyo Haneda Airport, which is closer to the city. The change is unrelated to the virus, Scott said. American Airlines does not have direct service between Chicago and China, but earlier this month extended its suspension of all flights to China out of its Dallas and Los Angeles hubs through April 24. This week, Fort Worth, Texas-based American also added flight waivers to Italy and South Korea because of the coronavirus outbreak, allowing passengers to make travel changes without fees. Atlanta-based Delta Air Lines previously suspended all flights to China through April 30, and this week reduced service to South Korea. Delta has issued travel waivers for China, South Korea and all flights to and from Italy, including Bologna, Milan, Rome, Venice and Turin in response to increased coronavirus cases there. United also issued flight waivers for China and Hong Kong, and this week added South Korea and northern Italy to the list of no-fee travel changes. The virus, now dubbed COVID-19, has disrupted travel since reports of the new respiratory illness first surfaced in Wuhan, China, in late December. China remains the epicenter of the disease, with nearly 79,000 confirmed cases and more than 2,700 deaths as of Thursday, according to the World Health Organization. But the virus has since spread to about 50 countries, with confirmed cases on the rise in South Korea, Italy and Iran, among other countries, according to health organizations. There have been 61 confirmed cases in the U.S., according to the CDC, including two in the Chicago area. A woman who returned from a visit to Wuhan, China, in January gave the virus to her husband in the first known case of person-to-person coronavirus transmission in the U.S., according to the CDC. The couple has since been released from a hospital in northwest suburban Hoffman Estates. ---------- rchannick@chicagotribune.com CAPTION: Photo: Passengers wearing masks arrive at Narita International Airport on Jan. 24 outside Toyko, Japan. United is reducing service to the city. TOMOHIRO OHSUMI/GETTY CREDIT: By Robert Channick 
2020-02-28	Grace Palmeri of Aurora decided to study abroad in Florence this semester to learn more about her Italian heritage and immerse herself in the culture of her ancestral homeland. But just as the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign student began acclimating to her new life and routine overseas, a recent spike in the number of coronavirus cases ignited anxiety and fear across her host country: Authorities reported 400 confirmed cases of the new virus in Italy earlier this week, a 25% increase in a period of about 24 hours. "There aren't as many tourists, and more and more people are wearing masks," said 20-year-old Palmeri, describing the scene in Florence, the capital city of the Tuscany region in central Italy. "The local supermarkets are selling out of masks and hand sanitizer, and my roommates and I have stocked up on all cleaning supplies for at least the next few weeks. ... I'd be lying if I said I wasn't a little concerned about the recent outbreak of the coronavirus, but I am doing everything I can to stay safe and healthy." While Palmeri and her roommates have decided to forgo a planned trip this weekend to Milan -- a northern Italian city that has born the brunt of the viral outbreak -- she has no intent to return to the United States until her program ends as scheduled in late May. Yet an increasing number of colleges and universities are canceling or suspending overseas programs in the wake of the recent coronavirus epidemic, which originated in Wuhan, China, and has sickened tens of thousands globally. Purdue University in West Lafayette, Indiana, announced early this week that it has suspended any university-related travel to China, South Korea, Iran, Italy and Japan, which the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention has identified as nations where there's a higher risk for contracting the virus. "The university's public health committee will continue to monitor CDC updates, will take additional steps if any countries are added to the list, and will notify the campus community of any changes to current practice," the university said in a written statement. Northwestern University officials said one of their students was studying abroad in Florence as part of a program out of Syracuse University in New York, which evacuated all students from Italy earlier this week citing the threat of coronavirus. The Northwestern student is returning to the United States to complete her coursework, said Sara Tully, director of the Global Learning Office at Northwestern. She added that the vast majority of Northwestern students study abroad in fall and summer quarters. "We haven't made any decisions about our summer programs yet, and we do have three that take place in China," she said. The University of Chicago has temporarily closed its campus in Hong Kong and center in Beijing, with programming postponed or relocated, and the university has also relocated to London a spring quarter program that was originally based in Hong Kong. "The paramount goal is maintaining the safety of faculty, students, staff and visitors," said University of Chicago spokesman Gerald McSwiggan, adding that the university hopes to resume these programs as soon as conditions allow. Palmeri is one of about 135 University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign students who are studying in Italy this semester. While the university canceled study-abroad programs in China earlier this year, administrators say they haven't taken similar action on programs in Italy. "We continue to monitor State Department and CDC guidelines, and we are prepared to respond if threat levels rise in any area of the world," said university spokeswoman Robin Kaler. Nationwide, a growing number of colleges and universities have recently pulled students out of higher-risk countries due to coronavirus fears. New York University declared earlier this week that it would suspend operations at its campus in Florence and begin holding classes remotely on March 2, urging students to leave Florence, according to a university statement. Florida International University earlier this week immediately restricted any university-related travel to Italy, Singapore, Japan and South Korea; any students or employees on university business in those nations were told to return to the U.S. immediately. As for Palmeri, she says she plans to continue studying in Florence unless her university or host institution advises her to leave. Despite the viral outbreak, she says her time abroad has been "amazing," from dining on pasta and gelato to visiting Renaissance churches and cathedrals. "This isn't the ideal situation and I, of course, wish it wasn't happening the time we are all studying abroad," she said. "I think the only thing we can do at this point is do whatever we can to prevent this virus and be as careful as possible." ---------- eleventis@chicagotribune.com CREDIT: By Angie Leventis Lourgos 
2020-02-25	As the spring break travel season approaches, the continuing spread of coronavirus, including a cluster of cases that emerged in Italy over the weekend, has some travelers questioning whether it's safer to avoid destinations that previously raised few concerns. The vast majority of the 79,331 cases of COVID-19 confirmed worldwide have been in China, where the virus was first reported. But the outbreak's reach is spreading, with cases reported in 29 countries, including dozens of new cases in Italy. U.S. health officials only have warned against travel to mainland China, with lower-level travel advisories for a handful of other destinations in Asia -- not popular spring break destinations like Mexico or the Caribbean. Data from travel app Hopper suggests concerns about the virus aren't keeping travelers home. Searches for flights from the U.S. to international destinations only are down about 3% compared with the first week of January, and most of the decline is driven by reduced demand for trips to China, said Hayley Berg, economist at Hopper. A handful of travelers postponed spring trips to Japan, but few seemed nervous about destinations outside Asia until cases were reported in Italy, said Randy Lynch, CEO of Chicago-based private luxury travel firm Kipling & Clark. "I think most people are in that semi-pause situation," he said. "They want to go, they're just waiting to see what happens." Here's what to consider when planning a trip:  How should travelers decide which destinations to avoid? The World Health Organization and Centers for Disease Control and Prevention have been providing regular updates on the status of cases, and both the CDC and U.S. State Department offer advice on travel to particular destinations. The CDC has recommended avoiding nonessential travel to mainland China and advised older adults and those with chronic medical conditions to consider postponing nonessential travel to Japan and South Korea. The agency issued lower-level travel notices for Hong Kong, Italy and Iran but doesn't currently recommend canceling or delaying trips there. While there's reason to be cautious, travelers shouldn't feel the need to call off a trip today, said Emily Landon, medical director for infection control at the University of Chicago Medical Center. Concerns rise for destinations closer to the center of the outbreak. She advised travelers keep a close eye on updates from health and government officials and decide what level of risk they're comfortable with, taking into account personal factors like whether the traveler or a family member has health issues or works in an environment such as healthcare. "Plan what you want, build in flexibility, and understand what your line is so if something crosses the line of what's acceptable, you can change," Landon said.  Is there a reason to worry about cruises? Any time a lot of people are living in close proximity, it can be easier for illnesses to spread, but that doesn't mean people should avoid cruises, Landon said. She hopes the industry learns from the Diamond Princess in Japan, where a two-week quarantine failed to keep COVID-19 from spreading to hundreds of passengers earlier this month, and the MS Westerdam in Cambodia, which let passengers disembark only to have one later test positive for the virus. Travelers who are concerned about the virus but want to take a cruise should ask how the ship will handle a sick passenger, "and if the plan doesn't make sense, don't get on," she said. About 13% of travel agencies surveyed by Travel Leaders Network earlier this month reported large numbers of cruise cancellations, mostly in China and Asia. "While we are getting inquiries, we are not seeing many cancellations outside of China and Asia," said John Lovell, president of leisure travel, supplier relations and networks at Travel Leaders Group. "Cruise bookings in the Caribbean, Europe and Alaska are solid," he said. "People are not going to give up their vacations or stop traveling."  Should travelers wear masks? Surgical masks are good at keeping someone who's sick from spreading an illness to others, but they aren't as good at protecting the wearer, Landon said. An N95 respirator, which filters out smaller particles, is more effective, if it's used properly. Landon doesn't recommend them unless the traveler has been properly fit for the mask and knows how to keep it clean and avoid contamination. Washing hands regularly, carrying hand sanitizer or sanitizing wipes and avoiding people who are coughing can reduce the risks of picking up an illness, whether COVID-19 or the common flu.  Will insurance cover canceled trips? Trip cancellation policies cover losses associated with trips canceled for specific reasons, and fear of being exposed to an illness is rarely one of them. Only a couple of policies at travel insurance website Squaremouth cover cancellations to areas where the CDC has issued a travel alert, said chief marketing officer Megan Moncrief. Travelers can upgrade to policies that let them cancel a trip for any reason, but premiums can be 40% greater than those on a standard travel insurance package, and they often only cover about 75% of the traveler's losses. In most cases, the policy has to be purchased at the time of booking or shortly thereafter. "Usually it's not a good investment...but there are some situations where it's the only thing they can buy for what they're concerned about," said John Cook, president and CEO of QuoteWright Insurance. Travel insurance packages often will reimburse people for quarantines, but only if the traveler is quarantined, Moncrief said. It doesn't apply if the person intended to travel to a destination where a quarantine has been imposed, though some travel delay policies may cover expenses, like alternate accommodations and meals, if travel restrictions interrupt a trip, she said.  Is there any other way to recover costs? Contact the travel provider to ask about options for postponing a trip or to seek refunds. Local travel agents said some travel companies they work with in Asia are letting travelers postpone trips with no penalty. Downers Grove-based Abercrombie & Kent is allowing customers who've scheduled luxury small group trips to China through April postpone or switch to an alternate trip at no fee, said spokeswoman Jean Fawcett. Jon Davis, of Lincoln Park, said he was able to get a credit for a United Airlines flight to Japan, though he's hoping the airline will agree to a refund. Davis had planned to run the Tokyo Marathon on March 1 but canceled his trip after the race was called off for all but a select group of elite athletes due to concerns about COVID-19. Felicia Edens' family was able to get a refund on a hotel room on Boracay, an island in the Philippines, after she and her husband canceled a trip they'd planned to take earlier this month. But Edens, who lives on Chicago's North Side, said her family wasn't able to recover the cost of their flight, since the insurance they purchased expired. Edens and her husband initially planned to travel as scheduled. They didn't appreciate "the full gravity of the situation" and didn't didn't want her mother, who paid for the trip, to lose money, she wrote in an email. But her mother, who departed early, advised them not to go. "It seemed that there were so many precautionary measures being taken that she didn't want to put us at risk at all or have to deal with anxiety during the trip," she said. ---------- lzumbach@chicagotribune.com CAPTION: Photo: Women wearing protective face masks walk Monday near the closed Duomo cathedral in Milan. It closed following security measures taken in northern Italy against the novel coronavirus. ANDREAS SOLARO/GETTY-AFP CREDIT: By Lauren Zumbach 
