Chinese city where outbreak started plans to test residents Wuhan, the Chinese city where the coronavirus pandemic began, has announced an ambitious plan to test all of its 11 million residents for the virus in the coming days, a campaign that will be closely watched by governments elsewhere. The testing drive, which is likely to require the mobilization of thousands of medical and other workers, shows the ruling Communist Party's resolve to prevent a second wave of infections as it tries to restart China's economy. The plan was announced this week after Wuhan reported six coronavirus cases, breaking a streak of more than a month without any new confirmed infections. The city's goal of testing every resident is unrivaled in the speed at which Wuhan apparently plans to carry it out. Some countries, like South Korea and Germany, have aggressively tested and traced infections, albeit at much lower levels than Wuhan is attempting. In the United States, the rate of testing is still far short of the 3 million to 5 million tests per week that experts say will be necessary to safely reopen the country. Such comprehensive testing poses challenges. It is unclear how Wuhan will procure enough testing kits and process all the samples, and whether such a broad, systematic approach is the best use of resources when the city's infections are low. Early reports had suggested that Wuhan was planning to test all 11 million residents in less than two weeks, citing a government notice that called it a "10-day battle." But even state media reports acknowledged the difficulty of that task.  EU suspends delivery of 10M Chinese masks over quality BRUSSELS -- The European Commission said Thursday it has suspended the delivery of 10 million Chinese masks to member states and Britain after two countries complained about the poor quality of the batches they received. As part of its efforts to tackle the COVID-19 crisis, this month the EU's executive arm started dispatching the masks to health care workers. After 1.5 million masks were shipped to 17 of the 27 member states and Britain, Poland's health minister Lukasz Szumowski said the 600,000 items Polish authorities received did not have European certificates and failed to comply with required medical standards. The whole stock of masks was purchased from a Chinese provider via an EU fund. The masks were to be distributed in installments over a six-week span.  2 men accused in slaying of black man in Ga. hire attorneys DECATUR, Ga. -- Attorneys hired by the two white men accused of pursuing and killing a black man in Georgia said Thursday that their clients have been vilified and cautioned against a rush to judgment in a case that has drawn national attention. Gregory and Travis McMichael, a father and son, are charged with aggravated assault and felony murder in the Feb. 23 death of 25-year-old Ahmaud Arbery. Attorneys Bob Rubin and Jason Sheffield said at a news conference that while the shooting was captured on video, much about events leading up to the deadly confrontation remains unknown. Sheffield called Arbery's death "a tragedy." "Right now we are starting at the end," Sheffield said outside their Atlanta law office.  Trump administration relaxes rules about truck driver hours The Trump administration eased rules Thursday that limit working hours for truck drivers, and the changes brought immediate protests from labor and safety groups. The Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration extended the maximum working day for short-haul drivers from 12 hours to 14 hours and applied the longer hours to more drivers by expanding the geographic definition of short-haul driving. The agency said the changes will save trucking companies more than $2.8 billion over 10 years, will let drivers make more deliveries, and won't compromise safety. The agency did not change the current limit of 11 hours of driving time during a day. Labor leaders and safety advocates argued a longer day will lead to more fatigued drivers.  US offers condolences over deadly Iran incident DUBAI, United Arab Emirates -- The U.S. military offered condolences Thursday to Iran over a friendly fire incident that saw an Iranian missile kill 19 Iranian troops, identifying the weapon that detonated as an anti-ship cruise missile. Iranian authorities on Monday said the missile struck the Iranian navy vessel Konarak on Sunday near the port of Jask, about 790 miles southeast of Tehran in the Gulf of Oman. Fifteen Iranian troops were wounded. In a statement, Capt. Bill Urban, a spokesman for the U.S. Central Command, said the force offered "our sincere condolences to the Iranian people for the tragic loss of life." However, Urban also criticized the training for taking place so close to the Strait of Hormuz, the narrow mouth of the Persian Gulf through which 20% of all oil passes.  New Israeli government swearing-in postponed JERUSALEM -- Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu and his rival-turned-partner, Benny Gantz, on Thursday postponed the swearing-in of their controversial new government as the Israeli leader rushed to quell infighting within his Likud party. In a joint announcement, the men said they would hold a swearing-in ceremony Sunday to allow Netanyahu time to give coveted Cabinet appointments to members of his party. The delay came after three deadlocked and divisive elections and a year and a half of political paralysis. Netanyahu and Gantz, a former military chief, announced last month they would join forces to steer the country through the coronavirus crisis and its severe economic fallout. Netanhayu is scheduled to go on trial this month for corruption charges.  In Canada: The Calgary Zoo will return two giant pandas on loan from China because a scarcity of flights due to COVID-19 has caused problems with getting enough fresh and tasty bamboo to feed them. Er Shun and Da Mao arrived in Calgary in 2018 after five years at the Toronto Zoo and were to remain in Alberta until 2023. The zoo's president, Clement Lanthier, said Thursday that the facility spent months trying to overcome transportation barriers in acquiring fresh bamboo and decided it's best for the animals to be in China, where their main food source is abundant. Bamboo is rare in Canada and they prefer only certain kinds. CAPTION: Photo: Strong waves from Typhoon Vongfong batter houses Thursday in Catbalogan City, Philippines. The storm resulted in tens of thousands of people being evacuated amid the coronavirus outbreak. Nearly 800 have died of COVID-19 in the Philippines. SIMVALE SAYAT/AP CREDIT: Staff and news services 
The packed rush hour train and bus were until recently common features of urban life. But the daily ritual of standing shoulder-to-shoulder with strangers, silently grousing about backpacks while looking down at your phone and waiting for your stop, may not be repeated until the new coronavirus has been eradicated. Ridership has dropped precipitously on Metra, CTA and Pace, as it has on public transportation systems around the country. Just at the CTA, ridership is down 80%. When riders do return -- and that process is expected to take much longer than how fast they fled -- the experience is likely to be different. "The way people commute and the way people use public transit is going to have to dramatically change," CTA President Dorval Carter said. "Employers are really going to have to rethink how they want employees to come to work, when they want employees to come to work, and how flexible they're going to have to be." Among the possibilities: transit agencies altering schedules to avoid crowded trains, buses running frequently throughout the day instead of being concentrated at rush hour, and employers staggering work hours to ease crowding on public transportation, transit experts say. It also could mean, at least temporarily, more cars on the roads, and more people using bikes or scooters to get to work. Former commuters may be afraid of getting back on trains and buses, so transit agencies will have to demonstrate the systems are clean and safe, according to transit experts and officials. The CTA, for instance, is looking at new technologies like ultraviolet light to augment its current cleaning processes. Posters on the CTA remind riders to stay six feet apart. The state also mandates wearing face masks in crowded areas, like public transit. But during Wednesday's CTA board meeting, Carter said the agency "can't police common sense." Riders are responsible for their own safety, he said, and should not board a bus or rail car if it's too crowded. Ridership hasn't declined in the same way everywhere. Metra, which relies heavily on commuters, has seen ridership drop 97%, compared with CTA's 80% and 67% at Pace. Even within the CTA, ridership patterns differ, reflecting demographic differences within Chicago, with many Loop-bound "L" commuters staying home while many essential and lower-income workers still ride transit to work. CTA officials noted that ridership is down 90% on the Brown Line, and at Loop "L" stations, but hasn't dropped as much on South Side "L" routes or on buses, particularly major routes coming from the South and West sides. Crowding still happens on buses, and though the CTA has added buses to create more capacity, it isn't easy to predict when and where it's going to happen, Carter said. The CTA is boarding bus passengers from the rear doors in order to protect bus drivers, and Carter sees that continuing "in the foreseeable future." One way to encourage riders to use transit outside of rush hour is to charge lower fares during off-peak periods, said Audrey Wennink, transportation director for the Metropolitan Planning Council, a research group. While transit agencies have not publicly discussed lowering fares for off-peak weekday hours, CTA is not charging fares on buses that lack Ventra card readers at the rear door. Most buses don't have them, so most bus trips are free. Wennink said cities need to encourage biking. A new public scooter program, still being planned by the city, also could play a role, she said. "We don't want this to be a turning point of more driving, and going backwards in terms of equity and safety and sustainability," Wennink said. Transit agencies and governments also need to make it an easy choice for riders to wear masks, said Ben Fried, communications director for TransitCenter, a New York-based research and advocacy foundation. In Seoul, South Korea, for example, where there has been only a 30-40% drop in transit ridership, buses contain hand sanitizer and mask dispensers. "When the pandemic response is strong and transmission rates are low, the ridership effect is not as severe as we've seen in the U.S.," Fried said. Transit agencies need to make sure they communicate with riders about service changes and how they're keeping the system clean, and get input from riders about what they need, said Kyle Whitehead, spokesman for the Active Transportation Alliance, which advocates for transit riders, bicyclists and pedestrians. While agencies grapple with a path forward, they are dealing with the severe economic consequences of lost ridership. The CTA, Metra and Pace could see almost $1 billion in revenue losses this year, according to the Regional Transportation Authority, the agency that oversees transit budgets. The $2.2 trillion federal Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act is providing $1.4 billion to the RTA, but that may not be enough to cover revenue losses, which transit officials believe will extend into 2021. The American Public Transportation Association sent a letter to Congress last week requesting another $23.8 billion in COVID-19 transit funding to address additional cost and revenue shortfalls. Stephen Schlickman, a transportation funding and finance consultant, said there are two variables for transit going forward -- a fear of COVID-19, which could keep people off transit, and a lack of financial resources to sustain existing levels of transit. He said the CARES Act funding will "barely" get transit through the year unless agencies start to reduce service levels. "If they don't do that, then existing levels for service, with some haircuts, should continue through the summer, but there will be a cliff that they will fall off toward the end of year or early next year," Schlickman said. ---------- mwisniewski@chicagotribune.com CAPTION: Photo: A CTA passenger wearing a face mask exits a train at the Roosevelt station Thursday. JOHN J. KIM/CHICAGO TRIBUNE ; Photo: A CTA passenger wears a face mask to mitigate possible exposure to COVID-19 while waiting for a train at the Washington/Wabash station Thursday in Chicago. JOHN J. KIM/CHICAGO TRIBUNE CREDIT: By Mary Wisniewski 
Younghee Kim opened her apartment door Tuesday to find a small feast: rice, pineapple, ham, a variety of canned goods. "I'm scared to go out," Kim said. "They brought it to me." Kim, 66, lives in the J. Michael Fitzgerald Apartments, a five-story building on North Pulaski Road that houses low-income senior citizens. She ventures out occasionally for groceries at the nearby Aldi, but the long lines make her nervous, and she's noticed that prices, especially for meat, are creeping up and out of her budget. Tuesday's delivery was part of a citywide effort by Chicago members of the Asian American Law Enforcement Association (AALEA), a nonprofit that works to promote understanding, cooperation and cultural awareness between the Asian American community and its law enforcement officers. For the past six weeks, members of the Chicago Police Department, in cooperation with the AALEA, have been picking up food from the Mission of Our Lady of the Angels in West Humboldt Park and delivering it to communities around the city with sizable Chinese, Korean, Thai, Indian, Pakistani, Indonesian, Vietnamese, Lao and Tibetan populations. Officers have been delivering about 70 boxes of food per week to housing complexes and food pantries where they're told the need is strong, particularly among senior citizens. Their stops have included the Hanul Family Alliance, a community based nonprofit that services Korean immigrants, the Chinese American Service League in Chinatown and Zam's Hope community center in Rogers Park. "Our seniors are our most vulnerable population during this pandemic," said Steven Chung, a commander in the Chicago Police Department's 12th District. "Family members may have been bringing food by before this all started, their social networks have decreased, the city services they rely on may have seen reductions. And then you have people looking for something to blame this virus on and, unfortunately, the Asian community has caught the brunt of that." Henry Lai, a Chicago police officer and president of the AALEA, said the food deliveries aim to alleviate the novel coronavirus' economic impact on Chicago's Asian American residents -- many of whom, he said, work at now-shuttered restaurants -- as well as the isolation some of them are experiencing. "Besides being afraid of the virus, some people are afraid they're going to be attacked," Lai said. "We're here to tell them, 'If you ever encounter anything, feel free to give us a call.' Delivering food gives us a chance to check in and make sure they're OK." While the Chicago Police Department hasn't seen an increase in reported hate crimes against Asian Americans this year, Chung said that doesn't necessarily mean they aren't happening. "There's generally been a reluctance in the Asian community to report crime in general," Chung said. "They don't necessarily know if they'll be taken seriously. Sometimes when we look at the numbers, they're not always telling us the whole story." In March, the Asian Pacific Policy and Planning Council and Chinese for Affirmative Action started collecting data on incidents of coronavirus-related racism against Asians. The council's executive director, Manjusha Kulkarni, told the Tribune that more than 400 reports surfaced in less than a week. "We know there's a stigma," Chung said. "You hear it. You feel it." He hopes the officers' presence builds trust and good will, even as it provides some much-needed food. Haley Kim, service coordinator at the J. Michael Fitzgerald Apartments, said Lai emailed her last week to ask if some officers could drop off food boxes for the next two weeks. "It's very helpful to our residents," Haley Kim said. Roughly 50% of the building's 77 residents are Asian, Haley Kim said, and all but one are retired. Many of them don't feel comfortable venturing out to the grocery store, and the building is severely limiting outside visitors. Some residents don't have family nearby. "It's just me," said Younghee Kim, who was born in South Korea and came to the United States in 1991 to attend Northeastern Illinois University. Lai said the food deliveries also fill a space where AALEA's social activities used to be. The 37-year-old organization, which draws members from throughout the Midwest, gathers frequently for volunteer opportunities as well as an annual dinner, where $1,000 scholarships are granted to three high school students in honor of Chong Soo Lim, the first Asian officer killed in the line of duty in Illinois. "A lot of great work is being done by members of the Chicago Police Department, by essential personnel and by members of the community too," Chung said. "These are uncertain times -- nationwide and in our city. We just want to help whoever needs our help, the best we can." I find myself quoting Mr. Rogers' mom a lot lately: "Look for the helpers." In this city, you rarely have to look far. ---------- hstevens@chicagotribune.com CREDIT: Heidi Stevens 
They were mothers and fathers, daughters and sons. Many were proud grandparents. Two were sisters from a tightknit South Side family. All were loved, relatives say, and will be forever missed. As the number of deaths attributable to COVID-19 ticks upward, the Tribune is working to chronicle those who have lost their lives in the Chicago area or who have connections to our region. These are some of those victims. \ ARLOLA RAWLS, 81 Of Chicago, died April 10. In her church and around her neighborhood, Arlola Rawls was known as "Mama Rawls." Rawls had eight children of her own, and raised many of her grandchildren. But she also was a maternal figure to other neighborhood kids, offering love and support to her children's friends who had lost their own mothers. "They would come and just sit and talk to my mom about whatever was going on in their life," Rawls' daughter, Tenesha, said. "She treated them like she treated her own kids." Rawls, 81, died April 10 after contracting COVID-19, her daughter said, leaving behind six of her children and many grandchildren and great-grandchildren. She was known for her weekly Sunday dinners where she would feed more than 30 people with fried chicken and collard greens among many dishes of soul food. People would leave the church commenting that they planned to head to "Mama Rawls' house" for a meal. Rawls would head to her kitchen and begin cooking for hours. "It was like Thanksgiving in our home," Tenesha Rawls said. "Everyone was welcome. She fed everyone." Rawls was born in Mississippi in 1938 and moved to Chicago with two children when she was 17, part of the Great Migration, looking for a better life outside of the South. Spurred by persistent racism and discrimination to leave Mississippi, she still came to live in a heavily segregated city. Rawls, though, loved the hustle and bustle of Chicago. She found a community in her church and her neighborhood. The family settled on the South Side, where, through the years, she raised her family and worked in a factory, as a waitress and in a downtown hotel. "She loved Chicago," Tenesha Rawls said. "She began to call Chicago her home." Tenesha Rawls, who lived with her mother to care for her, took her to the hospital April 4 because she had a fever. Rawls didn't know then that it would be the last time she would see her mother. Arlola Rawls was diagnosed with the virus at the hospital. "I've never left my mom in a hospital by herself before," Tenesha Rawls said tearfully. "This was the hardest thing I've had to do in my life." Rawls was able to talk to her mother on the phone a couple of times. Her mother sounded OK, but Rawls wondered if she was putting on a brave face for her daughter. "She persevered through a lot of things," she said. "She was strong." -- Madeline Buckley  PATRICIA YANNI, 78 Of Geneva. Died May 1. Patricia Yanni wasn't Italian, but she was a good cook and learned to make the Italian delicacies she would teach her daughter to prepare. She had to reinvent herself after her husband died young, and took up square dancing later in life. She wasn't afraid to try new things, her daughter, Kristin Davison, recalled. Yanni, 78, died May 1 at the Bria of Geneva nursing home. She had COVID-19 and other medical conditions, Davison said. Yanni was born in the Bronx in New York City. She met her husband, John, in New York and the two of them loved the city, Davison said. They moved their family, which by then included three children, to the Midwest in the late 1970s, after John graduated from school to become a dental technician. They said they thought the Midwest was a better place to raise children, Davison said. They briefly lived in Indiana before moving to Carol Stream, then to St. Charles. Davison recalled their first winter in Illinois brought the blizzard of 1979. Still, they loved New York and took their family back for visits, Davison said. Yanni worked for a time at Sears, and for many years at Harris Bank in St. Charles. She loved spending time with her family, baking cookies and preparing Italian food that she learned to cook after she married her Italian husband. Davison recalls making pizza with her mother, and baked ziti, lasagna and eggplant Parmesan. Sometimes, her mother and father would even cook calamari. Yanni loved traveling and visited England, but her favorite vacation spot was on a beach, whether in Florida or the Indiana Dunes, Davison said. John died in 1991, at age 50, of pancreatic cancer. Yanni, looking to find herself, eventually took up square dancing, Davison said. "We used to tease her all the time because she had all the outfits," Davison said. "But she had so much fun with that, so that was wonderful to see how much fun she was having." Yanni and Davison became very close, Davison said. Her parents had taught Davison not to rely on others to fix things around the house, and she recalled undertaking a project with her mother to refinish the flooring in her St. Charles home. The two of them stayed awake until 3 a.m., laughing and talking. "She had a great laugh," Davison said. "And a great sense of humor." For the last eight years of her life, Yanni lived at the Bria of Geneva nursing home. She had multiple sclerosis and diabetes, and developed dementia, Davison said. In addition to her husband, Yanni was preceded in death by a child who died as an infant, Davison said. She is survived by three children, seven grandchildren and four great-grandchildren. -- Sarah Freishtat  PATRICK CONRAN, 91 Of Riverside. Died May 3. Twice wounded while fighting in the Korean War, Patrick Conran rarely talked about the harrowing experience or the personal sacrifice his military service demanded. Instead, the two-time Purple Heart recipient returned home to Illinois, where he raised a family, earned a college degree and led a life of quiet service to others. "He was an example of selflessness to all of us," said his daughter Karen Wagner. "He was a humble, honest and generous man, and lived a contented, peaceful life." Conran died May 3, a little more than a week after being hospitalized because of COVID-19. He was 91. Born July 30, 1928, in Chicago to Irish immigrant parents, he grew up on the West Side as the third of seven children. He attended Our Lady of Sorrows Basilica National Shrine grammar school and St. Philip Basilica High School. Conran took a job with Procter & Gamble after graduation and worked there for 43 years, except for a break to serve in the Army. Drafted in March 1951, he arrived in Korea in August and was almost immediately wounded in a battle, according to a Tribune article from the time. Conran rarely discussed the incident with his family, but he provided a first-person account of the experience in the 2005 book "Second to None: Warrior Voices" by Barbara Ann Derksen. According to the book, Conran was among 13 replacement soldiers sent to join G Company on a Korean hill on Aug. 14, 1951. On the night of his arrival, the hill was overrun by the North Korean army and the U.S. soldiers retreated quickly. "I was soon all alone, along a river," he recalled. "I was lost. I passed dead American soldiers lying in the river. While resting on the riverbank, I was spotted by the enemy. He tossed a grenade toward me. Shrapnel hit me in the legs. I fired my M1 in his direction. There was no more action from his area. I don't know if I hit him." Conran said he remained on the bank bleeding for some time, until a fellow American soldier arrived and helped him to safety even as they dodged friendly fire. Conran believed the man's name was "Pinkey," but he was never able to locate him or learn his true identity after that night. According to a Tribune story published in September 1951, the 23-year-old Army private suffered shrapnel wounds to his right foot and back. Conran was the only one of the 13 G Company replacements who survived the skirmish. After spending six weeks in the hospital, Conran returned to action and was injured by shrapnel from a mortar round. He spent three months recovering in a hospital in Japan, where his younger brother and fellow soldier, Thomas, was able to visit him. He returned to Chicago and his job at Procter & Gamble in 1952. Five years later, he married Patricia Cannon, and together they raised four children in the north suburbs. Conran received a business degree from Northwestern University in 1971, taking evening classes while holding down a full-time job and raising a family. The accomplishment caught the attention of his dean. "You must be a superior man to have completed 117 hours of evening study," then-Dean Daniel Lang wrote in a letter to Conran before his graduation. "Many, many times you must have been tempted to drop out -- to take the easy way. But no, you chose to overcome." Conran moved to Riverside in 1986, a few years before he retired from Procter & Gamble. He volunteered countless hours there tending the gardens of St. Mary Catholic Church and singing baritone in the parish choir. In 2005, Cardinal Francis George bestowed the Chicago Archdiocese's Christifideles Award upon Conran for his faithful service to the Church. "It was wonderful to see him be recognized because he was never one to call attention to himself," his daughter said. In addition to volunteering with Meals on Wheels and at local homeless shelters, Conran enjoyed singing in a barbershop choir and attending his grandchildren's myriad activities and milestones. In 2017, his four children joined him on his Chicago Korean War Veterans' Honor Flight to Washington, D.C. The entire family was moved by the experience, which included a visit to the Korean War Veterans Memorial on the National Mall and a hero's homecoming when he landed back at Midway Airport. "It was one of the greatest experiences of his life, I know it was," Wagner said. "It was so incredibly heartwarming to see him treated like a hero everywhere he went." Conran is survived by four children: Karen Wagner, Kevin, Michael and Michele Hunter; 10 grandchildren; and 8 great-grandchildren -- all of whom were able to gather with him on Zoom in the days before he died of the coronavirus. Due to COVID-19 restrictions, a celebration of his life will be held at a date yet to be determined. -- Stacy St. Clair  MARIA LOPEZ, 63 Of Burbank. Died May 4. Every February, Maria Lopez and a group of fellow nurses from the University of Illinois Hospital in Chicago would board a plane to someplace warm. For about a decade, they'd traveled to different locales, including Lopez's beloved Mexico, where she is from. This year, they went to the Dominican Republic. As the group of friends took a dip in the ocean, Lopez, who was recovering from knee surgery, did not go wading. "She'd say, 'That's OK, amiga, next year ... I'm going in,' " said her friend and fellow nurse traveler Mary Ann Zervakis Brent. But "there's not going to be a next year," Zervakis Brent said. Lopez, 63, died May 4 after testing positive for the coronavirus. Her sudden death shocked co-workers, who lovingly referred to her as "amiga" and "mama." "She has an enormous heart of gold," said Zervakis Brent, a nurse anesthetist. "She was like a mama to everybody." Lopez was set to retire April 30. After her knee surgery, she returned to work for one last month, only to get sick. She was a mother to two daughters, and a grandmother to two granddaughters, and every Sunday was a day focused on family. She loved to travel and dance, requesting anything from mariachi music to the Beatles at hospital parties. Even the knee issues didn't stop her. "She just would not stop dancing," said her daughter, also named Maria Lopez. "She would pull up a chair and use it for support and not stop dancing." She was a "lifesaver" not only as a nurse but also for everyone in the family. As the oldest of nine siblings, "basically since she was born, she's been taking care of people," her daughter said. When the younger Maria Lopez was 3 months old, her mom moved to the U.S. from Guadalajara, Mexico. After becoming a nurse in her home country, her mom learned English and became certified in America. At UIC, she worked alongside her brother, Jose Lopez. She was a patient, experienced nurse who worked in robotic surgery for decades, constantly learning and teaching in a growing field that was considered experimental 20 years ago. She assisted surgeons during procedures. "She loves the robot," Zervakis Brent said. "I used to tease her and tell her she liked the robot better than me." When medical teams visited from other countries, it was Lopez they learned from. Ivo Tzvetanov, chief of the division of transplantation at UI Health, said people would quickly realize it was Lopez who was the expert. After speaking with her, they would often send nurses to Chicago to learn from her. "It wouldn't be an exaggeration to say that Maria was probably one of the first and one of the most experienced nurses when it comes to robotics technology in the country," he said. In a profession where he is able to save many patients, said Pier Giulianotti, chief of general surgery and robotics at UI Health, this loss hurts. "I wish I could have done something for her." Fellow UIC nurse Jose Moreno said Lopez defied the stereotype of nurses squabbling with surgeons that people are used to seeing on TV. Instead, she was so beloved that while she was sick, everyone asked about her. "She was one that brought all people together," Moreno said. "She was an incredible, intelligent, hardworking nurse, and that's how she was treated at work by all her colleagues." When Zervakis Brent started at UIC, she was nervous about being the new person. But Lopez quickly enveloped her with her warmth. Year after year, she would invite her to join the trips until she accepted. "She took care of everybody," Zervakis Brent said. "She knew the value of getting people to do their best work by making them happy." After entering the hospital, Lopez was placed in intensive care but seemed to be improving, her daughter Maria Lopez said. She and her sister, Carina Rodriguez, were planning a welcome home party with a banner, balloons, flowers and a home-cooked meal. "She fought to the very end," her daughter said. "If she ever thought that she wasn't going to make it, she didn't express that to us at all." Her daughter is pained that after years of saving for a comfortable retirement, she never made it. But she said her mother set an example of enjoying life to the fullest. "I am happy that she did get to do so much with the life she was given," she said. "She didn't just sit at home and, 'I'm going to work, work, work, work, work, and then when I go on retirement, then I'll go and do my traveling.'" -- Alison Bowen CAPTION: Photo: (Arlola Rawls); Photo: (Patricia Yanni); Photo: (Patrick Conran); Photo: (Maria Lopez) CREDIT: Madeline Buckley, Sarah Freishtat, Stacy St. Clair, Alison Bowen 
The defining characteristic of the current national mood is profound uncertainty. We don't know how widespread the new coronavirus is. We don't know who may have it. The lack of information is a huge obstacle to resuming normal life. Donald Trump has reservations about the expansion of testing for the disease, because it raises the quantity of known infections. "If we did very little testing, we wouldn't have the most cases," he said Wednesday. "So, in a way, by doing all of this testing, we make ourselves look bad." With Trump, of course, optics are everything. In March, he didn't want a cruise ship with some ill passengers to disembark in California because it would boost the number of confirmed U.S. cases. "I like the numbers being where they are," he said. "I don't need to have the numbers double because of one ship that wasn't our fault." It was like trying to cure a fever by breaking the thermometer. This is just one of the many realities that the president doesn't understand about the pandemic. After backtracking on his plan to disband the White House Coronavirus Task Force, he tweeted that it would continue in operation but focus on "safety & opening up our country again" as well as "Vaccines & Therapeutics." What does that leave out? Testing. But a massive expansion of testing is the surest, safest way to speed our return to something resembling life as we knew it. A vaccine could take years to develop, and any big improvements in treatment may require time-consuming clinical trials to ensure safety and effectiveness. But testing could greatly reduce the need for them by greatly reducing transmission. And we know it could be deployed on a vast scale right away because other countries have already done it. The South Korean government responded to the pandemic by pushing private companies to quickly mass-produce test kits. "Korean officials opened 600 testing centers and pioneered the use of drive-through testing stations to reduce face-to-face contact indoors," reported Derek Thompson in The Atlantic, and "these pop-up centers offered patients 10-minute tests without forcing them to leave their cars." The results have been extraordinary. South Korea, with a population of 51 million, has recorded only 256 deaths from the disease -- compared with more than 77,000 in the United States, which has 331 million people. What's more, it achieved this low number without lockdowns -- allowing factories, theaters and restaurants to stay open. Testing is valuable in this fight for two big reasons. The first is that it facilitates the quarantining of everyone who tests positive. The second is that it allows tracing of those with whom they have come in contact, so that they can be tested promptly. But it has another virtue: giving people who test negative the confidence to mingle with others who also test negative. Even if routine dental visits were allowed, Nobel Prize-winning economist Paul Romer explained in an interview with The New Yorker, "I don't want to go back to the dentist's office in New York City until I know that he can show me a recent negative test, and he doesn't want me to come into his office until I can show him that I've got a recent negative test." As soon as both can get tested, they can proceed without much worry. Once tests are easily accessible, the fear of contagion will subside. Friends and relatives will feel comfortable getting together without masks and social distancing. Employees will be more willing to go back to work knowing their co-workers have tested negative. Restaurants, gyms and airlines might be allowed to operate without onerous restrictions by accepting only customers who can show recent confirmation that they are uninfected. This method isn't foolproof, because someone can test negative Monday and contract the virus Tuesday. But frequent testing on a mass scale would greatly reduce the chance that someone would unknowingly expose others. The federal government could come out ahead by putting money into making tests available at low cost to all. The recent shutdowns have cost trillions of dollars in government outlays and lost economic activity. If the federal government spent $100 billion to make tests available, as Romer suggests, it would recoup its investment many times over in a short time. Trump fears that more testing will make him look bad, but he's mistaken. Done enough, it could do him and the rest of us a lot of good. ---------- Steve Chapman, a member of the Tribune Editorial Board, blogs at www.chicagotribune.com/chapman . schapman@chicagotribune.com Twitter @SteveChapman CAPTION: Photo: Medical workers peer out from the tents before the start of coronavirus testing at the Vida Wellness Center in Little Village on Wednesday. ANTONIO PEREZ/CHICAGO TRIBUNE CREDIT: Steve Chapman 
They were mothers and fathers, daughters and sons. Many were proud grandparents. Two were sisters from a tight-knit South Side family. All were loved, relatives say, and will be forever missed. As the number of deaths attributable to COVID-19 ticks upward, the Tribune is working to chronicle those who have lost their lives in the Chicago area or who have connections to our region. These are some of those victims. \ JOHN LARRY SARTAIN, 77 From Des Plaines, died April 18. A gregarious Alabama native who rose each morning at 5 a.m. to read the Bible, John Larry Sartain "always loved to get a rise out of people," his daughter, Nicole Scholpp, recalled. "He had all these funny sayings: 'I'm fine as a froghair,'" Scholpp said. Or, she added, he would stand at the entrance to a Starbucks and say to a person about to enter: "Oh, they're out of coffee." "He just brought laughter into the world," she added. "That's what made him happy." A resident of Chicago's northwest suburbs, Sartain, who was known as Larry, died April 18 at Advocate Lutheran General Hospital in northwest suburban Park Ridge. He was 77. The Cook County medical examiner's office listed acute respiratory failure, a COVID-19 infection and dementia as causes of death. Born in Birmingham, Alabama, in 1942, Sartain moved to Chicago in his late teens or 20s, his daughter said, and settled in the city's Uptown neighborhood. There, he met his future wife of 51 years, Diane. Her parents owned the apartment building where they lived. From separate apartments, the two talked at night, communicating via the windows that faced an air shaft. "And love blossomed," Scholpp said. Sartain served in the U.S. Army in the 1960s. He was stationed in Korea, his family said. Over the years, his daughter said, he held many jobs, including selling State Farm insurance, delivering Dannon yogurt, washing windows and cleaning concrete. He and his wife lived in northwest suburban Des Plaines and in Elk Grove Village. Before his death, his daughter said, Sartain lived in the Generations at Oakton nursing and rehabilitation facility in Des Plaines. In addition to his wife and daughter, survivors include his son, Eric, and three grandchildren. Private services were held at the G.L. Hills Funeral Home in Des Plaines. A longtime fan of the University of Alabama Crimson Tide football team, Sartain was buried at Irving Park Cemetery wearing a camouflage green hat with the red Alabama "A" on the front. -- Blair Kamin  MORRIS LOEB, 90 From Northbrook, died April 7. Morry Loeb lived many lives across almost a century, with the final act of his 90 years landing on his birthday. Loeb was a performer, salesman, family man and executive. He wrote stories and plays. He trained for marathons. In his 80s, he was still heading into the office to mentor young colleagues and every day picking up his newspaper, reading cover to cover. His family said he was endlessly curious, never really finished. "He has lots of interesting stories because he's lived so many different lives," said his daughter Sandra Loeb. Morris Loeb -- known to many as "Morry" -- died April 7 of complications from the coronavirus. It was his 90th birthday. "He always felt like there was something else to experience or to do or to know or to hear about or investigate," his daughter Barbara Loeb said. "He still had an interest in what was going to happen next." In the early 1900s, Morris Loeb's parents emigrated from Russia and Poland. Loeb was born in Milwaukee and grew up on the West Side, attending Marshall High School. With his theatrical knack, Loeb loved making others laugh. He performed at Theater on the Lake and studied at Second City. His daughter Teri Sosa remembers film director William Friedkin casually visiting the apartment. Loeb married early, raised a family and launched into a professional career, starting as a salesman and becoming an executive vice president at United Insurance Company. He settled in Northbrook after his second marriage to Florence Anderson. Between the two marriages, he had three daughters and a son, who preceded him in death. Loeb was so proud of his children and grandchildren and all of their accomplishments, Sandra Loeb said. Her father never pursued an advanced degree, but he was able to watch his daughters become a lawyer, a physician and a professor. "A girl needed to have a profession, he used to say," said Sandra Loeb, an attorney. "That way I could marry whoever I want for love and not be dependent on some schmuck." The daughters said their father was progressive, a believer in equal rights for all people. His left leanings informed his life, Sosa said. He didn't shy from speaking truth to power. "What I really valued about him was the fact that he was just clear as a bell," said Sosa, the professor. "He was just smart as a whip." Her father's intellect was formidable, Sosa said. She delved into the family's genealogy, sharing information with her father about long-forgotten cousins, as well as relatives who were murdered in the Holocaust. Her father seemed curious about each new piece of his past, Sosa said, and wanted to know more. Loeb kept working through his mid-80s. His last job was for AccuQuote, an online insurance company. "At the time, I couldn't understand why someone so overqualified would want to come work for us," his former boss posted on social media. "But he just wanted to be able to have a meaningful way to continue to help people. And that's exactly what he did. Every day. "Honesty, integrity, and character matter," the post continued. "People can feel it. We felt it. His clients felt it. He was smart. He was knowledgeable. He cared. He lived his life following the golden rule, and he was a pleasure to be around. A true mensch. A gentleman. One of the really good guys." In his later years, Loeb kept in touch with his artistic side by participating in a writing group where he pulled from his own experiences to create plays and short stories. He kept attending shows at the Marriott Theatre in Lincolnshire or in the Loop. Sandra Loeb said one of the last shows she remembers seeing with him was "The Book of Mormon." "He loved it," she said. "He laughed louder than anyone in the audience." Morris Loeb also often had a response to whatever was happening on MSNBC. Or with the Bears. Sosa said she remembers visiting her dad when she was living in Philadelphia. "And I started cheering for the Eagles, and he just, oh, he let me have it," Sosa laughed. "Are you kidding me?" he said. "You've just been gone a few years and now you're an Eagles fan?" Now, she wishes there had been more time to say goodbye. "I will just miss the opportunity to know him more," Sosa said. In recent months, Loeb was living at the Warren Barr North Shore rehab facility. Sandra Loeb last saw her father during his brief stay at Highland Park Hospital before the shutdown. Sandra Loeb said she was working on finding a way to get him out of the North Shore facility when she received a call that his fever had spiked. Her father was taken to Glenbrook Hospital, where his condition deteriorated. Barbara Loeb, a doctor, said she worked as the go-between communicator for physicians and her family. The day he died, Barbara Loeb saw a cardinal in her backyard, a visit she saw as a possible sign of comfort. At her father's funeral at Montrose Cemetery, she read a poem about how past generations always find a way to carry forward. "Know that I am always with you," she began, continuing on to a small, masked crowd. "Even when you can no longer hear my voice or know my face. A loving part of you forever." The lilt of bagpipes from the funeral of a Chicago firefighter carried over to Loeb's burial site. "I like to think," the rabbi said, "that Morry, who loved to be the center of attention, perhaps would have appreciated the fanfare that is happening right now." -- Morgan Greene  JOSEPHINE TAPIRU, 56 From Chicago, died April 18. LUIS TAPIRU JR., 20 From Chicago, died April 14. Josephine Tapiru had been pulling extra shifts, working from 9 a.m. until sometimes 11 p.m., because the North Side nursing home was getting more and more short-staffed as co-workers fell ill. She kept a close watch on her temperature: still 98. Fine, she thought. After clocking out on April 3 from Park View Rehab, Tapiru told a friend her throat was getting sore and she was coughing. She stopped at a drug store, picked up a bottle of NyQuil and went to bed as soon as she got home. Sometime that night, she slipped into a coma. The world's novel coronavirus was beginning to take its terrible toll on her family. Tapiru was taken to the intensive care unit at St. Francis Hospital in Evanston. Her husband, Luis Tapiru Sr., would be admitted there within a week. Four days later, on April 14, their 20-year-old son Luis Tapiru Jr. was found dead on the couch of their home. Four more days passed and Josephine Tapiru died, too, without coming out of her coma. Friends and family waited nearly a week, when Luis Sr. was finally removed from a ventilator, to tell him about the deaths of his wife and son. The couple's lone surviving son watched the tragedy unfold from Ottawa, Canada, where most of his close friends and relatives live. "I can't be there right now, and that's the toughest thing,'' Justin Tapiru, 28, said April 24. "They were feeling fine. I haven't had time to think or grieve.'' His brother is one of the youngest people in Illinois to die from the disease. Luis Jr. had played football at Senn High School and seemed healthy, family and friends said. An autopsy found no underlying medical conditions that contributed to his death from COVID-19, a rare finding for someone so young. Josephine Tapiru had suffered from endometrial cancer, and it was listed as a contributing factor in her death, according to the Cook County medical examiner's office. She was 56. She and her husband had both worked as caregivers, in private homes and at long-term senior centers, though Luis Sr. had recently been working for a manufacturing company. Josephine Tapiru, a licensed practical nurse, worked at Park View Rehab in Edgewater, a short drive from the family's high-rise apartment, according to the family. "Good Jesus, it is really hard," said Josephine Tapiru's best friend, Joselyn Smith, crying. "I'm still denying it. But we have to move on. So we have to fight and move on. But it's just hard. I feel like I'm in a trance, that this is not so true. It's a big loss. It really happened so fast.'' On March 21, Josephine Tapiru was looking forward to her regular weekend chat with Smith. Catching up after a busy week was always fun, but this time she shared some disturbing news. "She was really so upset because one of her office mates was showing some symptoms of the virus,'' Smith said. "She was mad.'' Under state health guidelines, you were not supposed to work if you felt ill. "She was scared to death,'' said another close friend, Donna Oduca. Workers at the senior center wore masks, she said, but Tapiru was still worried. On April 1, Tapiru told friends that she was getting more and more worried as others on the staff called in sick and she was working longer hours. On the morning of April 4, her husband and son Luis Jr. went to work and assumed she was sleeping in because she had worked so late the night before. They checked in later in the day, but she didn't pick up the phone. Sometime after lunch, Luis Jr. called his father and rushed home to check on her. "My mom won't wake up,'' he frantically told Oduca, also a nurse, who lives nearby. "Call 911,'' she told him as she headed to the Tapirus' seventh-floor apartment in the 6800 block of North Kedzie Avenue. Using his CPR training from a job as a camp counselor, the son began chest compressions as Oduca walked in wearing "full PPE,'' she said. Josephine Tapiru remained unconscious as she was taken to St. Francis Hospital. The next day, the hospital called to say she had tested positive for COVID-19 and was on life support. "That was so sad,'' Oduca said. Luis Sr. began feeling ill on April 5. "Hey, I'm not feeling better,'' he told Oduca on April 10. Later that day, he was also taken to St. Francis and placed on a ventilator as he, too, tested positive for the virus. Oduca and her husband, Cezar, along with other friends and relatives, kept in close contact with Luis Jr., who remained at the family's home, and Justin. But they soon had trouble reaching Luis Jr. Normally, he would always text or call back. On April 14, Oduca and her husband called 911. A few minutes later, police called back. "They just said they found him on the couch, and he passed on,'' Oduca said. Four days later, on April 18, Josephine Tapiru was pronounced dead at St. Francis Hospital. For days, family kept the news of the deaths from Luis Sr., who remained on a ventilator and was not allowed visitors. Terrified he would find out on his own, Justin said he broke the news to his father on April 23 via video hook-up while his father was with a chaplain, a doctor and a nurse. Justin Tapiru says he will miss his little brother's maturity. "He was more of a big brother to me,'' he said. "When my mom got sick, I was sad and freaking out. I was in shock ... and Luis said: 'You know what? She's going to pull through this. She's the strongest woman we know.' His dream was to become a full-time Twitch streamer. But he had a backup plan: He would get a degree in communications. He loved pop music and electronic dance music. One of his favorite groups was Twice. He loved singing and even auditioned for "The Voice'' a few times, Justin said. He would have turned 21 in June. The brothers never got the chance to make birthday plans. Josephine and Luis Tapiru met in the Philippines and moved to Canada, where they both worked as caregivers. About 13 years ago, they moved to Chicago because "they wanted a better opportunity,'' Donna Oduca said. Both were praised in local obituaries for the care they gave to the elderly. Smith said she was like a sister, watching out for her and Oduca. "We were like the Three Stooges,'' she said. Smith, 45, an accountant who is working from home these days, recalled the first few weeks of the stay-at-home order. Josephine Tapiru would call her during her commute and say, "Be careful. Nobody's out here. It's scary outside. It's like a ghost town.'' -- Rosemary Sobol CAPTION: Photo: (John Larry Sartain) FAMILY PHOTO ; Photo: (Morris Loeb) FAMILY PHOTO ; Photo: (Josephine Tapiru) DONNA ODUCA ; Photo: (Luis Tapiru Jr.) DONNA ODUCA CREDIT: Blair Kamin, Morgan Greene, Rosemary Sobol 
Before the traditional May 1 deadline to decide where she would go to college, Tiffany Tang had four schools to choose from. Then on Tuesday, UCLA emailed to offer her a spot off the waitlist. That evening, she received a call from a Houston area code -- an admissions officer from Rice. The next day, Cornell got in touch. Shaken by economic hardship, health fears and uncertainty about when campuses will reopen, a large number of high school seniors appear to be putting off a decision about where to go to college in the fall -- or whether to go at all. Admissions officers are reluctant to admit weakness, meaning there is little hard data at this point. But there are clear signs of concern about plummeting enrollment and lost revenue. Of some 700 universities with a May 1 acceptance deadline, which include many of the country's most competitive, about half have given students an extra month to decide, said Marie Bigham, founder of Accept, a college admissions reform group. Some schools are waiving deposit requirements, particularly for foreign students, who are especially valuable to universities because most pay full tuition. And experts say the number of wait-listed students who are getting offers shows that even some of the most selective schools are acting more aggressively to fill freshman classes. "People are coming off waitlists all over the place right now," said Debra Felix, a former admissions director at Columbia University who runs her own student advising service. Many students said they did not want to make a decision about the fall until they knew for sure whether campuses would reopen. Johnny Kennevan, a senior at Seneca High School in Tabernacle, New Jersey, was recruited to play basketball at York College in Pennsylvania. But his plans would likely change if the campus is still closed, he said. "It doesn't make sense to pay 20 grand to sit at my computer at home and take online courses," he said. "You can get the same education from a community college." The coronavirus pandemic hit at a time when American higher education, which employs about 3 million people nationwide, was suffering from a host of financial problems. Many liberal arts colleges have struggled to meet enrollment goals in recent years because of rising tuition costs, concerns about student debt and a shrinking population of young people. Since mid-March, when colleges abruptly shut down campus operations and moved to online learning, schools have announced hundreds of millions of dollars in losses and say that a $14 billion federal aid package will not be nearly enough to keep struggling schools afloat. Executives have taken pay cuts, endowments have shrunk, hiring has been frozen, and construction projects have stopped. But experts say that is only the beginning if schools cannot persuade students to return in the fall, when many campuses are bracing for the possibility that online learning could continue. Eric Nichols, the vice president of enrollment at Loyola University Maryland, a liberal arts college in Baltimore, said that he was getting questions from students about how to defer their acceptance or take a gap year and how long they can take to decide. "We think a lot of students won't have made up their minds even by the summer," he said. Universities are likely to be accommodating, Nichols said, because they would like a commitment, even if it is deferred. At the same time, if deferments start to affect the bottom line, schools might have to refuse. "It's honestly an issue that's never been a problem before," he said, "but this is uncharted territory, so we'll see." Colleges are particularly concerned about the loss of foreign students kept away by travel restrictions or a reluctance to leave their home countries during the pandemic. Indiana University's Bloomington campus has long been a popular choice for students from China, India and South Korea. But international enrollment deposits are lagging 22% behind the same time period in previous years, said John Wilkerson, the university's executive director of international admissions, although he cautioned that international students usually wait until the last minute to decide. Like many schools hoping that another month will help, Indiana University extended its acceptance deadline to June 1. And for international students, it has waived the enrollment deposit and made housing application fees refundable. For Tang, the high school senior who lives outside Albany, New York, and heard from three colleges where she was wait-listed it is some consolation that she can now choose between so many colleges. "Where I've imagined myself going for the past two months has just changed within, like, just two days," she said. CAPTION: Photo: While choosing from four schools, Tiffany Tang, of Loudonville, New York, was recently offered college admission off waitlists from UCLA, Rice and Cornell. SASHA MASLOV/THE NEW YORK TIMES CREDIT: By Anemona Hartocollis and Dan Levin, Dan Levin, The New York Times 
US allows use of experimental drug to aid in virus recovery WASHINGTON -- U.S. regulators on Friday allowed emergency use of an experimental drug that appears to help some coronavirus patients recover faster. It is the first drug shown to help fight COVID-19, which has killed more than 237,000 people worldwide. The FDA said that Gilead Science's intravenous drug would be specifically indicated for hospitalized patients with "severe disease," such as those experiencing breathing problems requiring supplemental oxygen or ventilators. The FDA acted after preliminary results from a government-sponsored study showed that remdesivir shortened the time to recovery by 31% for hospitalized COVID-19 patients. The study of 1,063 patients is the largest and most strict test of the drug and included a comparison group that received just usual care so remdesivir's effects could be rigorously evaluated. Those given the drug were able to leave the hospital in 11 days on average versus 15 days for the comparison group. The FDA said that performance warranted Friday's decision, though regulators acknowledged "there is limited information known about the safety and effectiveness of using remdesivir." The drug's side effects include potential inflammation of the liver and problems related to its infusion, which could lead to nausea, vomiting, sweating and low blood pressure. The National Institutes of Health's Dr. Anthony Fauci said this week the drug would become a new standard of care for severely ill COVID-19 patients.  Duchess of Sussex dealt setback in lawsuit against newspaper LONDON -- The Duchess of Sussex lost an early round in a London court Friday when a judge dismissed part of her lawsuit against a British newspaper publisher that put out excerpts of a letter to her estranged father. Meghan sued Associated Newspapers for invasion of privacy and copyright infringement last year over articles in the Mail on Sunday that reproduced parts of the letter she wrote in August 2018 after the former actress known as Meghan Markle married Britain's Prince Harry. Judge Mark Warby threw out some of the causes of action argued in her lawsuit, including the claim that the newspaper publisher acted "dishonestly." Warby also struck the claim that Associated Newspapers deliberately "stirred up" a dispute between Meghan and her father, Thomas Markle.  NKorea report: Kim Jong Un makes public appearance SEOUL, South Korea -- North Korean state media says leader Kim Jong Un has made his first public appearance in 20 days. The Korean Central News Agency said Saturday that he attended a ceremony marking the completion of a fertilizer factory near the capital of Pyongyang. Photos from the ceremony weren't immediately released. Kim Jong Un was last seen during a ruling party meeting on April 11 to discuss coronavirus prevention. Speculation about his health swirled after he missed the April 15 celebration of the birthday of his late grandfather and state founder, Kim Il Sung. South Korea's government had downplayed rumors and unconfirmed reports that Kim was in poor health following a medical procedure.  NASA administrator urges launch spectators to stay home CAPE CANAVERAL, Fla. -- NASA and SpaceX on Friday urged spectators to stay home for the first home launch of astronauts in nearly a decade because of the pandemic. Top officials warned the public against traveling to Florida for the May 27 launch of two NASA astronauts aboard a SpaceX rocket to the International Space Station. For shuttle launches, hundreds of thousands of spectators descend on Kennedy Space Center and nearby beaches, said NASA Administrator Jim Bridenstine. "The challenge that we're up against right now is we want to keep everybody safe," he said. "And so we're asking people not to travel to the Kennedy Space Center." Bridenstine urged the public to watch the launch online or on TV from home.  Prison delayed for 2 in college bribery scandal An heir to the Hot Pockets fortune and a former investment executive who participated in the college admissions cheating scheme won't get to serve their punishments at home, but they can delay going to prison until this summer because of the pandemic, a judge has ruled. Michelle Janavs, whose family invented Hot Pockets, and Douglas Hodge, the ex-CEO of Pacific Investment Management Co., can remain free until at least June 30, U.S. District Judge Nathaniel Gorton ruled Thursday. Gorton denied their requests for home confinement, saying he will "not forfeit his obligation to impose a sentence that is warranted by a defendant's criminal conduct" despite the "evolving cause of concern" posed by COVID-19. Lawyers for Janavs and Hodge had argued it's too dangerous to send them to prison.  Lawsuit: DOE continued to garnish wages after order The U.S. Education Department has continued to garnish wages from workers who are behind on their student loan payments even after Congress ordered the agency to suspend the practice during the pandemic, a new lawsuit charges. The complaint, filed Thursday in federal court in Washington, alleges that thousands of workers are getting up to 15% of their pay held back because the Education Department failed to notify employers that they must stop withholding pay. It was filed by consumer and student advocacy groups on behalf of Elizabeth Barber, a 59-year-old home health aide in New York, and any others who have lost wages during the crisis. The department declined to comment on the lawsuit but said it has taken immediate action to halt garnishments.  In Honduras: References to the Honduran president appear throughout U.S. prosecutors' statements announcing drug trafficking charges against the former chief of Honduras' national police this week. For months, the U.S. Attorney's Office in Manhattan has been signaling that the ultimate objective of years of investigation and methodically built cases could be President Juan Orlando Hernandez. The president's brother, Tony Hernandez, has already been convicted and is awaiting sentencing next month. The president has always denied any ties to drug trafficking and did so again late Thursday, though most Hondurans long ago wrote off their president as corrupt. CAPTION: Photo: Pepper, a robot wearing a white surgical mask, greets Tokyo Gov. Yuriko Koike on Friday in the lobby of a hotel repurposed for mildly sick coronavirus patients. The switch is part of a new plan to free up beds at hospitals overburdened with more severe cases. EUGENE HOSHIKO/AP CREDIT: Staff and news services 
One of the key conditions Gov. J.B. Pritzker says must be met before Illinois can lift its stay-at-home order is a comprehensive way to track, warn and quarantine everyone who has had significant contact with newly diagnosed COVID-19 patients. "Contact tracing is one of the most critical tools that we have to reduce our spread rate, speed up our diagnoses and seek to halt outbreaks before they happen," the governor said Friday during his daily briefing. But state, Chicago and Cook County public health leaders concede they're not yet ready to fully roll out a coronavirus contact tracing system. The big problems to solve? Finding enough workers and putting technology in place. Dr. Ngozi Ezike, director of the Illinois Department of Public Health, cited estimates that there need to be 30 contact tracers for every 100,000 people. That means more than 3,800 interviewers to handle the data, sleuthing and legwork necessary to trace contacts on the unprecedented scale needed during a pandemic caused by such a virulent disease. The city can't say how many people it has on the job, with officials noting there are people working on it from different divisions within the Chicago Department of Public Health and its health care allies. The county, meanwhile, says it has 29 people devoted to the effort but will need at least 300 to cover more than 2 million residents spread over 700 square miles of suburban Cook. And so state public health officials say the goal is for "some portion" of the program to be in place by late May, the current expiration date on Pritzker's stay-at-home order. "We don't necessarily have to have all of it by then," said Dr. Wayne Duffus, the acting state epidemiologist. The priority will be "critical areas," including nursing homes, long-term care facilities, prisons and jails, he said. Beyond that, the state is working on a standardized hiring process, an online training program and a computer app to help track cases and contacts, Duffus said. The bulk of public health system work in Illinois is done at the local level, so the state envisions its role as being "an operations manager" for contact tracing at the 97 county and regional health departments. Pritzker on Friday estimated the cost of the effort at $80 million. National experts agree that contact tracing is essential if states are to avoid another surge in COVID-19 cases and an overwhelming flood of patients into hospitals. Tools are limited to slow the virus's spread before the nation develops therapies and a vaccine, but social distancing remains effective, said Anita Cicero, deputy director of the Johns Hopkins Center for Health Security. "But as communities and economies need to relax some of those social distancing restrictions, testing and tracing the cases is the tool that we have right now that will be effective," she added. "And if communities aren't able to isolate the sick and quarantine those who are exposed, then rapid community spread is probably likely to increase again, which would bring us back to requiring the strict physical distancing measures."  What is contact tracing? Contact tracing in the U.S. dates back to at least the early 20th century, when it was used to limit the spread of communicable diseases such as smallpox and tuberculosis. Since then, it's been employed to control other scourges, including sexually transmitted diseases, measles and Ebola. The practice has been credited with limiting the spread of COVID-19 in other countries that quickly turned to the approach. That includes South Korea and Singapore, where the government used digital surveillance and enforcement methods that likely would meet stiff resistance here from privacy and freedom advocates. "So many diseases are highly communicable," said Dr. Jennifer Layden, chief medical officer for the Chicago Department of Public Health. "So contact investigations are part of the public health bread and butter." Here's how it works: When a confirmed case of COVID-19 is reported to the state, a contact tracer tracks down the sick person, or their relatives when the person is too ill to talk or has died from the disease. The interviewer tells them the patient should be isolated at home until they no longer are believed to be contagious. Sometimes, if the person doesn't have the capability to isolate on their own, they refer them to social service agencies that can help find alternative housing and delivery of food, medicine or health care services. The interviewer tries to determine who the patient had contact with up to two weeks prior to symptom onset. In some cases, a person may have no symptoms at all, making that calculation more difficult. The tracers then track down those contacts and attempt to speak with them. They suggest precautions to avoid spreading the disease and ask them to quarantine at home for two weeks from the time of contact with the infected person, or if they are sick, until they have fully recovered. Ideally, the tracers also would track down the contacts of everyone who is presumptively diagnosed with COVID-19, given that person could be spreading SARS-CoV-2 -- the virus that causes the disease -- before a test confirms they actually have it, experts said. "At the very first hint of somebody being ill, they need to immediately be put into isolation, even while they are awaiting their test results," said Dr. Rachel Rubin, the county public health department's senior medical officer. "Even if they did a test that went off to a lab, they can't even wait that two days to 10 days of getting that result, because in that intervening time when they are just beginning to get sick is when they are infecting everybody around them." Tracing work takes time, requires empathy and social skills, and can be emotionally taxing. "We're asking people to kind of recount stories that they have probably already told other physicians before, and sometimes we're asking family members to recount how their loved ones died," said Dr. Chen Wang, a preventive medicine fellow for the county health department who has been tracking down cases for a couple of months. "I've had cases where I called the phone number of that person who has passed away and I speak with their spouse. And their wife says, 'This was my husband I had been with for 60 years, and the longest time we every spent apart were those days that he was in the hospital.' And now the surviving spouse is back in their home alone." Despite the anxiety that can be involved, nearly everyone is cooperative with the efforts, Wang added. "People recognize that we're all in this together, and everyone has something that they can contribute," she said.  Efforts underway Pritzker and Illinois officials have looked to Massachusetts' partnership with global health nonprofit Partners In Health as a model. That northeastern state -- with a little more than half the population of Illinois but more COVID-19 cases and deaths, is deploying 1,000 contact workers. Johns Hopkins experts say even that likely won't be enough. Duffus, acting state epidemiologist, said one particular aspect of the Massachusetts program that he would like to implement in Illinois is the use of resource coordinators. Those workers are tasked with making sure people who test positive for COVID-19 have the food, medications and services they need to be able to self-isolate. "A resource coordinator is going to be crucial to the success of this because we can ask people to do things, but if their needs are not met, it's going to be very difficult for them," he said. Not all of the contact tracers would need a background in medicine or public health, Duffus said. They should be hired locally because they will have an easier time establishing trust with the people who they call, he added. The state also is looking at the use of technology to help with case tracking, with the possibility of an online application that would let people enter their symptoms and contacts so that workers can follow those leads. Illinois has been without a permanent state epidemiologist since Layden resigned at the end of February to become the city's chief medical officer. Duffus, a senior medical adviser in the Division of Global HIV and TB at the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, arrived April 5. At the time, the state had reported more than 11,000 known cases of COVID-19 and 274 deaths. Ezike said that there was no downtime because Illinois' public health department was covered by epidemiologists who have been CDC-trained and are longtime infectious disease experts. Chicago has been doing some contact tracing since the initial outbreak. But it has had to pick and choose what to focus on because of limited resources. "Certainly congregate settings where we're seeing a high level of spread, and that would be long-term care facilities, public shelters, jails, those outbreaks that are reported to us ... in a workplace are priorities," Layden said. "But we are really striving to get to a point -- I mean where there's review of the data and there's investigation into every case -- to the point where we are thoroughly investigating all the contacts is something we are striving to do," she said. The city is working to build partnerships with community health workers, students and others to expand the ranks of contact tracers, so when cases eventually decline they can work to prevent another flare-up, Layden added. Like the state, Chicago is searching for ways that technology might make the job easier and more efficient. While rolling out the Chi COVID Coach app, Dr. Allison Arwady, the city's public health commissioner, said city officials were looking at the possibility of using it to help track contacts and send warnings to contacts via text when someone contracts the virus. Cook County has focused its 29 contact tracers on nursing homes and group homes, as well as hospitalized patients, said Rubin, the health department's senior medical officer. When the surge starts to decline, the program will need to expand, she added. Rubin also said testing is not yet as widespread, quick and accurate as necessary to detect cases early, when a patient may be most contagious. And there needs to be a more thorough system for reporting test results to the state because not all health care providers are doing that, she said. "Once we reach a point where we can start doing more contact tracing, we really will need to ramp it up, because we want to stop that next surge ... from being as high and as steep," Rubin said.  A 'near miss' A Johns Hopkins study concluded the nation needs about 100,000 contact tracers, with more than 3,800 in Illinois. But Crystal Watson, the report's lead author, warned that "we also shouldn't delay in conducting tracing until we have a perfect testing system." In Chicago, Howard Brown Health has been doing contact tracing from the start. It was a natural for the nonprofit organization, which serves the LGBTQ community and other groups that face health care disparities. For many years, the organization has been contact tracing for sexually transmitted diseases, including AIDS, said Dr. John Schneider, an infectious disease specialist affiliated with the University of Chicago. Since early March, Howard Brown Health has interviewed about 300 people with COVID-19 and reached out to as many as 1,200 of their contacts. Schneider makes many of those calls, and described one situation that he described as "a near miss" where intervention may have come too late. He was talking to a woman who had COVID-19 and lived at home with her husband, son and daughter. Everyone but the daughter had become sick, so they sent her to live with relatives, including her grandparents. By the time she was tested -- and found to be infected with the virus despite having no symptoms -- the disease already had spread to others in her temporary home. "If I could have gotten to her three days earlier ... then I could have said, 'The daughter needs to stay home, keep her in a different room if asymptomatic, that's fine, but no one should be going to the grandparents right now,'" Schneider said. The case illustrates the need for doing contact tracing from the very moment of diagnosis, possibly at the lab where the person went for the test. Like the governor and the experts, Schneider believes contact tracing will be crucial to prevent or limit future outbreaks after the number of cases in the current surge diminishes. "We're entering a phase where it's really important, because then it starts to become more manageable, and then it has implications for keeping things open, keeping families healthy," he said. ---------- hdardick@chicagotribune.com dpetrella@chicagotribune.com CAPTION: Photo: Dr. John Schneider, a specialist affiliated with the University of Chicago, works Thursdayat the Howard Brown Health clinic. ANTONIO PEREZ/CHICAGO TRIBUNE CREDIT: By Hal Dardick and Dan Petrella 
US allows use of experimental drug to aid in virus recovery WASHINGTON -- U.S. regulators on Friday allowed emergency use of an experimental drug that appears to help some coronavirus patients recover faster. It is the first drug shown to help fight COVID-19, which has killed more than 237,000 people worldwide. The FDA said that Gilead Science's intravenous drug would be specifically indicated for hospitalized patients with "severe disease," such as those experiencing breathing problems requiring supplemental oxygen or ventilators. The FDA acted after preliminary results from a government-sponsored study showed that remdesivir shortened the time to recovery by 31% for hospitalized COVID-19 patients. The study of 1,063 patients is the largest and most strict test of the drug and included a comparison group that received just usual care so remdesivir's effects could be rigorously evaluated. Those given the drug were able to leave the hospital in 11 days on average versus 15 days for the comparison group. The FDA said that performance warranted Friday's decision, though regulators acknowledged "there is limited information known about the safety and effectiveness of using remdesivir." The drug's side effects include potential inflammation of the liver and problems related to its infusion, which could lead to nausea, vomiting, sweating and low blood pressure. The National Institutes of Health's Dr. Anthony Fauci said this week the drug would become a new standard of care for severely ill COVID-19 patients.  Duchess of Sussex dealt setback in lawsuit against newspaper LONDON -- The Duchess of Sussex lost an early round in a London court Friday when a judge dismissed part of her lawsuit against a British newspaper publisher that put out excerpts of a letter to her estranged father. Meghan sued Associated Newspapers for invasion of privacy and copyright infringement last year over articles in the Mail on Sunday that reproduced parts of the letter she wrote in August 2018 after the former actress known as Meghan Markle married Britain's Prince Harry. Judge Mark Warby threw out some of the causes of action argued in her lawsuit, including the claim that the newspaper publisher acted "dishonestly." Warby also struck the claim that Associated Newspapers deliberately "stirred up" a dispute between Meghan and her father, Thomas Markle.  NKorea report: Kim Jong Un makes public appearance SEOUL, South Korea -- North Korean state media says leader Kim Jong Un has made his first public appearance in 20 days. The Korean Central News Agency said Saturday that he attended a ceremony marking the completion of a fertilizer factory near the capital of Pyongyang. Photos from the ceremony weren't immediately released. Kim Jong Un was last seen during a ruling party meeting on April 11 to discuss coronavirus prevention. Speculation about his health swirled after he missed the April 15 celebration of the birthday of his late grandfather and state founder, Kim Il Sung. South Korea's government had downplayed rumors and unconfirmed reports that Kim was in poor health following a medical procedure.  NASA administrator urges launch spectators to stay home CAPE CANAVERAL, Fla. -- NASA and SpaceX on Friday urged spectators to stay home for the first home launch of astronauts in nearly a decade because of the pandemic. Top officials warned the public against traveling to Florida for the May 27 launch of two NASA astronauts aboard a SpaceX rocket to the International Space Station. For shuttle launches, hundreds of thousands of spectators descend on Kennedy Space Center and nearby beaches, said NASA Administrator Jim Bridenstine. "The challenge that we're up against right now is we want to keep everybody safe," he said. "And so we're asking people not to travel to the Kennedy Space Center." Bridenstine urged the public to watch the launch online or on TV from home.  Prison delayed for 2 in college bribery scandal An heir to the Hot Pockets fortune and a former investment executive who participated in the college admissions cheating scheme won't get to serve their punishments at home, but they can delay going to prison until this summer because of the pandemic, a judge has ruled. Michelle Janavs, whose family invented Hot Pockets, and Douglas Hodge, the ex-CEO of Pacific Investment Management Co., can remain free until at least June 30, U.S. District Judge Nathaniel Gorton ruled Thursday. Gorton denied their requests for home confinement, saying he will "not forfeit his obligation to impose a sentence that is warranted by a defendant's criminal conduct" despite the "evolving cause of concern" posed by COVID-19. Lawyers for Janavs and Hodge had argued it's too dangerous to send them to prison.  Lawsuit: DOE continued to garnish wages after order The U.S. Education Department has continued to garnish wages from workers who are behind on their student loan payments even after Congress ordered the agency to suspend the practice during the pandemic, a new lawsuit charges. The complaint, filed Thursday in federal court in Washington, alleges that thousands of workers are getting up to 15% of their pay held back because the Education Department failed to notify employers that they must stop withholding pay. It was filed by consumer and student advocacy groups on behalf of Elizabeth Barber, a 59-year-old home health aide in New York, and any others who have lost wages during the crisis. The department declined to comment on the lawsuit but said it has taken immediate action to halt garnishments.  In Honduras: References to the Honduran president appear throughout U.S. prosecutors' statements announcing drug trafficking charges against the former chief of Honduras' national police this week. For months, the U.S. Attorney's Office in Manhattan has been signaling that the ultimate objective of years of investigation and methodically built cases could be President Juan Orlando Hernandez. The president's brother, Tony Hernandez, has already been convicted and is awaiting sentencing next month. The president has always denied any ties to drug trafficking and did so again late Thursday, though most Hondurans long ago wrote off their president as corrupt. CAPTION: Photo: Pepper, a robot wearing a white surgical mask, greets Tokyo Gov. Yuriko Koike on Friday in the lobby of a hotel repurposed for mildly sick coronavirus patients. The switch is part of a new plan to free up beds at hospitals overburdened with more severe cases. EUGENE HOSHIKO/AP CREDIT: Staff and news services 
Canadian police say 22 victims after rampage in Nova Scotia TORONTO -- Canadian police said Tuesday they believe there are at least 22 victims after a gunman wearing a police uniform shot people in their homes and set fires in a rampage across rural communities in Nova Scotia over the weekend. The Royal Canadian Mounted Police said they have recovered remains from some of the destroyed homes. Earlier, authorities had said at least 18 were killed in the 12-hour attack. Officials said the suspect, identified as 51-year-old Gabriel Wortman, was shot and later died Sunday. Authorities did not give a motive for the killings. The dead include a 17-year-old as well as a police officer, a police news release said. All the other victims were adults and included both men and women. There were 16 different crime scenes in five different communities in northern and central Nova Scotia, it said. "Some of the victims were known to Gabriel Wortman and were targeted while others were not known to him," the police statement said. Authorities also confirmed Wortman was wearing an authentic police uniform and one of the cars he used "was a very real look-alike RCMP vehicle." "This is an unprecedented incident that has resulted in incredible loss and heartbreak for countless families and loved ones. So many lives will be forever touched," the police statement said. In an earlier news release authorities had said they believed there were 23 victims but Royal Canadian Mounted Police spokesman Daniel Brien later clarified the death toll included 22 victims and the gunman.  S. Korea downplays concerns over health of Kim Jong Un SEOUL, South Korea -- South Korean officials reported no unusual activity in North Korea on Tuesday following unconfirmed media reports that leader Kim Jong Un was in fragile health after surgery. But the possibility of high-level instability raised troubling questions about the future of a nuclear-armed state that has been steadily building an arsenal meant to threaten the U.S. mainland amid stalled talks between Kim and U.S. President Donald Trump. South Korea's presidential office said Kim appeared to be handling state affairs as usual and it had no information about rumors regarding his health. But many will be watching closely for any signs of trouble in North Korea, and whether it will address the reports -- something it has not yet done.  Dutch court OKs euthanasia in advanced dementia cases THE HAGUE, Netherlands -- The Netherlands' highest court ruled Tuesday that doctors can carry out euthanasia in patients with advanced dementia if the patient has earlier made a written directive. The Supreme Court ruling solidifies in law a practice that already was being carried out on rare occasions in the Netherlands. Dutch euthanasia advocacy group NVVE welcomed the ruling, saying in a statement that the decision should help doctors "to feel strengthened and supported if they want to carry out euthanasia on a patient with dementia." The case before the Supreme Court revolved around a district court's acquittal from last year of a doctor who in 2016 carried out a directive for euthanasia on a 74-year-old woman.  Former UCLA soccer coach to plead guilty in admissions scam The former University of California, Los Angeles men's soccer coach will plead guilty to taking $200,000 in bribes as part of the college admissions cheating scheme, federal prosecutors said Tuesday. Jorge Salcedo, 47, of Los Angeles, will admit to getting bribes in exchange for helping get one male and one female student into the school as fake soccer recruits. He will plead guilty to a racketeering conspiracy charge, according to court documents. Salcedo was among 50 charged last year in the case that has embroiled the world of higher education. More than 30 wealthy parents, coaches at elite schools and others have already pleaded guilty to taking or paying bribes to rig college entrance exams or have students recruited to teams for sports they didn't play.  Missouri sues China over coronavirus pandemic COLUMBIA, Mo. -- The state of Missouri filed a lawsuit Tuesday against the Chinese government over the coronavirus, alleging that nation's officials are to blame for the global pandemic. The lawsuit, filed in federal court by the state's top prosecutor, alleges Chinese officials are "responsible for the enormous death, suffering, and economic losses they inflicted on the world, including Missourians." "The Chinese government lied to the world about the danger and contagious nature of COVID-19, silenced whistleblowers, and did little to stop the spread of the disease," Attorney General Eric Schmitt said in a written statement. Missouri Democratic Party Executive Director Lauren Gepford called the lawsuit a "stunt" by a Republican attorney general who is up for reelection.  UAW backs Democrat Biden for president DETROIT -- The United Auto Workers union is endorsing Democrat Joe Biden for President. The 400,000-member union says in a statement Tuesday that the nation needs stable leadership with less acrimony "and more balance to the rights and protections of working Americans." The union says Biden has committed to reining in corporate power over workers, encouraging collective bargaining, and making sure workers get the pay, benefits and protections they deserve. Biden also has committed to expand access to affordable health care, the union said. Union negotiators are in talks with Ford, General Motors and Fiat Chrysler about restarting U.S. factories that have been closed for the past month due to fears of spreading the coronavirus.  In London: Britain marked Queen Elizabeth II's 94th birthday with silence Tuesday, as the nation in lockdown amid the COVID-19 pandemic forgoes the usual gun salutes and ringing of bells. With thousands dead amid the outbreak, the monarch decided that the celebratory display of military firepower would not be appropriate. Nor will there be a celebratory peal of bells at Westminster Abbey, as the church where the queen was married and crowned is currently closed. The royal family took to social media to share images of Elizabeth as she marked the occasion -- but in keeping with social distancing rules, there were no visits. CAPTION: Photo: Sri Lankan Catholics priests stand Tuesday at the entrance of St. Anthony's church, one of the sites of the 2019 Easter Sunday attacks, on the anniversary of the bombings in Colombo, Sri Lanka. More than 260 were killed when three churches were attacked. ERANGA JAYAWARDENA/AP CREDIT: Staff and news services 
While they are few in number, those who've decided it's their duty as Americans to protest coronavirus lockdowns are putting their self-interest over the health of others. Period. You can disagree with me and call me a liberal schmuck and stand by President Donald Trump and the protesters he's egging on all you want, but that won't change the fundamental facts of the coronavirus, how it spreads and where our country stands in dealing with the pandemic. In fact, by violating social-distancing rules, not wearing masks and encouraging like-minded folks to follow their lead, anti-coronavirus protesters are likely delaying the very thing they claim to desire: a reopening of America. Here are some facts the virus doesn't care whether or not you believe. Until there's widespread testing and contact tracing (tracking down and isolating everyone an infected person has come in contact with), it will be hard to prevent additional outbreaks or measure how many Americans have been infected. One of the most nettlesome problems with this virus is it can be spread by people who aren't showing symptoms. A new study of a town in Italy found 43.2% of people diagnosed with the virus were asymptomatic. According to an NPR report earlier this month, a third of the 82 people who tested positive for the coronavirus at a Washington state nursing home were "free of fever, malaise and coughing when they were swabbed for the virus, though most went on to develop symptoms." There are people in parts of the country saying "Well, no one around here has it." That's a statement based on zero factual evidence. People crowding around state capitol buildings calling for lockdowns to be lifted have no clue whether they're standing next to fellow protesters carrying the virus. As a country, we don't have the data to say any place is virus-free. Say you live in a small town in downstate Illinois. Nobody you know has gotten sick. That's certainly a positive sign. But do you have gas stations and restaurants in your town? Are you near an interstate that carries people from areas that have higher infection rates? Suppose someone from St. Louis is infected but not showing any symptoms, and that person decides to drive to Chicago and, on the way, pulls into at a truck stop just outside your town. Say two of your friends are there and they get exposed to that infected person in the truck stop diner. That's the first problem -- an asymptomatic person spreading the virus. The next problem is that coronavirus is highly contagious. Too many have equated the virus with the flu, thanks in part to Trump and other Republican lawmakers and conservative pundits making such comparisons. Hugh Montgomery, director of the Institute for Human Health and Performance at University College London, told a British television network the virus that causes COVID-19 is three times as infectious as the flu. That doesn't sound that bad, until you crunch the numbers. On average, a person with the flu will infect 1.3 people. So if you take that through 10 transmissions, one person will have infected about 14 people. "This coronavirus is very, very infectious, so every person passes to it three," Montgomery said. "Now that doesn't sound like much of a difference, but if each of those three pass it to three and that happens in 10 layers, I have been responsible for infecting 59,000 people." The "one passing it to three" is considered a high estimate. So say a person with coronavirus, on average, infects two people, a figure lower than epidemiological estimates. In 10 transmissions, one person would still be responsible for 1,024 other people getting the virus. "If you are irresponsible enough to think that you don't mind if you get the flu," Montgomery said, "remember it's not about you -- it's about everybody else." In February, a 61-year-old woman in South Korea tested positive for the coronavirus, at a time when the country had only 30 other cases. Hundreds from the woman's church wound up testing positive for COVID-19 and that one patient led to a massive outbreak. Just recently there have been coronavirus outbreaks at three Iowa food processing plants, a pork factory in South Dakota, a meat packing plant in Colorado and a wind power plant in North Dakota. What happens when there's an outbreak at a plant? It gets shut down. If one asymptomatic person at one protest has the coronavirus and spreads it to two more, then those two return to their hometowns and each spreads it to two more, you have the potential for another outbreak. And how will any state respond to a surge of new infections? By shutting down. I understand the worries protesters and many others are facing. My industry is being walloped by the coronavirus shutdown. Pay cuts, furloughs and layoffs are either happening or being weighed at news organizations across the country, including this one. I'd give anything for a swift return to normalcy. But until there's enough testing nationwide to allow public health officials to smartly and confidently start slowly easing restrictions, a rushed "great reopening" will almost certainly be followed by a less-great re-closing. If you want to protest something, protest the lack of adequate testing. Listen to governors, Democratic and Republican, saying it's the key to the realm. Help them push the federal government to recognize the urgency. But protest via phone calls and emails. Don't go out in large groups and think your chants will repel a virus. You put yourself at risk. You put others -- possibly hundreds of others -- at risk. And the end result may well be a longer lockdown time for everyone. ---------- rhuppke@chicagotribune.com CAPTION: Photo: A demonstrator leads protest chants during a rally Sunday in Olympia, Washington, against Gov. Jay Inslee's 'Stay Home, Stay Healthy' emergency order in response to the coronavirus pandemic. RUTH FREMSON/THE NEW YORK TIMES CREDIT: Rex W. Huppke 
Influential Congressional Black Caucus PAC backs Biden's bid DETROIT -- The Congressional Black Caucus PAC endorsed Joe Biden's presidential bid on Monday, further cementing his support among the nation's influential black political leadership. The political action committee's unanimous endorsement came on the heels of several key nods of support among caucus leadership and members, including civil rights icon Rep. John Lewis of Georgia and caucus Chairwoman Rep. Karen Bass of California. The PAC is the caucus's separate campaign arm. "There's no question that Joe Biden is badly needed by this country," CBC PAC Chairman Rep. Gregory Meeks of New York said. "His leadership, his experience, his understanding on how to get things done and his ability to work and pull people together is needed now more than ever. We need someone that is a healer and not a divider, and that's Joe Biden." Biden, who is on the cusp of clinching the Democratic presidential nomination, had already scored key endorsements from 38 of the 54 members of the group, which is composed of most African American members of Congress. Black voters have long anchored the former vice president's White House bid with overwhelming support in South Carolina, on Super Tuesday and in Midwestern states like Michigan. But that was before the coronavirus pandemic disrupted the race, forcing several states with significant black populations, like Georgia, to postpone their primaries. African Americans have been disproportionately affected by COVID-19.  US report: Kim Jong Un in 'grave danger' after surgery SEOUL, South Korea -- The South Korean government on Tuesday was looking into U.S. media reports saying North Korean leader Kim Jong Un was in fragile condition after surgery. Officials from South Korea's Unification Ministry and National Intelligence Service said they couldn't immediately confirm the report. CNN cited an anonymous U.S. official who said Kim was in "grave danger." The Unification Ministry, which deals with inter-Korean affairs, said it couldn't confirm another report by Daily NK, which cited anonymous sources to report that Kim was recovering from heart surgery in the capital Pyongyang and that his condition was improving. Speculation on Kim's health was raised after he missed the celebration of his late grandfather and state founder Kim Il Sung on Wednesday.  Court: To help fight virus, Texas can ban medication abortions NEW ORLEANS -- Texas can ban medication abortions as part of the state's effort to fight the spread of the new coronavirus, a federal appeals court panel ruled Monday. The 5th Circuit Court of Appeals in New Orleans last week temporarily blocked the state's prohibition on medication abortions while it gave more consideration to the issue. The same panel, in a 2-1 decision, said Monday the state was within its rights to ban that -- and other abortion procedures -- as it sought to slow the use of masks, gowns and other protective medical gear. The majority opinion said a lower court erred by treating a medication abortion as "an absolute right." Clinics have argued that medication abortions do not require personal protective equipment.  Brazil's Bolsonaro calls for social isolation to end this week SAO PAULO -- Four days after firing his health minister amid the coronavirus pandemic, Brazilian President Jair Bolsonaro said Monday he wants social isolation policies to end nationwide this week, though many Brazilian states are committed to such policies. Nearly all states have stay-home measures in place, some slated to extend until mid-May. The country's top court has ruled governors and mayors can decide on social isolation measures regardless of the federal government's position. Bolsonaro, meanwhile, wants a quick reopening to stop the deterioration of Brazil's faltering economy. The Brazilian president favors a less restrictive model in which only those in high-risk groups would be quarantined at home until the end of the outbreak.  Burkina Faso killed 31 unarmed men, report says OUAHIGOUYA, Burkina Faso -- Burkina Faso's security forces reportedly killed 31 unarmed men in the country's north, according to a report on Monday by Human Rights Watch. The killings occurred on April 9 after the men were detained during a government counterterrorism operation in the town of Djibo, the report said. The West African nation continues to be wracked by violence linked to Islamic extremists and local defense militias, which has displaced nearly 840,000 people within Burkina Faso. The report's writers interviewed 17 people with knowledge of the killings and found all of the victims were ethnic Fulani. The Fulani have been increasingly targeted by the military and local defense militias for their alleged affiliation with Islamist groups.  Trump plans temporary suspension on immigration WASHINGTON -- President Donald Trump said late Monday he will sign an executive order "to temporarily suspend immigration into the United States" because of the coronavirus. "In light of the attack from the Invisible Enemy, as well as the need to protect the jobs of our GREAT American Citizens, I will be signing an Executive Order to temporarily suspend immigration into the United States!" Trump tweeted. He offered no details as to what immigration programs might be affected. The White House did not immediately elaborate. Trump has taken credit for his restrictions on travel from China and hard-hit European countries, arguing it contributed to slowing viral spread in the U.S. He's yet to extend those restrictions to other nations now experiencing virus outbreaks.  In Turkey: Turkey's president on Monday accused the Syrian government of taking advantage of the world's preoccupation with the coronavirus pandemic to increase attacks in rebel-held northwestern Syria in violation of a truce. In an address to the nation following a Cabinet meeting, President Recep Tayyip Erdogan threatened to take action if the alleged Syrian government violations in Idlib province continue. Erdogan's threat came amid reports of limited Syrian violations and exchanges of fire between troops and Turkey-backed opposition forces. The cease-fire deal was brokered March 5 between Russia and Turkey, which back opposing sides in the Syrian conflict. CAPTION: Photo: Stormy South: The heavily damaged home of Brian and Penny Templesis of Baxterville, Mississippi, is seen Monday, one day after a tornado hit. Suspected twisters and a house fire from a lightning strike left three people dead in Alabama, Mississippi and Georgia. CAM BONELLI/THE CLARION-LEDGER CREDIT: Staff and news services 
Amid possible tornado threat, storms rake Southern states MONTGOMERY, Ala. -- High winds, hail and heavy rain pounded parts of Alabama on Sunday, as forecasters warned residents to brace for possible tornadoes and flooding later in the day across a wide swatch of the southern United States. Tornado watches covered a swath of east Texas and large parts of Louisiana and Mississippi on Sunday afternoon. More than 24,000 customers were without electricity early Sunday, according to www.poweroutage.us. It was the second Sunday in a row that the South was hit with severe weather. Four Alabama counties were under a flash flood warning through the late morning because of heavy rain: Bibb, Chilton, Coosa and Shelby, the National Weather Service said. High winds had uprooted trees and left blankets of hail on the ground in some areas, the National Weather Service reported. "Two to three inches of rain has already fallen and an additional one to two inches is possible," the agency said on its website. A second wave of storms was expected to develop Sunday afternoon and bring the risk of strong tornadoes into the evening, the National Weather Service said. Large twisters were a possibility for parts of Louisiana, Mississippi and Alabama. A zone from the Texas-Louisiana line that extends eastward across the southern parts of Mississippi, Alabama and into Georgia will be at greatest risk of severe weather and tornadoes. The area is home to more than 5 million people. Damaging winds and a tornado threat will also extend across Georgia and parts of South Carolina.  Biden wins mail-in Wyoming Democratic presidential caucus CHEYENNE, Wyo. -- Joe Biden has won Wyoming's Democratic presidential caucus, which had been postponed for two weeks and scaled back to just mail-in ballots because of the coronavirus pandemic, state party officials said Sunday. The results come less than two weeks after Bernie Sanders dropped out and endorsed Biden, who is the only candidate still actively seeking the Democratic nomination. Biden beat Sanders 72% to 28%. A total of 15,428 votes were cast. Biden gets 12 delegates and Sanders gets two. Biden led Sanders in the delegate count 1,305 to 939. The Biden and Sanders campaigns are in talks over allowing Sanders to keep some of his statewide delegates. The Wyoming Democratic Party announced the results after tabulating votes Saturday and auditing the results overnight.  Official: Police kill gunmanwho hijacked Dallas-area bus ROWLETT, Texas -- A man opened fire on a Dallas-area bus on Sunday, hijacking it with two people aboard and leading officers on a chase that ended in a shootout in which the man was killed and three officers were wounded, according to police officials. A man got on the Dallas Area Rapid Transit bus in Richardson, just north of Dallas, at around 11 a.m. and opened fire, shattering windows, a DART spokesman said. The man took the driver hostage and fired at DART officers who tried to stop the vehicle, said Garland police officer Pedro Barineau. Police eventually used a spike strip to stop the vehicle, Barineau said. The man continued firing as he exited the bus after it stopped, and officers returned fire, killing him, Barineau said.  North Korea denies that Kim sent Trump 'a nice note' SEOUL, South Korea -- North Korea on Sunday dismissed as "ungrounded" President Donald Trump's comment that he received "a nice note" from the North's leader, Kim Jong Un. Trump said during a press briefing on the coronavirus pandemic Saturday that "I received a nice note from him recently. It was a nice note. I think we're doing fine." Trump also defended now-stalled nuclear diplomacy with Kim, saying the U.S. would have been at war with North Korea if he had not been elected. North Korea's Foreign Ministry said in a statement that there was no letter addressed to Trump recently by "the supreme leadership," a reference to Kim. It said it would examine why the U.S. leadership released "the ungrounded story" to the media.  Iran admits encounter with US ship during a drill TEHRAN, Iran -- Iran's paramilitary Revolutionary Guard acknowledged Sunday it had a tense encounter with U.S. warships in the Persian Gulf last week, but alleged without offering evidence that American forces sparked the incident. The incident Wednesday saw the U.S. Navy release video of small Iranian fast boats coming close to American warships as they operated in the northern Persian Gulf near Kuwait, with U.S. Army Apache helicopters. In the Guard's telling, its forces were conducting a drill and faced "the unprofessional and provocative actions of the United States and their indifference to warnings." It said the Americans later withdrew. The Guard released no evidence to support its allegation, but did release a video showing an Iranian boat traveling in parallel with a U.S. warship.  Israelis accuse Netanyahu of endangering democracy TEL AVIV, Israel -- More than 2,000 Israelis took to the streets of Tel Aviv on Sunday, demonstrating against Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu's attempts to form an "emergency" government with his chief rival and accusing him of using the coronavirus crisis to escape prosecution on corruption charges. Demonstrators wore face masks and largely kept their distance from one another, in line with social-distancing rules, as speakers criticized Netanyahu's possible partnership with rival Benny Gantz. Gantz, who during three bitter elections over the past year vowed never to sit in a government with Netanyahu due to his legal problems, announced last month that he had accepted the prime minister's suggestion to form an "emergency" government.  In Yemen: Yemen's rebels on Sunday detained a former culture minister and writer who was a vocal critic of their rule, his family and lawyer said. The rebels, known as Houthis, stormed Khalid al-Rwaishan's home in a suburb of the capital Sanaa at dawn, seizing documents. Al-Rwaishan was then taken to an undisclosed location, said his lawyer, Waddah Qutaish. The former minister's son, Waddah al-Rwaishan, confirmed the arrest, saying that the Houthis "abducted" him. A spokesman for the Houthi rebels did not respond to phone calls seeking comment. Khalid al-Rwaishan served as culture minister in 2006 in the government of former President Ali Abdullah Saleh. CAPTION: Photo: Ecumenical Patriarch Bartholomew I, left, the spiritual leader of the world's Orthodox Christians, leads the Orthodox Easter service Sunday at the Patriarchal Church of St. George in Istanbul, which was held without worshippers to help contain the coronavirus. SAHIN ERDEM/EPA CREDIT: Staff and news services 
As half the world is placed under stay-at-home orders to combat COVID-19, a few pastors in the U.S. are keeping churches open despite advisories against public gatherings; some Christian worshippers came together recently for in-person Easter services, Hasidic Jews have ignored social distancing rules at funerals and a church community in South Korea and Muslim pilgrims in India and Malaysia have become vectors of disease transmission. All proclaim greater trust in God than in clinicians and assert the salutary effects of religious practices in the face of a global pandemic. By no means are all religious communities ignoring health risks. Islamic jurists around the globe have moved to close mosques -- including the holiest sites of Islam in Mecca, Medina and Jerusalem -- and most churches and synagogues have firmly closed their doors. Yet some leaders and communities seem out of step with the reality of the pandemic. Rather than pursuing aggressive or confrontational tactics, state and public health authorities need to form alliances with these faith communities. And doing this in a way that builds trust is critical to the fight against COVID-19. First, authorities need to acknowledge the role religious communal life and practices play in the lives of individuals, especially during times of uncertainty and fear. They must work with religious leaders so that they can better understand the rationale behind the social constraints. That will empower religious leaders to frame these policies within a religious worldview and design creative solutions. Some churches have moved sermons and worship services online so that members can remain connected. In Muslim circles, scholars have taken care to message that while the communal obligation of Friday prayers is suspended, the individual obligation of midday prayers continues. Forums dedicated to dialogue and understanding between religious and public health experts can thus generate creative solutions that recognize religious theologies of healing, promote spiritual health and acknowledge the gravity of the COVID-19 pandemic. Secondly, religious sites should be leveraged toward public health interventions. There is a long history of faith-based health partnerships in the U.S., and these collaborations can be mobilized toward improving community health. Churches and mosques could serve as sites for drive-thru testing, and their online forums could be used for health education. In this way, religious communities can be activated to help address gaps in testing and knowledge. Finally, state authorities need to partner with religious authorities in their communications. Formal statements and press briefings where public health, state and religious authorities speak in a unified voice can go a long way to address lack of trust and experiences of marginalization. Just as business leaders have been brought in to address the economic aspects of this crisis and to voice their commitment to work with the government to tackle it, religious leaders can speak to the spiritual dimensions of the crisis and voice support in helping confront it. Faith-based understanding of illness through history gives important context that must not be ignored. Even today, many faiths continue to maintain a theology of healing where the Divine controls disease -- including onset and cure. Statements from the Prophet Muhammad convey that God sends sickness and grants recovery, and both Islam and Christianity recognize Jesus' role as a healer. If one believes that COVID-19 is a manifestation of divine will, then appealing to God to protect one from catching it -- or to heal one afflicted by it -- makes sense. And this turning to the divine becomes all the more appealing when one recognizes the many unknowns surrounding COVID-19; there is no known vaccine, no sure way to obtain a diagnosis given the scarcity of tests and no definitive timeline for when this crisis will end. Some religious adherents find it difficult to follow the logic that food markets and health care institutions that cater to the physical health of individuals are classified as essential services and thus exempted from stay-at-home orders and closure, while religious institutions that nourish the spirit are not. They feel skeptical that public health and state authorities have their best interests at heart and they prefer to prioritize religious practices that have long sustained them. In the words of one mosque elder, "If we are going to die, then we might as well die in prayer." Science shows that spirituality bolsters health. Individuals connected to religious communities tend to live longer, likely due to the social support offered in such communities and the strong positive coping mechanisms religious beliefs and practices offer. Now is the time to leverage the strength of those communities in the face of this crisis. ---------- Aasim I. Padela, M.D., M.Sc., is a University of Chicago Medicine emergency medicine physician, community health researcher and bioethicist. He is also an expert at the Institute for Social Policy & Understanding. CREDIT: By Aasim I. Padela 
Mark Weidemaier is scanned daily upon entering KIA Champions Field, and it doesn't bother him one bit. "We're probably in the safest place in the world," Weidemaier, a coach for the KIA Tigers, said Friday morning before an intrasquad game in Gwangju, South Korea. "We're playing baseball." Weidemaier, 65, a former scout and coach for nine major-league teams, expressed optimism that the Korea Baseball Organization will start exhibition play Tuesday and open the season May 5, about 3 1/2 months after the coronavirus outbreak hit the country. "It's pretty much business as usual," Weidemaier said. "The government has done a great job of testing. We get body scanned as soon as we walk into the stadium. The front office workers wear masks." Weidemaier, however, wonders if Major League Baseball will play this season, based on what he has seen of the United States on CNN compared with the progressive steps taken in Korea. "One thing is for sure," Weidemaier said, "a lot of things are going to change." Tigers workouts are "what you see in a normal spring training," Weidemaier said. But he anticipates that they'll play home games in front of 20,500 empty seats as a safety measure. Weidemaier, who worked as an advance scout for the White Sox in the late 1990s and has worked in the Far East before this season, was aware that some Korean players wore masks during workouts in Seoul, which is about four hours north of Gwangju. That hasn't been the case with the Tigers, but manager (and former Giants and Diamondbacks slugger) Matt Williams, the coaching staff -- which includes former Cubs first baseman Hee Seop Choi as hitting coach and former Mets pitcher Jae Weong Seo as pitching coach -- players and support staff have practiced social distancing with few exceptions, such as handshakes and an occasional hug. The team started testing all employees, and any with a fever was sent home and quarantined. Signs are posted throughout the Tigers clubhouse and dugout emphasizing social distancing. "You've got to go out and eat at some point," Weidemaier said. "But you just adhere to social distancing and keep your fingers crossed. "The testing has been great." The coronavirus has been in the minds of the Tigers since they departed for Fort Myers, Fla., to start spring training Jan. 28 -- eight days after the first case was diagnosed in Korea, according to the World Health Organization. The Tigers, who have won 11 Korea Series titles since the league's inception in 1982, played 20 exhibition games and were ready to return March 6 but stayed in Florida for health and safety reasons. The family of one of the players was part of a Daegu, South Korea, church community that the virus infected, and the family remains quarantined in the city of nearly 2.5 million, Weidemaier said. Despite the delay, the Tigers found some independent-league teams to play in Florida before returning to Korea on March 16. "We were ready to play (by March 6)," Weidemaier said. "It's been a grind to keep guys mentally sharp." The Tigers returned to their homes immediately and were not quarantined upon arriving from the U.S. The team also has emphasized to Americans Preston Tucker, Drew Gagnon and former Cubs minor-leaguer Aaron Brooks and their families to limit travel from their apartments to the ballpark. "Some teams let their American players go home to the states, and they had to go into quarantine when they returned," Weidemaier said. "We've been very fortunate here." CAPTION: Photo: The LG Twins play an intrasquad game in an empty ballpark on April 5 in Seoul, South Korea. The game was aired through the team's YouTube channel. LEE JIN-MAN/AP CREDIT: By Mark Gonzales 
Richest countries will freeze poorer nations' debt payment JOHANNESBURG -- The world's richest countries agreed Wednesday to freeze poor nations' debt obligations, shortly after nearly 20 European and African leaders made a joint appeal for a massive international effort to boost Africa's coronavirus response, saying that "only a global victory that fully includes Africa can bring this pandemic to an end." Finance ministers of the G-20 group of major economies, which includes the U.S., China, India and others, said they will immediately put on hold poor countries' obligations to service debt they owe. The statement issued after a video conference put to rest concerns that China would block such a measure, which is aimed at helping the poorest nations focus their spending on health care and assistance to vulnerable people to contain the outbreak and its fallout. The joint appeal signed by the leaders of France, Ethiopia, Germany, South Africa and other nations, published in the Financial Times, had called for dramatic measures that include an immediate moratorium on all debt payments, public and private, until the pandemic is over. While the G-20 did not specify how many countries would benefit, French Finance Minister Bruno Le Maire said 76 countries were eligible for the moratorium, including about 40 in sub-Saharan Africa. Debt payments worth $20 billion will be suspended, including $8 billion owed to private creditors and $12 billion owed to other countries, he said. An additional $12 billion in debt payments to multilateral institutions like the World Bank are also under consideration for a debt freeze.  High turnout in South Korean election despite pandemic fears SEOUL, South Korea -- Millions of South Koreans wore masks and disposable gloves as they voted in parliamentary elections Wednesday, the highest turnout in nearly three decades despite the coronavirus. The government resisted calls to postpone the elections billed as a midterm referendum on President Moon Jae-in, who enters the final two years of his single five-year term grappling with a historic public health crisis that is unleashing massive economic shock. Exit polls conducted by TV stations indicated that Moon's Democratic Party and a satellite party it created to win proportional representative seats would combine for a majority in the 300-seat National Assembly. The long lines followed record-high early voting Friday and Saturday, and defied expectations of a low turnout.  FDA OKs low-cost ventilator developed by U. of Minnesota MINNEAPOLIS -- The U.S. Food and Drug Administration on Wednesday approved a low-cost ventilator developed by the University of Minnesota. The FDA authorized use of the compact device, known as the Coventor, that was developed and designed by a team of university researchers, a medical school resident and an engineer. The developers hope the Coventor will be used in clinical settings where traditional ventilators are unavailable. "With FDA authorization, we are closer to that happening," said Stephen Richardson, a cardiac anesthesiology fellow in the Medical School, M Health Fairview. Ventilators are used to help increase blood oxygen levels and have been in short supply as hospitals deal with COVID-19.  Students could take SAT at home if schools remain closed A home version of the SAT college entrance exam is being prepared in case schools remain closed into the fall, College Board officials said Wednesday as they announced the cancellation of June testing. Instead of a paper-and-pencil test given under proctors' supervision, the home version would be digital and rely on "remote proctoring." That could include using the computer's camera and microphone to monitor movement or talking, College Board President Jeremy Singer said on a conference call with reporters. Coronavirus-related school closures forced cancellation of spring testing for 1 million first-time test-takers, the majority of them juniors planning to enter college in 2021, officials said. The national June 6 session is the latest to be canceled.  DOJ watchdog reviewing prisons for virus safety WASHINGTON -- The Justice Department's inspector general will conduct remote inspections of Bureau of Prisons facilities to ensure they are following best practices to mitigate the spread of the coronavirus after hundreds of federal inmates tested positive for the virus. The review announced Wednesday comes as the federal prison system struggles with a growing number of coronavirus cases and complaints from inmates, advocacy groups and correction officers about how officials are handling the pandemic among their 122 facilities. Attorney General William Barr recently sent some of his closest advisers to federal prisons identified as coronavirus hot spots, a Justice Department official said. The attorney general's counselors were sent to observe the conditions on the ground firsthand and report back to Barr.  Calif. to give cash payments to immigrants hurt by virus SACRAMENTO, Calif. -- California will be the first state to give cash payments to immigrants living in the country illegally who are hurt by the coronavirus, offering $500 apiece to 150,000 adults who were left out of the $2.2 trillion stimulus package approved by Congress. Many Americans began receiving $1,200 checks from the federal government this week, and others who are unemployed are getting an additional $600 a week from the government that has ordered them to stay home. But people living in the country illegally are not eligible for any of that money, and advocates have been pushing for states to fill in the gap. Wednesday, Gov. Gavin Newsom announced he would spend $75 million of taxpayer money to create a Disaster Relief Fund for immigrants living in the country illegally.  In Iran: The death toll in Iran from the coronavirus pandemic is likely nearly double the officially reported figures, due to undercounting and because not everyone with breathing problems has been tested for the virus, a parliament report said. Iranian health officials offered no comment on the report, which represents the highest-level charge yet from within the Islamic Republic's government of its figures being questionable, something suspected by international experts. Iran on Wednesday put the death toll at 4,777, out of 76,389 confirmed cases of the virus. The report, released Tuesday, comes as Iranian President Hassan Rouhani continues to push for a slow reopening of the country's economy. CAPTION: Photo: People stop in front of Notre Dame Cathedral as the bells ring Wednesday to mark the one-year anniversary of its blaze. A year after the devastating fire, the restoration of cathedral has been suspended by a lockdown in Paris to battle the coronavirus. CHRISTOPHE ENA/AP CREDIT: Staff and news services 
To get personal protective equipment for state workers on the front lines of the coronavirus pandemic, the governor of Illinois has had to spend nearly $2 million on charter flights that will haul "millions of masks and gloves" -- from China. That's ridiculous. And it should make you mad. The Federal Emergency Management Agency last week agreed to buy 750,000 coronavirus test kits -- from South Korea. That's also ridiculous. And it should also make you mad. In the span of eight days -- from last Tuesday to this Tuesday -- the coronavirus killed five times as many Americans as terrorists did on 9/11. Five times. In just those eight days, 14,974 souls gone. And America, self-branded as the most-powerful country on the planet, is chartering flights to bring masks and gloves in from China? The U.S. government is buying test kits from South Korea because we can't manufacture our own quickly enough? What's happening in this country right now -- from the lack of widespread testing to states bidding against each other for safety gear to keep health care workers and first responders healthy -- is outrageous. It's a disgrace. There's no reason, more than three months into this pandemic, that the governor of any state should be having to hunt down gloves and masks in far-flung places. American companies should long ago have started producing the personal protective equipment that's needed, as well the testing kits that are desperately needed to get a hold on this outbreak. From the jump, President Donald Trump has had the power, through the Defense Production Act, to unleash the might of America's manufacturing companies. Instead, he has been hesitant to use that power, costing states money, time and, undoubtedly, lives. From the Tribune report on Gov. J.B. Pritzker's chartered flights: "Had the president directed American companies to produce more masks, ventilators and other equipment, 'we wouldn't be paying $5 or $6 sometimes for an N95 mask that in a normal circumstance costs 85 cents or a dollar,' " Pritzker said. On Tuesday, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention reported that as of April 9, more than 9,000 health care workers had contracted the coronavirus. And 27 had died from COVID-19. The agency said those numbers are "likely an underestimation." Let's not beat around the bush: our federal government has responded to the coronavirus outbreak with rank incompetence. The seriousness of the virus was grossly downplayed through much of January. Any additional time the country gained from Trump's decision to ban some travelers from China (more than 40,000 travelers from China arrived in the U.S. after the "ban" was in place) was wasted in a feckless February. And now? Now we have governors who know they're largely on their own, a stunning lack of coronavirus testing nationwide and the world's largest coronavirus death toll. As of Tuesday night it was 25,992 people. We lost 2,977 people on Sept. 11, and having lived through that day, I recall the fear that swept across America as we collectively processed such a massive loss. But I also remember anger. We were livid over the attack, united in our outrage and determined to do whatever was necessary to prevent it from happening again. The deaths from the coronavirus pandemic have eclipsed the toll of that awful day. And we have ample fear and frustration. But I don't see the anger. Maybe it's muted because we're locked down and socially distanced. Maybe it's because we're so fiercely divided, with loyalty to the president driving individuals and even entire states to treat a virus like something that can be beaten with stubborn defiance and good ol' American gumption. It's ridiculous. This isn't a game. The president can stand in the White House briefing room each day for however many hours he wants and blabber lies and blame everyone -- governors, China, the media, Barack Obama, Nancy Pelosi -- until he turns from orange to blue. But until governors don't have to fetch basic supplies from China, until there's enough testing and contact tracing to allow medical experts to safely guide us out of our lockdown, Trump's words mean even less than usual. Consider this: According to NBC News, during Trump's more than two-hour coronavirus press briefing Monday, a lie-filled circus of distortions and narcissism, there were 93 coronavirus deaths reported. Forty-two in California. Sixteen in Georgia. Eight in Washington. Seven in Kentucky. Six in Delaware. Five each in New Mexico and South Carolina. And four in Alabama. That's over the course of just a couple hours. That should make you mad. It should hurt, the same way the lives we lost in one day in 2001 hurt. As we did then, we should unite to do everything humanly possible to prevent more deaths. As we did then, we shouldn't accept failure. Failure is the governor of any state spending $2 million on charter flights to get equipment from China that should be made here in America. Failure is promising a virus test to anyone who wants one and not keeping that promise Failure is exactly what we have right now. And that should make you blood-boiling mad. ---------- rhuppke@chicagotribune.com CAPTION: Photo: Sample testing devices used in diagnosing the novel coronavirus are checked on a production line as they are prepared to be included in kits near Cheongju, south of Seoul. ED JONES/AFP CREDIT: Rex W. Huppke 
Angel the goat is due in May to give birth at the same high school where she was born three years ago, on a sprawling 78 acres in Chicago's Mount Greenwood. Students had been looking forward to delivering the baby goat -- or goats -- themselves, an accomplishment they've been working toward at Chicago High School for Agricultural Sciences. But like prom and other milestones, it's a moment they may miss while schools are closed amid the coronavirus pandemic. During the teachers strike in October, students kept a rotation to care for the school's animals: a dairy cow, a potbelly pig, a turkey pardoned by an alderman back in November for the school's annual Thanksgiving dinner, 60 chickens, two alpacas, four pygmy goats and Angel. Sometimes the students also raise cattle and pigs. But in the spirit of social distancing, they're leaving their charges in the hands of Shane Blake, a 24-year-old neighbor who attended Chicago Ag and Southside Occupational Academy. Blake became familiar with the farm on grade school field trips. He always knew he wanted to go back after finishing high school; it's become his favorite place. Now he gets a ride in the morning from his father, Pat Blake, and walks home in the afternoon. He brings back eggs every now and then. Pat, a retired firefighter, said working with animals has been meaningful for Shane, who has autism and would keep more to himself before. "It's been therapeutic for him, without a doubt. He really came out of his shell," Pat said. "Coming from introverted to outward expression, it's like night and day (since) starting to work with animals." Shane Blake's dream is to have his own farm someday. "Farmer in the Dell," Shane said. His mom used to call him that. "I'd raise my own animals and grow my own food." He's already a Special Olympics gold medalist in horse riding and past Illinois Outstanding Rider of the Year. Blake said he enjoys spending time outside and finds being around animals "very soothing." He knows Angel, but the pigs and horses are his favorite. Last year he watched the birth of more than a dozen piglets, and when the school gets more, he's going to name them. He has some names picked out already: Daisy, Rex, Jake. Principal William Hook said the school was supposed to get pigs this month, including a pregnant sow, so the students could deliver and inoculate piglets. "Unfortunately, they may not get a chance to do that if we don't come back in the spring," he said. But whenever they do, he said, "I could get a pregnant sow on a moment's notice." The school partners with a farm in Sugar Grove that donates the animals, he said. Blake takes pride in his work and was honored when Hook asked him about taking responsibility for the animals during the school closures. "Great feeling," he said. When Blake was a student at Chicago Ag, Hook noticed him excel in animal science. "He was a rock star there," Hook said. "He's a conscientious worker and I'm lucky to have him. ... When he came here as a freshman, he was very introverted, he spoke very little, but you can really now see him open up." Hook described Blake's way with animals: "They love him. He's got a real gentle way about him, pretty nonchalant. He walks in, the little goats flock to him. ... He cares for the animals and they respond in kind." When Blake went on to Southside Occupational, which teaches transitional and vocational skills, he kept going back to the farm school, which paid him as a student worker. He's now on staff. Of the nine agriculture teachers, seven are also former students, Hook said. When Hook took over as principal 13 years ago, he learned animal care along with the students. He was a senior at Bogan High School when Chicago Ag opened in 1985, and went on to study economics at Northwestern University. About a third of the students end up pursuing careers in agriculture, Hook said. Students in the food science pathway make pesto with basil from their aquaponics lab and zucchini bread with their own produce and eggs. For their capstone project, students in the horticulture pathway designed a garden for the Chicago Flower and Garden Show that was due to take place at Navy Pier in March but was canceled. Hook is hoping to figure out a way that students can still build the garden they envisioned. In the meantime, the school's greenhouses are filled with more plants than he's ever seen before, and he's not sure if the school will be able to hold its annual Mother's Day plant sale. The ag school also has a seasonal farm stand and a 3-acre market garden where students grow peppers, onions, tomatoes and other vegetables. Proceeds from sales directly support students for things like college trips and study abroad opportunities. Every summer, Hook said the school flies students to an engineering camp at California Polytechnic. It gets students to Nebraska each year for a cattle drive. This spring, students were booked on trips to South Korea, Panama and Europe, but those were called off. On a typical school day, students rotate farm responsibilities, but during nonschool hours, student workers are paid. Though the hands-on elements of the school can't be replicated online, the school, like the rest in Chicago Public Schools, began official remote learning Monday. "It's difficult," Hook said. "We miss our students, we miss our staff. ... Maybe they miss being at school. It's a big part of their lives. It's a difficult time, trying to make a remote learning plan that still has value when they return, not to have to go back over stuff that they missed." It remains to be seen whether school will resume before Angel gives birth. Angel mated with a goat from Vincent High School of Agricultural Sciences in Milwaukee. "We said, 'We'll just leave them out in the field and see what happens,'" Hook said. A science class tested Angel and found out she was pregnant. ---------- hleone@chicagotribune.com CAPTION: Photo: Shane Blake, formerly a student and now an employee at Chicago High School for Agriculture Sciences, fills a basket with eggs at school's chicken coop.; Photo: Goats climb atop a step stool Friday at the Chicago High School for Agriculture Sciences. While the school is closed, the animals are under the care of Shane Blake.; ANTONIO PEREZ/CHICAGO TRIBUNE PHOTOS CREDIT: By Hannah Leone 
Court: Medication abortions allowed in Texas in pandemic AUSTIN, Texas -- A federal appeals court panel ruled that medication abortions, in which pills are taken to terminate a pregnancy, can be provided in Texas during the coronavirus pandemic. The ruling Monday from a three-judge panel of the 5th U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals was among several developments in Republican-led states where governors have sought to prohibit almost all abortions by classifying them as elective procedures that should be put off during the virus outbreak. Texas Republican Gov. Greg Abbott issued an executive order last month that bars nonessential medical procedures so that health resources can go to treating coronavirus patients. Texas' Republican attorney general has said that providing abortions other than for an immediate medical emergency would violate the order. But a three-judge panel of the 5th U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals said that medication abortions can go forward. In a concurrence, Judge James L. Dennis wrote that Texas' move to ban medication abortions "is a strong indication that the enforcement is pretextual and does not bear a 'real or substantial relation' to the public health crisis we are experiencing." Also Monday, a 10th U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals panel upheld a lower-court order that overturned an Oklahoma ban. The 6th U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals also declined to hear an appeal by Ohio Attorney General Dave Yost seeking to reverse a judge's temporary restraining order allowing abortion facilities in the state to continue performing surgical abortions.  President's rollback of school nutrition rules vacated by court NEW YORK -- After making a brief comeback on school lunch menus, white bread and other refined grains may be vanishing again when schools reopen after a federal court vacated the Trump administration's rollback of school nutrition standards. The district court in Maryland said the administration did not give adequate public notice of the change, which had gone into effect for this past school year. The ruling was in response to a lawsuit brought by the Center for Science in the Public Interest and Healthy School Food Maryland and represented by Democracy Forward. The U.S. Department of Agriculture said it does not comment on ongoing litigation and it's unknown how the agency will proceed. The agency oversees the national school lunch and breakfast programs.  North Korea fires barrage of missiles from ground and air SEOUL, South Korea -- A barrage of North Korean missiles fired from the ground and fighter jets splashed down on the waters off the country's east coast Tuesday, South Korea's military said, a show of force on the eve of a state anniversary in the North and parliamentary elections in the South. The back-to-back launches were the latest in a series of weapons tests that North Korea has conducted in recent weeks amid stalled nuclear talks and outside worries about a possible coronavirus outbreak in the country. North Korean troops based in the eastern coastal city of Munchon first launched several projectiles Tuesday morning, South Korea's Joint Chiefs of Staff said in a statement. The weapons flew at a low altitude off the North's east coast, a South Korean official said.  Judge gives state of Alabama ownership of last US slave ship BIRMINGHAM, Ala. -- The last slave ship known to have landed in the United States more than 150 years ago has a new owner: The state of Alabama. A federal judge granted ownership of the Clotilda shipwreck to the Alabama Historical Commission in a one-page order released Monday. The decision by U.S. District Judge Kristi DuBose means the state will have final say over remnants of the ship, found on a muddy river bottom north of Mobile and publicly identified last year. The Clotilda, a Gulf schooner, sailed to West Africa on an illegal trip financed by a white businessman as a nation divided over slavery was building toward Civil War. It delivered 110 kidnapped Africans to Mobile before it was burned in a bayou in 1860 to hide evidence of the crime.  Cardinal links corruption to child abuse charges CANBERRA, Australia -- Cardinal George Pell has linked his fight against corruption in the Vatican with his prosecution in Australia for alleged child sex abuse. Pell was regarded as the third highest-ranking Vatican official in 2018 when he became the world's most senior Catholic to be convicted of child sex abuse. He served 13 months in prison before Australia's High Court last week acquitted him of molesting two choirboys in St. Patrick's Cathedral in Melbourne while he was archbishop of Australia's second-largest city in the 1990s. Pope Francis' former finance minister said in a television interview broadcast Tuesday that some church officials believed he was prosecuted by Australian authorities because of the trouble he had caused in the Vatican by his implementation of financial reforms.  Congress delays return to DC until at least May 4 WASHINGTON -- The Senate on Tuesday joined the House in delaying its next meeting in Washington, citing the need to protect members from the coronavirus pandemic. The delay also gives lawmakers more time to consider ways to deliberate while social distancing, amid ongoing talks about how to prop up the hard-hit economy. Congress is stalled over the followup to the largest rescue bill in U.S. history. Progress is complicated by the ongoing need to stay apart, the advanced ages of many lawmakers and by President Donald Trump's insistence that social distancing be eased soon. On Monday, House leaders announced they would not meet before May 4. Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell on Tuesday did likewise, saying the move was based on advice from experts.  In the Persian Gulf: Armed men boarded a Hong Kong-flagged tanker ship Tuesday off the coast of Iran near the crucial Strait of Hormuz, holding the ship for a short time before releasing it amid heightened tensions between Tehran and the U.S., authorities said. No one immediately claimed responsibility for the seizure, though suspicion fell on Iran's paramilitary Revolutionary Guard. Iranian officials and state media did not acknowledge the incident and the U.S. Navy's Bahrain-based 5th Fleet did not respond to a request for comment. The incident comes after a private maritime intelligence firm warned of suspicious incidents in recent days near the strait. CAPTION: Photo: A Libyan man stands Tuesday at the site of shelling on the Arada residential area in Tripoli. The forces of Libyan military strongman Khalifa Haftar rained rockets on Tripoli after being ousted by government loyalists from strategic towns west of the capital. MAHMUD TURKIA/GETTY-AFP CREDIT: Staff and news services 
