Chinese city where outbreak started plans to test residents Wuhan, the Chinese city where the coronavirus pandemic began, has announced an ambitious plan to test all of its 11 million residents for the virus in the coming days, a campaign that will be closely watched by governments elsewhere. The testing drive, which is likely to require the mobilization of thousands of medical and other workers, shows the ruling Communist Party's resolve to prevent a second wave of infections as it tries to restart China's economy. The plan was announced this week after Wuhan reported six coronavirus cases, breaking a streak of more than a month without any new confirmed infections. The city's goal of testing every resident is unrivaled in the speed at which Wuhan apparently plans to carry it out. Some countries, like South Korea and Germany, have aggressively tested and traced infections, albeit at much lower levels than Wuhan is attempting. In the United States, the rate of testing is still far short of the 3 million to 5 million tests per week that experts say will be necessary to safely reopen the country. Such comprehensive testing poses challenges. It is unclear how Wuhan will procure enough testing kits and process all the samples, and whether such a broad, systematic approach is the best use of resources when the city's infections are low. Early reports had suggested that Wuhan was planning to test all 11 million residents in less than two weeks, citing a government notice that called it a "10-day battle." But even state media reports acknowledged the difficulty of that task.  EU suspends delivery of 10M Chinese masks over quality BRUSSELS -- The European Commission said Thursday it has suspended the delivery of 10 million Chinese masks to member states and Britain after two countries complained about the poor quality of the batches they received. As part of its efforts to tackle the COVID-19 crisis, this month the EU's executive arm started dispatching the masks to health care workers. After 1.5 million masks were shipped to 17 of the 27 member states and Britain, Poland's health minister Lukasz Szumowski said the 600,000 items Polish authorities received did not have European certificates and failed to comply with required medical standards. The whole stock of masks was purchased from a Chinese provider via an EU fund. The masks were to be distributed in installments over a six-week span.  2 men accused in slaying of black man in Ga. hire attorneys DECATUR, Ga. -- Attorneys hired by the two white men accused of pursuing and killing a black man in Georgia said Thursday that their clients have been vilified and cautioned against a rush to judgment in a case that has drawn national attention. Gregory and Travis McMichael, a father and son, are charged with aggravated assault and felony murder in the Feb. 23 death of 25-year-old Ahmaud Arbery. Attorneys Bob Rubin and Jason Sheffield said at a news conference that while the shooting was captured on video, much about events leading up to the deadly confrontation remains unknown. Sheffield called Arbery's death "a tragedy." "Right now we are starting at the end," Sheffield said outside their Atlanta law office.  Trump administration relaxes rules about truck driver hours The Trump administration eased rules Thursday that limit working hours for truck drivers, and the changes brought immediate protests from labor and safety groups. The Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration extended the maximum working day for short-haul drivers from 12 hours to 14 hours and applied the longer hours to more drivers by expanding the geographic definition of short-haul driving. The agency said the changes will save trucking companies more than $2.8 billion over 10 years, will let drivers make more deliveries, and won't compromise safety. The agency did not change the current limit of 11 hours of driving time during a day. Labor leaders and safety advocates argued a longer day will lead to more fatigued drivers.  US offers condolences over deadly Iran incident DUBAI, United Arab Emirates -- The U.S. military offered condolences Thursday to Iran over a friendly fire incident that saw an Iranian missile kill 19 Iranian troops, identifying the weapon that detonated as an anti-ship cruise missile. Iranian authorities on Monday said the missile struck the Iranian navy vessel Konarak on Sunday near the port of Jask, about 790 miles southeast of Tehran in the Gulf of Oman. Fifteen Iranian troops were wounded. In a statement, Capt. Bill Urban, a spokesman for the U.S. Central Command, said the force offered "our sincere condolences to the Iranian people for the tragic loss of life." However, Urban also criticized the training for taking place so close to the Strait of Hormuz, the narrow mouth of the Persian Gulf through which 20% of all oil passes.  New Israeli government swearing-in postponed JERUSALEM -- Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu and his rival-turned-partner, Benny Gantz, on Thursday postponed the swearing-in of their controversial new government as the Israeli leader rushed to quell infighting within his Likud party. In a joint announcement, the men said they would hold a swearing-in ceremony Sunday to allow Netanyahu time to give coveted Cabinet appointments to members of his party. The delay came after three deadlocked and divisive elections and a year and a half of political paralysis. Netanyahu and Gantz, a former military chief, announced last month they would join forces to steer the country through the coronavirus crisis and its severe economic fallout. Netanhayu is scheduled to go on trial this month for corruption charges.  In Canada: The Calgary Zoo will return two giant pandas on loan from China because a scarcity of flights due to COVID-19 has caused problems with getting enough fresh and tasty bamboo to feed them. Er Shun and Da Mao arrived in Calgary in 2018 after five years at the Toronto Zoo and were to remain in Alberta until 2023. The zoo's president, Clement Lanthier, said Thursday that the facility spent months trying to overcome transportation barriers in acquiring fresh bamboo and decided it's best for the animals to be in China, where their main food source is abundant. Bamboo is rare in Canada and they prefer only certain kinds. CAPTION: Photo: Strong waves from Typhoon Vongfong batter houses Thursday in Catbalogan City, Philippines. The storm resulted in tens of thousands of people being evacuated amid the coronavirus outbreak. Nearly 800 have died of COVID-19 in the Philippines. SIMVALE SAYAT/AP CREDIT: Staff and news services 
The packed rush hour train and bus were until recently common features of urban life. But the daily ritual of standing shoulder-to-shoulder with strangers, silently grousing about backpacks while looking down at your phone and waiting for your stop, may not be repeated until the new coronavirus has been eradicated. Ridership has dropped precipitously on Metra, CTA and Pace, as it has on public transportation systems around the country. Just at the CTA, ridership is down 80%. When riders do return -- and that process is expected to take much longer than how fast they fled -- the experience is likely to be different. "The way people commute and the way people use public transit is going to have to dramatically change," CTA President Dorval Carter said. "Employers are really going to have to rethink how they want employees to come to work, when they want employees to come to work, and how flexible they're going to have to be." Among the possibilities: transit agencies altering schedules to avoid crowded trains, buses running frequently throughout the day instead of being concentrated at rush hour, and employers staggering work hours to ease crowding on public transportation, transit experts say. It also could mean, at least temporarily, more cars on the roads, and more people using bikes or scooters to get to work. Former commuters may be afraid of getting back on trains and buses, so transit agencies will have to demonstrate the systems are clean and safe, according to transit experts and officials. The CTA, for instance, is looking at new technologies like ultraviolet light to augment its current cleaning processes. Posters on the CTA remind riders to stay six feet apart. The state also mandates wearing face masks in crowded areas, like public transit. But during Wednesday's CTA board meeting, Carter said the agency "can't police common sense." Riders are responsible for their own safety, he said, and should not board a bus or rail car if it's too crowded. Ridership hasn't declined in the same way everywhere. Metra, which relies heavily on commuters, has seen ridership drop 97%, compared with CTA's 80% and 67% at Pace. Even within the CTA, ridership patterns differ, reflecting demographic differences within Chicago, with many Loop-bound "L" commuters staying home while many essential and lower-income workers still ride transit to work. CTA officials noted that ridership is down 90% on the Brown Line, and at Loop "L" stations, but hasn't dropped as much on South Side "L" routes or on buses, particularly major routes coming from the South and West sides. Crowding still happens on buses, and though the CTA has added buses to create more capacity, it isn't easy to predict when and where it's going to happen, Carter said. The CTA is boarding bus passengers from the rear doors in order to protect bus drivers, and Carter sees that continuing "in the foreseeable future." One way to encourage riders to use transit outside of rush hour is to charge lower fares during off-peak periods, said Audrey Wennink, transportation director for the Metropolitan Planning Council, a research group. While transit agencies have not publicly discussed lowering fares for off-peak weekday hours, CTA is not charging fares on buses that lack Ventra card readers at the rear door. Most buses don't have them, so most bus trips are free. Wennink said cities need to encourage biking. A new public scooter program, still being planned by the city, also could play a role, she said. "We don't want this to be a turning point of more driving, and going backwards in terms of equity and safety and sustainability," Wennink said. Transit agencies and governments also need to make it an easy choice for riders to wear masks, said Ben Fried, communications director for TransitCenter, a New York-based research and advocacy foundation. In Seoul, South Korea, for example, where there has been only a 30-40% drop in transit ridership, buses contain hand sanitizer and mask dispensers. "When the pandemic response is strong and transmission rates are low, the ridership effect is not as severe as we've seen in the U.S.," Fried said. Transit agencies need to make sure they communicate with riders about service changes and how they're keeping the system clean, and get input from riders about what they need, said Kyle Whitehead, spokesman for the Active Transportation Alliance, which advocates for transit riders, bicyclists and pedestrians. While agencies grapple with a path forward, they are dealing with the severe economic consequences of lost ridership. The CTA, Metra and Pace could see almost $1 billion in revenue losses this year, according to the Regional Transportation Authority, the agency that oversees transit budgets. The $2.2 trillion federal Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act is providing $1.4 billion to the RTA, but that may not be enough to cover revenue losses, which transit officials believe will extend into 2021. The American Public Transportation Association sent a letter to Congress last week requesting another $23.8 billion in COVID-19 transit funding to address additional cost and revenue shortfalls. Stephen Schlickman, a transportation funding and finance consultant, said there are two variables for transit going forward -- a fear of COVID-19, which could keep people off transit, and a lack of financial resources to sustain existing levels of transit. He said the CARES Act funding will "barely" get transit through the year unless agencies start to reduce service levels. "If they don't do that, then existing levels for service, with some haircuts, should continue through the summer, but there will be a cliff that they will fall off toward the end of year or early next year," Schlickman said. ---------- mwisniewski@chicagotribune.com CAPTION: Photo: A CTA passenger wearing a face mask exits a train at the Roosevelt station Thursday. JOHN J. KIM/CHICAGO TRIBUNE ; Photo: A CTA passenger wears a face mask to mitigate possible exposure to COVID-19 while waiting for a train at the Washington/Wabash station Thursday in Chicago. JOHN J. KIM/CHICAGO TRIBUNE CREDIT: By Mary Wisniewski 
Younghee Kim opened her apartment door Tuesday to find a small feast: rice, pineapple, ham, a variety of canned goods. "I'm scared to go out," Kim said. "They brought it to me." Kim, 66, lives in the J. Michael Fitzgerald Apartments, a five-story building on North Pulaski Road that houses low-income senior citizens. She ventures out occasionally for groceries at the nearby Aldi, but the long lines make her nervous, and she's noticed that prices, especially for meat, are creeping up and out of her budget. Tuesday's delivery was part of a citywide effort by Chicago members of the Asian American Law Enforcement Association (AALEA), a nonprofit that works to promote understanding, cooperation and cultural awareness between the Asian American community and its law enforcement officers. For the past six weeks, members of the Chicago Police Department, in cooperation with the AALEA, have been picking up food from the Mission of Our Lady of the Angels in West Humboldt Park and delivering it to communities around the city with sizable Chinese, Korean, Thai, Indian, Pakistani, Indonesian, Vietnamese, Lao and Tibetan populations. Officers have been delivering about 70 boxes of food per week to housing complexes and food pantries where they're told the need is strong, particularly among senior citizens. Their stops have included the Hanul Family Alliance, a community based nonprofit that services Korean immigrants, the Chinese American Service League in Chinatown and Zam's Hope community center in Rogers Park. "Our seniors are our most vulnerable population during this pandemic," said Steven Chung, a commander in the Chicago Police Department's 12th District. "Family members may have been bringing food by before this all started, their social networks have decreased, the city services they rely on may have seen reductions. And then you have people looking for something to blame this virus on and, unfortunately, the Asian community has caught the brunt of that." Henry Lai, a Chicago police officer and president of the AALEA, said the food deliveries aim to alleviate the novel coronavirus' economic impact on Chicago's Asian American residents -- many of whom, he said, work at now-shuttered restaurants -- as well as the isolation some of them are experiencing. "Besides being afraid of the virus, some people are afraid they're going to be attacked," Lai said. "We're here to tell them, 'If you ever encounter anything, feel free to give us a call.' Delivering food gives us a chance to check in and make sure they're OK." While the Chicago Police Department hasn't seen an increase in reported hate crimes against Asian Americans this year, Chung said that doesn't necessarily mean they aren't happening. "There's generally been a reluctance in the Asian community to report crime in general," Chung said. "They don't necessarily know if they'll be taken seriously. Sometimes when we look at the numbers, they're not always telling us the whole story." In March, the Asian Pacific Policy and Planning Council and Chinese for Affirmative Action started collecting data on incidents of coronavirus-related racism against Asians. The council's executive director, Manjusha Kulkarni, told the Tribune that more than 400 reports surfaced in less than a week. "We know there's a stigma," Chung said. "You hear it. You feel it." He hopes the officers' presence builds trust and good will, even as it provides some much-needed food. Haley Kim, service coordinator at the J. Michael Fitzgerald Apartments, said Lai emailed her last week to ask if some officers could drop off food boxes for the next two weeks. "It's very helpful to our residents," Haley Kim said. Roughly 50% of the building's 77 residents are Asian, Haley Kim said, and all but one are retired. Many of them don't feel comfortable venturing out to the grocery store, and the building is severely limiting outside visitors. Some residents don't have family nearby. "It's just me," said Younghee Kim, who was born in South Korea and came to the United States in 1991 to attend Northeastern Illinois University. Lai said the food deliveries also fill a space where AALEA's social activities used to be. The 37-year-old organization, which draws members from throughout the Midwest, gathers frequently for volunteer opportunities as well as an annual dinner, where $1,000 scholarships are granted to three high school students in honor of Chong Soo Lim, the first Asian officer killed in the line of duty in Illinois. "A lot of great work is being done by members of the Chicago Police Department, by essential personnel and by members of the community too," Chung said. "These are uncertain times -- nationwide and in our city. We just want to help whoever needs our help, the best we can." I find myself quoting Mr. Rogers' mom a lot lately: "Look for the helpers." In this city, you rarely have to look far. ---------- hstevens@chicagotribune.com CREDIT: Heidi Stevens 
They were mothers and fathers, daughters and sons. Many were proud grandparents. Two were sisters from a tightknit South Side family. All were loved, relatives say, and will be forever missed. As the number of deaths attributable to COVID-19 ticks upward, the Tribune is working to chronicle those who have lost their lives in the Chicago area or who have connections to our region. These are some of those victims. \ ARLOLA RAWLS, 81 Of Chicago, died April 10. In her church and around her neighborhood, Arlola Rawls was known as "Mama Rawls." Rawls had eight children of her own, and raised many of her grandchildren. But she also was a maternal figure to other neighborhood kids, offering love and support to her children's friends who had lost their own mothers. "They would come and just sit and talk to my mom about whatever was going on in their life," Rawls' daughter, Tenesha, said. "She treated them like she treated her own kids." Rawls, 81, died April 10 after contracting COVID-19, her daughter said, leaving behind six of her children and many grandchildren and great-grandchildren. She was known for her weekly Sunday dinners where she would feed more than 30 people with fried chicken and collard greens among many dishes of soul food. People would leave the church commenting that they planned to head to "Mama Rawls' house" for a meal. Rawls would head to her kitchen and begin cooking for hours. "It was like Thanksgiving in our home," Tenesha Rawls said. "Everyone was welcome. She fed everyone." Rawls was born in Mississippi in 1938 and moved to Chicago with two children when she was 17, part of the Great Migration, looking for a better life outside of the South. Spurred by persistent racism and discrimination to leave Mississippi, she still came to live in a heavily segregated city. Rawls, though, loved the hustle and bustle of Chicago. She found a community in her church and her neighborhood. The family settled on the South Side, where, through the years, she raised her family and worked in a factory, as a waitress and in a downtown hotel. "She loved Chicago," Tenesha Rawls said. "She began to call Chicago her home." Tenesha Rawls, who lived with her mother to care for her, took her to the hospital April 4 because she had a fever. Rawls didn't know then that it would be the last time she would see her mother. Arlola Rawls was diagnosed with the virus at the hospital. "I've never left my mom in a hospital by herself before," Tenesha Rawls said tearfully. "This was the hardest thing I've had to do in my life." Rawls was able to talk to her mother on the phone a couple of times. Her mother sounded OK, but Rawls wondered if she was putting on a brave face for her daughter. "She persevered through a lot of things," she said. "She was strong." -- Madeline Buckley  PATRICIA YANNI, 78 Of Geneva. Died May 1. Patricia Yanni wasn't Italian, but she was a good cook and learned to make the Italian delicacies she would teach her daughter to prepare. She had to reinvent herself after her husband died young, and took up square dancing later in life. She wasn't afraid to try new things, her daughter, Kristin Davison, recalled. Yanni, 78, died May 1 at the Bria of Geneva nursing home. She had COVID-19 and other medical conditions, Davison said. Yanni was born in the Bronx in New York City. She met her husband, John, in New York and the two of them loved the city, Davison said. They moved their family, which by then included three children, to the Midwest in the late 1970s, after John graduated from school to become a dental technician. They said they thought the Midwest was a better place to raise children, Davison said. They briefly lived in Indiana before moving to Carol Stream, then to St. Charles. Davison recalled their first winter in Illinois brought the blizzard of 1979. Still, they loved New York and took their family back for visits, Davison said. Yanni worked for a time at Sears, and for many years at Harris Bank in St. Charles. She loved spending time with her family, baking cookies and preparing Italian food that she learned to cook after she married her Italian husband. Davison recalls making pizza with her mother, and baked ziti, lasagna and eggplant Parmesan. Sometimes, her mother and father would even cook calamari. Yanni loved traveling and visited England, but her favorite vacation spot was on a beach, whether in Florida or the Indiana Dunes, Davison said. John died in 1991, at age 50, of pancreatic cancer. Yanni, looking to find herself, eventually took up square dancing, Davison said. "We used to tease her all the time because she had all the outfits," Davison said. "But she had so much fun with that, so that was wonderful to see how much fun she was having." Yanni and Davison became very close, Davison said. Her parents had taught Davison not to rely on others to fix things around the house, and she recalled undertaking a project with her mother to refinish the flooring in her St. Charles home. The two of them stayed awake until 3 a.m., laughing and talking. "She had a great laugh," Davison said. "And a great sense of humor." For the last eight years of her life, Yanni lived at the Bria of Geneva nursing home. She had multiple sclerosis and diabetes, and developed dementia, Davison said. In addition to her husband, Yanni was preceded in death by a child who died as an infant, Davison said. She is survived by three children, seven grandchildren and four great-grandchildren. -- Sarah Freishtat  PATRICK CONRAN, 91 Of Riverside. Died May 3. Twice wounded while fighting in the Korean War, Patrick Conran rarely talked about the harrowing experience or the personal sacrifice his military service demanded. Instead, the two-time Purple Heart recipient returned home to Illinois, where he raised a family, earned a college degree and led a life of quiet service to others. "He was an example of selflessness to all of us," said his daughter Karen Wagner. "He was a humble, honest and generous man, and lived a contented, peaceful life." Conran died May 3, a little more than a week after being hospitalized because of COVID-19. He was 91. Born July 30, 1928, in Chicago to Irish immigrant parents, he grew up on the West Side as the third of seven children. He attended Our Lady of Sorrows Basilica National Shrine grammar school and St. Philip Basilica High School. Conran took a job with Procter & Gamble after graduation and worked there for 43 years, except for a break to serve in the Army. Drafted in March 1951, he arrived in Korea in August and was almost immediately wounded in a battle, according to a Tribune article from the time. Conran rarely discussed the incident with his family, but he provided a first-person account of the experience in the 2005 book "Second to None: Warrior Voices" by Barbara Ann Derksen. According to the book, Conran was among 13 replacement soldiers sent to join G Company on a Korean hill on Aug. 14, 1951. On the night of his arrival, the hill was overrun by the North Korean army and the U.S. soldiers retreated quickly. "I was soon all alone, along a river," he recalled. "I was lost. I passed dead American soldiers lying in the river. While resting on the riverbank, I was spotted by the enemy. He tossed a grenade toward me. Shrapnel hit me in the legs. I fired my M1 in his direction. There was no more action from his area. I don't know if I hit him." Conran said he remained on the bank bleeding for some time, until a fellow American soldier arrived and helped him to safety even as they dodged friendly fire. Conran believed the man's name was "Pinkey," but he was never able to locate him or learn his true identity after that night. According to a Tribune story published in September 1951, the 23-year-old Army private suffered shrapnel wounds to his right foot and back. Conran was the only one of the 13 G Company replacements who survived the skirmish. After spending six weeks in the hospital, Conran returned to action and was injured by shrapnel from a mortar round. He spent three months recovering in a hospital in Japan, where his younger brother and fellow soldier, Thomas, was able to visit him. He returned to Chicago and his job at Procter & Gamble in 1952. Five years later, he married Patricia Cannon, and together they raised four children in the north suburbs. Conran received a business degree from Northwestern University in 1971, taking evening classes while holding down a full-time job and raising a family. The accomplishment caught the attention of his dean. "You must be a superior man to have completed 117 hours of evening study," then-Dean Daniel Lang wrote in a letter to Conran before his graduation. "Many, many times you must have been tempted to drop out -- to take the easy way. But no, you chose to overcome." Conran moved to Riverside in 1986, a few years before he retired from Procter & Gamble. He volunteered countless hours there tending the gardens of St. Mary Catholic Church and singing baritone in the parish choir. In 2005, Cardinal Francis George bestowed the Chicago Archdiocese's Christifideles Award upon Conran for his faithful service to the Church. "It was wonderful to see him be recognized because he was never one to call attention to himself," his daughter said. In addition to volunteering with Meals on Wheels and at local homeless shelters, Conran enjoyed singing in a barbershop choir and attending his grandchildren's myriad activities and milestones. In 2017, his four children joined him on his Chicago Korean War Veterans' Honor Flight to Washington, D.C. The entire family was moved by the experience, which included a visit to the Korean War Veterans Memorial on the National Mall and a hero's homecoming when he landed back at Midway Airport. "It was one of the greatest experiences of his life, I know it was," Wagner said. "It was so incredibly heartwarming to see him treated like a hero everywhere he went." Conran is survived by four children: Karen Wagner, Kevin, Michael and Michele Hunter; 10 grandchildren; and 8 great-grandchildren -- all of whom were able to gather with him on Zoom in the days before he died of the coronavirus. Due to COVID-19 restrictions, a celebration of his life will be held at a date yet to be determined. -- Stacy St. Clair  MARIA LOPEZ, 63 Of Burbank. Died May 4. Every February, Maria Lopez and a group of fellow nurses from the University of Illinois Hospital in Chicago would board a plane to someplace warm. For about a decade, they'd traveled to different locales, including Lopez's beloved Mexico, where she is from. This year, they went to the Dominican Republic. As the group of friends took a dip in the ocean, Lopez, who was recovering from knee surgery, did not go wading. "She'd say, 'That's OK, amiga, next year ... I'm going in,' " said her friend and fellow nurse traveler Mary Ann Zervakis Brent. But "there's not going to be a next year," Zervakis Brent said. Lopez, 63, died May 4 after testing positive for the coronavirus. Her sudden death shocked co-workers, who lovingly referred to her as "amiga" and "mama." "She has an enormous heart of gold," said Zervakis Brent, a nurse anesthetist. "She was like a mama to everybody." Lopez was set to retire April 30. After her knee surgery, she returned to work for one last month, only to get sick. She was a mother to two daughters, and a grandmother to two granddaughters, and every Sunday was a day focused on family. She loved to travel and dance, requesting anything from mariachi music to the Beatles at hospital parties. Even the knee issues didn't stop her. "She just would not stop dancing," said her daughter, also named Maria Lopez. "She would pull up a chair and use it for support and not stop dancing." She was a "lifesaver" not only as a nurse but also for everyone in the family. As the oldest of nine siblings, "basically since she was born, she's been taking care of people," her daughter said. When the younger Maria Lopez was 3 months old, her mom moved to the U.S. from Guadalajara, Mexico. After becoming a nurse in her home country, her mom learned English and became certified in America. At UIC, she worked alongside her brother, Jose Lopez. She was a patient, experienced nurse who worked in robotic surgery for decades, constantly learning and teaching in a growing field that was considered experimental 20 years ago. She assisted surgeons during procedures. "She loves the robot," Zervakis Brent said. "I used to tease her and tell her she liked the robot better than me." When medical teams visited from other countries, it was Lopez they learned from. Ivo Tzvetanov, chief of the division of transplantation at UI Health, said people would quickly realize it was Lopez who was the expert. After speaking with her, they would often send nurses to Chicago to learn from her. "It wouldn't be an exaggeration to say that Maria was probably one of the first and one of the most experienced nurses when it comes to robotics technology in the country," he said. In a profession where he is able to save many patients, said Pier Giulianotti, chief of general surgery and robotics at UI Health, this loss hurts. "I wish I could have done something for her." Fellow UIC nurse Jose Moreno said Lopez defied the stereotype of nurses squabbling with surgeons that people are used to seeing on TV. Instead, she was so beloved that while she was sick, everyone asked about her. "She was one that brought all people together," Moreno said. "She was an incredible, intelligent, hardworking nurse, and that's how she was treated at work by all her colleagues." When Zervakis Brent started at UIC, she was nervous about being the new person. But Lopez quickly enveloped her with her warmth. Year after year, she would invite her to join the trips until she accepted. "She took care of everybody," Zervakis Brent said. "She knew the value of getting people to do their best work by making them happy." After entering the hospital, Lopez was placed in intensive care but seemed to be improving, her daughter Maria Lopez said. She and her sister, Carina Rodriguez, were planning a welcome home party with a banner, balloons, flowers and a home-cooked meal. "She fought to the very end," her daughter said. "If she ever thought that she wasn't going to make it, she didn't express that to us at all." Her daughter is pained that after years of saving for a comfortable retirement, she never made it. But she said her mother set an example of enjoying life to the fullest. "I am happy that she did get to do so much with the life she was given," she said. "She didn't just sit at home and, 'I'm going to work, work, work, work, work, and then when I go on retirement, then I'll go and do my traveling.'" -- Alison Bowen CAPTION: Photo: (Arlola Rawls); Photo: (Patricia Yanni); Photo: (Patrick Conran); Photo: (Maria Lopez) CREDIT: Madeline Buckley, Sarah Freishtat, Stacy St. Clair, Alison Bowen 
The defining characteristic of the current national mood is profound uncertainty. We don't know how widespread the new coronavirus is. We don't know who may have it. The lack of information is a huge obstacle to resuming normal life. Donald Trump has reservations about the expansion of testing for the disease, because it raises the quantity of known infections. "If we did very little testing, we wouldn't have the most cases," he said Wednesday. "So, in a way, by doing all of this testing, we make ourselves look bad." With Trump, of course, optics are everything. In March, he didn't want a cruise ship with some ill passengers to disembark in California because it would boost the number of confirmed U.S. cases. "I like the numbers being where they are," he said. "I don't need to have the numbers double because of one ship that wasn't our fault." It was like trying to cure a fever by breaking the thermometer. This is just one of the many realities that the president doesn't understand about the pandemic. After backtracking on his plan to disband the White House Coronavirus Task Force, he tweeted that it would continue in operation but focus on "safety & opening up our country again" as well as "Vaccines & Therapeutics." What does that leave out? Testing. But a massive expansion of testing is the surest, safest way to speed our return to something resembling life as we knew it. A vaccine could take years to develop, and any big improvements in treatment may require time-consuming clinical trials to ensure safety and effectiveness. But testing could greatly reduce the need for them by greatly reducing transmission. And we know it could be deployed on a vast scale right away because other countries have already done it. The South Korean government responded to the pandemic by pushing private companies to quickly mass-produce test kits. "Korean officials opened 600 testing centers and pioneered the use of drive-through testing stations to reduce face-to-face contact indoors," reported Derek Thompson in The Atlantic, and "these pop-up centers offered patients 10-minute tests without forcing them to leave their cars." The results have been extraordinary. South Korea, with a population of 51 million, has recorded only 256 deaths from the disease -- compared with more than 77,000 in the United States, which has 331 million people. What's more, it achieved this low number without lockdowns -- allowing factories, theaters and restaurants to stay open. Testing is valuable in this fight for two big reasons. The first is that it facilitates the quarantining of everyone who tests positive. The second is that it allows tracing of those with whom they have come in contact, so that they can be tested promptly. But it has another virtue: giving people who test negative the confidence to mingle with others who also test negative. Even if routine dental visits were allowed, Nobel Prize-winning economist Paul Romer explained in an interview with The New Yorker, "I don't want to go back to the dentist's office in New York City until I know that he can show me a recent negative test, and he doesn't want me to come into his office until I can show him that I've got a recent negative test." As soon as both can get tested, they can proceed without much worry. Once tests are easily accessible, the fear of contagion will subside. Friends and relatives will feel comfortable getting together without masks and social distancing. Employees will be more willing to go back to work knowing their co-workers have tested negative. Restaurants, gyms and airlines might be allowed to operate without onerous restrictions by accepting only customers who can show recent confirmation that they are uninfected. This method isn't foolproof, because someone can test negative Monday and contract the virus Tuesday. But frequent testing on a mass scale would greatly reduce the chance that someone would unknowingly expose others. The federal government could come out ahead by putting money into making tests available at low cost to all. The recent shutdowns have cost trillions of dollars in government outlays and lost economic activity. If the federal government spent $100 billion to make tests available, as Romer suggests, it would recoup its investment many times over in a short time. Trump fears that more testing will make him look bad, but he's mistaken. Done enough, it could do him and the rest of us a lot of good. ---------- Steve Chapman, a member of the Tribune Editorial Board, blogs at www.chicagotribune.com/chapman . schapman@chicagotribune.com Twitter @SteveChapman CAPTION: Photo: Medical workers peer out from the tents before the start of coronavirus testing at the Vida Wellness Center in Little Village on Wednesday. ANTONIO PEREZ/CHICAGO TRIBUNE CREDIT: Steve Chapman 
They were mothers and fathers, daughters and sons. Many were proud grandparents. Two were sisters from a tight-knit South Side family. All were loved, relatives say, and will be forever missed. As the number of deaths attributable to COVID-19 ticks upward, the Tribune is working to chronicle those who have lost their lives in the Chicago area or who have connections to our region. These are some of those victims. \ JOHN LARRY SARTAIN, 77 From Des Plaines, died April 18. A gregarious Alabama native who rose each morning at 5 a.m. to read the Bible, John Larry Sartain "always loved to get a rise out of people," his daughter, Nicole Scholpp, recalled. "He had all these funny sayings: 'I'm fine as a froghair,'" Scholpp said. Or, she added, he would stand at the entrance to a Starbucks and say to a person about to enter: "Oh, they're out of coffee." "He just brought laughter into the world," she added. "That's what made him happy." A resident of Chicago's northwest suburbs, Sartain, who was known as Larry, died April 18 at Advocate Lutheran General Hospital in northwest suburban Park Ridge. He was 77. The Cook County medical examiner's office listed acute respiratory failure, a COVID-19 infection and dementia as causes of death. Born in Birmingham, Alabama, in 1942, Sartain moved to Chicago in his late teens or 20s, his daughter said, and settled in the city's Uptown neighborhood. There, he met his future wife of 51 years, Diane. Her parents owned the apartment building where they lived. From separate apartments, the two talked at night, communicating via the windows that faced an air shaft. "And love blossomed," Scholpp said. Sartain served in the U.S. Army in the 1960s. He was stationed in Korea, his family said. Over the years, his daughter said, he held many jobs, including selling State Farm insurance, delivering Dannon yogurt, washing windows and cleaning concrete. He and his wife lived in northwest suburban Des Plaines and in Elk Grove Village. Before his death, his daughter said, Sartain lived in the Generations at Oakton nursing and rehabilitation facility in Des Plaines. In addition to his wife and daughter, survivors include his son, Eric, and three grandchildren. Private services were held at the G.L. Hills Funeral Home in Des Plaines. A longtime fan of the University of Alabama Crimson Tide football team, Sartain was buried at Irving Park Cemetery wearing a camouflage green hat with the red Alabama "A" on the front. -- Blair Kamin  MORRIS LOEB, 90 From Northbrook, died April 7. Morry Loeb lived many lives across almost a century, with the final act of his 90 years landing on his birthday. Loeb was a performer, salesman, family man and executive. He wrote stories and plays. He trained for marathons. In his 80s, he was still heading into the office to mentor young colleagues and every day picking up his newspaper, reading cover to cover. His family said he was endlessly curious, never really finished. "He has lots of interesting stories because he's lived so many different lives," said his daughter Sandra Loeb. Morris Loeb -- known to many as "Morry" -- died April 7 of complications from the coronavirus. It was his 90th birthday. "He always felt like there was something else to experience or to do or to know or to hear about or investigate," his daughter Barbara Loeb said. "He still had an interest in what was going to happen next." In the early 1900s, Morris Loeb's parents emigrated from Russia and Poland. Loeb was born in Milwaukee and grew up on the West Side, attending Marshall High School. With his theatrical knack, Loeb loved making others laugh. He performed at Theater on the Lake and studied at Second City. His daughter Teri Sosa remembers film director William Friedkin casually visiting the apartment. Loeb married early, raised a family and launched into a professional career, starting as a salesman and becoming an executive vice president at United Insurance Company. He settled in Northbrook after his second marriage to Florence Anderson. Between the two marriages, he had three daughters and a son, who preceded him in death. Loeb was so proud of his children and grandchildren and all of their accomplishments, Sandra Loeb said. Her father never pursued an advanced degree, but he was able to watch his daughters become a lawyer, a physician and a professor. "A girl needed to have a profession, he used to say," said Sandra Loeb, an attorney. "That way I could marry whoever I want for love and not be dependent on some schmuck." The daughters said their father was progressive, a believer in equal rights for all people. His left leanings informed his life, Sosa said. He didn't shy from speaking truth to power. "What I really valued about him was the fact that he was just clear as a bell," said Sosa, the professor. "He was just smart as a whip." Her father's intellect was formidable, Sosa said. She delved into the family's genealogy, sharing information with her father about long-forgotten cousins, as well as relatives who were murdered in the Holocaust. Her father seemed curious about each new piece of his past, Sosa said, and wanted to know more. Loeb kept working through his mid-80s. His last job was for AccuQuote, an online insurance company. "At the time, I couldn't understand why someone so overqualified would want to come work for us," his former boss posted on social media. "But he just wanted to be able to have a meaningful way to continue to help people. And that's exactly what he did. Every day. "Honesty, integrity, and character matter," the post continued. "People can feel it. We felt it. His clients felt it. He was smart. He was knowledgeable. He cared. He lived his life following the golden rule, and he was a pleasure to be around. A true mensch. A gentleman. One of the really good guys." In his later years, Loeb kept in touch with his artistic side by participating in a writing group where he pulled from his own experiences to create plays and short stories. He kept attending shows at the Marriott Theatre in Lincolnshire or in the Loop. Sandra Loeb said one of the last shows she remembers seeing with him was "The Book of Mormon." "He loved it," she said. "He laughed louder than anyone in the audience." Morris Loeb also often had a response to whatever was happening on MSNBC. Or with the Bears. Sosa said she remembers visiting her dad when she was living in Philadelphia. "And I started cheering for the Eagles, and he just, oh, he let me have it," Sosa laughed. "Are you kidding me?" he said. "You've just been gone a few years and now you're an Eagles fan?" Now, she wishes there had been more time to say goodbye. "I will just miss the opportunity to know him more," Sosa said. In recent months, Loeb was living at the Warren Barr North Shore rehab facility. Sandra Loeb last saw her father during his brief stay at Highland Park Hospital before the shutdown. Sandra Loeb said she was working on finding a way to get him out of the North Shore facility when she received a call that his fever had spiked. Her father was taken to Glenbrook Hospital, where his condition deteriorated. Barbara Loeb, a doctor, said she worked as the go-between communicator for physicians and her family. The day he died, Barbara Loeb saw a cardinal in her backyard, a visit she saw as a possible sign of comfort. At her father's funeral at Montrose Cemetery, she read a poem about how past generations always find a way to carry forward. "Know that I am always with you," she began, continuing on to a small, masked crowd. "Even when you can no longer hear my voice or know my face. A loving part of you forever." The lilt of bagpipes from the funeral of a Chicago firefighter carried over to Loeb's burial site. "I like to think," the rabbi said, "that Morry, who loved to be the center of attention, perhaps would have appreciated the fanfare that is happening right now." -- Morgan Greene  JOSEPHINE TAPIRU, 56 From Chicago, died April 18. LUIS TAPIRU JR., 20 From Chicago, died April 14. Josephine Tapiru had been pulling extra shifts, working from 9 a.m. until sometimes 11 p.m., because the North Side nursing home was getting more and more short-staffed as co-workers fell ill. She kept a close watch on her temperature: still 98. Fine, she thought. After clocking out on April 3 from Park View Rehab, Tapiru told a friend her throat was getting sore and she was coughing. She stopped at a drug store, picked up a bottle of NyQuil and went to bed as soon as she got home. Sometime that night, she slipped into a coma. The world's novel coronavirus was beginning to take its terrible toll on her family. Tapiru was taken to the intensive care unit at St. Francis Hospital in Evanston. Her husband, Luis Tapiru Sr., would be admitted there within a week. Four days later, on April 14, their 20-year-old son Luis Tapiru Jr. was found dead on the couch of their home. Four more days passed and Josephine Tapiru died, too, without coming out of her coma. Friends and family waited nearly a week, when Luis Sr. was finally removed from a ventilator, to tell him about the deaths of his wife and son. The couple's lone surviving son watched the tragedy unfold from Ottawa, Canada, where most of his close friends and relatives live. "I can't be there right now, and that's the toughest thing,'' Justin Tapiru, 28, said April 24. "They were feeling fine. I haven't had time to think or grieve.'' His brother is one of the youngest people in Illinois to die from the disease. Luis Jr. had played football at Senn High School and seemed healthy, family and friends said. An autopsy found no underlying medical conditions that contributed to his death from COVID-19, a rare finding for someone so young. Josephine Tapiru had suffered from endometrial cancer, and it was listed as a contributing factor in her death, according to the Cook County medical examiner's office. She was 56. She and her husband had both worked as caregivers, in private homes and at long-term senior centers, though Luis Sr. had recently been working for a manufacturing company. Josephine Tapiru, a licensed practical nurse, worked at Park View Rehab in Edgewater, a short drive from the family's high-rise apartment, according to the family. "Good Jesus, it is really hard," said Josephine Tapiru's best friend, Joselyn Smith, crying. "I'm still denying it. But we have to move on. So we have to fight and move on. But it's just hard. I feel like I'm in a trance, that this is not so true. It's a big loss. It really happened so fast.'' On March 21, Josephine Tapiru was looking forward to her regular weekend chat with Smith. Catching up after a busy week was always fun, but this time she shared some disturbing news. "She was really so upset because one of her office mates was showing some symptoms of the virus,'' Smith said. "She was mad.'' Under state health guidelines, you were not supposed to work if you felt ill. "She was scared to death,'' said another close friend, Donna Oduca. Workers at the senior center wore masks, she said, but Tapiru was still worried. On April 1, Tapiru told friends that she was getting more and more worried as others on the staff called in sick and she was working longer hours. On the morning of April 4, her husband and son Luis Jr. went to work and assumed she was sleeping in because she had worked so late the night before. They checked in later in the day, but she didn't pick up the phone. Sometime after lunch, Luis Jr. called his father and rushed home to check on her. "My mom won't wake up,'' he frantically told Oduca, also a nurse, who lives nearby. "Call 911,'' she told him as she headed to the Tapirus' seventh-floor apartment in the 6800 block of North Kedzie Avenue. Using his CPR training from a job as a camp counselor, the son began chest compressions as Oduca walked in wearing "full PPE,'' she said. Josephine Tapiru remained unconscious as she was taken to St. Francis Hospital. The next day, the hospital called to say she had tested positive for COVID-19 and was on life support. "That was so sad,'' Oduca said. Luis Sr. began feeling ill on April 5. "Hey, I'm not feeling better,'' he told Oduca on April 10. Later that day, he was also taken to St. Francis and placed on a ventilator as he, too, tested positive for the virus. Oduca and her husband, Cezar, along with other friends and relatives, kept in close contact with Luis Jr., who remained at the family's home, and Justin. But they soon had trouble reaching Luis Jr. Normally, he would always text or call back. On April 14, Oduca and her husband called 911. A few minutes later, police called back. "They just said they found him on the couch, and he passed on,'' Oduca said. Four days later, on April 18, Josephine Tapiru was pronounced dead at St. Francis Hospital. For days, family kept the news of the deaths from Luis Sr., who remained on a ventilator and was not allowed visitors. Terrified he would find out on his own, Justin said he broke the news to his father on April 23 via video hook-up while his father was with a chaplain, a doctor and a nurse. Justin Tapiru says he will miss his little brother's maturity. "He was more of a big brother to me,'' he said. "When my mom got sick, I was sad and freaking out. I was in shock ... and Luis said: 'You know what? She's going to pull through this. She's the strongest woman we know.' His dream was to become a full-time Twitch streamer. But he had a backup plan: He would get a degree in communications. He loved pop music and electronic dance music. One of his favorite groups was Twice. He loved singing and even auditioned for "The Voice'' a few times, Justin said. He would have turned 21 in June. The brothers never got the chance to make birthday plans. Josephine and Luis Tapiru met in the Philippines and moved to Canada, where they both worked as caregivers. About 13 years ago, they moved to Chicago because "they wanted a better opportunity,'' Donna Oduca said. Both were praised in local obituaries for the care they gave to the elderly. Smith said she was like a sister, watching out for her and Oduca. "We were like the Three Stooges,'' she said. Smith, 45, an accountant who is working from home these days, recalled the first few weeks of the stay-at-home order. Josephine Tapiru would call her during her commute and say, "Be careful. Nobody's out here. It's scary outside. It's like a ghost town.'' -- Rosemary Sobol CAPTION: Photo: (John Larry Sartain) FAMILY PHOTO ; Photo: (Morris Loeb) FAMILY PHOTO ; Photo: (Josephine Tapiru) DONNA ODUCA ; Photo: (Luis Tapiru Jr.) DONNA ODUCA CREDIT: Blair Kamin, Morgan Greene, Rosemary Sobol 
