Chinese city where outbreak started plans to test residents Wuhan, the Chinese city where the coronavirus pandemic began, has announced an ambitious plan to test all of its 11 million residents for the virus in the coming days, a campaign that will be closely watched by governments elsewhere. The testing drive, which is likely to require the mobilization of thousands of medical and other workers, shows the ruling Communist Party's resolve to prevent a second wave of infections as it tries to restart China's economy. The plan was announced this week after Wuhan reported six coronavirus cases, breaking a streak of more than a month without any new confirmed infections. The city's goal of testing every resident is unrivaled in the speed at which Wuhan apparently plans to carry it out. Some countries, like South Korea and Germany, have aggressively tested and traced infections, albeit at much lower levels than Wuhan is attempting. In the United States, the rate of testing is still far short of the 3 million to 5 million tests per week that experts say will be necessary to safely reopen the country. Such comprehensive testing poses challenges. It is unclear how Wuhan will procure enough testing kits and process all the samples, and whether such a broad, systematic approach is the best use of resources when the city's infections are low. Early reports had suggested that Wuhan was planning to test all 11 million residents in less than two weeks, citing a government notice that called it a "10-day battle." But even state media reports acknowledged the difficulty of that task.  EU suspends delivery of 10M Chinese masks over quality BRUSSELS -- The European Commission said Thursday it has suspended the delivery of 10 million Chinese masks to member states and Britain after two countries complained about the poor quality of the batches they received. As part of its efforts to tackle the COVID-19 crisis, this month the EU's executive arm started dispatching the masks to health care workers. After 1.5 million masks were shipped to 17 of the 27 member states and Britain, Poland's health minister Lukasz Szumowski said the 600,000 items Polish authorities received did not have European certificates and failed to comply with required medical standards. The whole stock of masks was purchased from a Chinese provider via an EU fund. The masks were to be distributed in installments over a six-week span.  2 men accused in slaying of black man in Ga. hire attorneys DECATUR, Ga. -- Attorneys hired by the two white men accused of pursuing and killing a black man in Georgia said Thursday that their clients have been vilified and cautioned against a rush to judgment in a case that has drawn national attention. Gregory and Travis McMichael, a father and son, are charged with aggravated assault and felony murder in the Feb. 23 death of 25-year-old Ahmaud Arbery. Attorneys Bob Rubin and Jason Sheffield said at a news conference that while the shooting was captured on video, much about events leading up to the deadly confrontation remains unknown. Sheffield called Arbery's death "a tragedy." "Right now we are starting at the end," Sheffield said outside their Atlanta law office.  Trump administration relaxes rules about truck driver hours The Trump administration eased rules Thursday that limit working hours for truck drivers, and the changes brought immediate protests from labor and safety groups. The Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration extended the maximum working day for short-haul drivers from 12 hours to 14 hours and applied the longer hours to more drivers by expanding the geographic definition of short-haul driving. The agency said the changes will save trucking companies more than $2.8 billion over 10 years, will let drivers make more deliveries, and won't compromise safety. The agency did not change the current limit of 11 hours of driving time during a day. Labor leaders and safety advocates argued a longer day will lead to more fatigued drivers.  US offers condolences over deadly Iran incident DUBAI, United Arab Emirates -- The U.S. military offered condolences Thursday to Iran over a friendly fire incident that saw an Iranian missile kill 19 Iranian troops, identifying the weapon that detonated as an anti-ship cruise missile. Iranian authorities on Monday said the missile struck the Iranian navy vessel Konarak on Sunday near the port of Jask, about 790 miles southeast of Tehran in the Gulf of Oman. Fifteen Iranian troops were wounded. In a statement, Capt. Bill Urban, a spokesman for the U.S. Central Command, said the force offered "our sincere condolences to the Iranian people for the tragic loss of life." However, Urban also criticized the training for taking place so close to the Strait of Hormuz, the narrow mouth of the Persian Gulf through which 20% of all oil passes.  New Israeli government swearing-in postponed JERUSALEM -- Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu and his rival-turned-partner, Benny Gantz, on Thursday postponed the swearing-in of their controversial new government as the Israeli leader rushed to quell infighting within his Likud party. In a joint announcement, the men said they would hold a swearing-in ceremony Sunday to allow Netanyahu time to give coveted Cabinet appointments to members of his party. The delay came after three deadlocked and divisive elections and a year and a half of political paralysis. Netanyahu and Gantz, a former military chief, announced last month they would join forces to steer the country through the coronavirus crisis and its severe economic fallout. Netanhayu is scheduled to go on trial this month for corruption charges.  In Canada: The Calgary Zoo will return two giant pandas on loan from China because a scarcity of flights due to COVID-19 has caused problems with getting enough fresh and tasty bamboo to feed them. Er Shun and Da Mao arrived in Calgary in 2018 after five years at the Toronto Zoo and were to remain in Alberta until 2023. The zoo's president, Clement Lanthier, said Thursday that the facility spent months trying to overcome transportation barriers in acquiring fresh bamboo and decided it's best for the animals to be in China, where their main food source is abundant. Bamboo is rare in Canada and they prefer only certain kinds. CAPTION: Photo: Strong waves from Typhoon Vongfong batter houses Thursday in Catbalogan City, Philippines. The storm resulted in tens of thousands of people being evacuated amid the coronavirus outbreak. Nearly 800 have died of COVID-19 in the Philippines. SIMVALE SAYAT/AP CREDIT: Staff and news services 
The packed rush hour train and bus were until recently common features of urban life. But the daily ritual of standing shoulder-to-shoulder with strangers, silently grousing about backpacks while looking down at your phone and waiting for your stop, may not be repeated until the new coronavirus has been eradicated. Ridership has dropped precipitously on Metra, CTA and Pace, as it has on public transportation systems around the country. Just at the CTA, ridership is down 80%. When riders do return -- and that process is expected to take much longer than how fast they fled -- the experience is likely to be different. "The way people commute and the way people use public transit is going to have to dramatically change," CTA President Dorval Carter said. "Employers are really going to have to rethink how they want employees to come to work, when they want employees to come to work, and how flexible they're going to have to be." Among the possibilities: transit agencies altering schedules to avoid crowded trains, buses running frequently throughout the day instead of being concentrated at rush hour, and employers staggering work hours to ease crowding on public transportation, transit experts say. It also could mean, at least temporarily, more cars on the roads, and more people using bikes or scooters to get to work. Former commuters may be afraid of getting back on trains and buses, so transit agencies will have to demonstrate the systems are clean and safe, according to transit experts and officials. The CTA, for instance, is looking at new technologies like ultraviolet light to augment its current cleaning processes. Posters on the CTA remind riders to stay six feet apart. The state also mandates wearing face masks in crowded areas, like public transit. But during Wednesday's CTA board meeting, Carter said the agency "can't police common sense." Riders are responsible for their own safety, he said, and should not board a bus or rail car if it's too crowded. Ridership hasn't declined in the same way everywhere. Metra, which relies heavily on commuters, has seen ridership drop 97%, compared with CTA's 80% and 67% at Pace. Even within the CTA, ridership patterns differ, reflecting demographic differences within Chicago, with many Loop-bound "L" commuters staying home while many essential and lower-income workers still ride transit to work. CTA officials noted that ridership is down 90% on the Brown Line, and at Loop "L" stations, but hasn't dropped as much on South Side "L" routes or on buses, particularly major routes coming from the South and West sides. Crowding still happens on buses, and though the CTA has added buses to create more capacity, it isn't easy to predict when and where it's going to happen, Carter said. The CTA is boarding bus passengers from the rear doors in order to protect bus drivers, and Carter sees that continuing "in the foreseeable future." One way to encourage riders to use transit outside of rush hour is to charge lower fares during off-peak periods, said Audrey Wennink, transportation director for the Metropolitan Planning Council, a research group. While transit agencies have not publicly discussed lowering fares for off-peak weekday hours, CTA is not charging fares on buses that lack Ventra card readers at the rear door. Most buses don't have them, so most bus trips are free. Wennink said cities need to encourage biking. A new public scooter program, still being planned by the city, also could play a role, she said. "We don't want this to be a turning point of more driving, and going backwards in terms of equity and safety and sustainability," Wennink said. Transit agencies and governments also need to make it an easy choice for riders to wear masks, said Ben Fried, communications director for TransitCenter, a New York-based research and advocacy foundation. In Seoul, South Korea, for example, where there has been only a 30-40% drop in transit ridership, buses contain hand sanitizer and mask dispensers. "When the pandemic response is strong and transmission rates are low, the ridership effect is not as severe as we've seen in the U.S.," Fried said. Transit agencies need to make sure they communicate with riders about service changes and how they're keeping the system clean, and get input from riders about what they need, said Kyle Whitehead, spokesman for the Active Transportation Alliance, which advocates for transit riders, bicyclists and pedestrians. While agencies grapple with a path forward, they are dealing with the severe economic consequences of lost ridership. The CTA, Metra and Pace could see almost $1 billion in revenue losses this year, according to the Regional Transportation Authority, the agency that oversees transit budgets. The $2.2 trillion federal Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act is providing $1.4 billion to the RTA, but that may not be enough to cover revenue losses, which transit officials believe will extend into 2021. The American Public Transportation Association sent a letter to Congress last week requesting another $23.8 billion in COVID-19 transit funding to address additional cost and revenue shortfalls. Stephen Schlickman, a transportation funding and finance consultant, said there are two variables for transit going forward -- a fear of COVID-19, which could keep people off transit, and a lack of financial resources to sustain existing levels of transit. He said the CARES Act funding will "barely" get transit through the year unless agencies start to reduce service levels. "If they don't do that, then existing levels for service, with some haircuts, should continue through the summer, but there will be a cliff that they will fall off toward the end of year or early next year," Schlickman said. ---------- mwisniewski@chicagotribune.com CAPTION: Photo: A CTA passenger wearing a face mask exits a train at the Roosevelt station Thursday. JOHN J. KIM/CHICAGO TRIBUNE ; Photo: A CTA passenger wears a face mask to mitigate possible exposure to COVID-19 while waiting for a train at the Washington/Wabash station Thursday in Chicago. JOHN J. KIM/CHICAGO TRIBUNE CREDIT: By Mary Wisniewski 
The defining characteristic of the current national mood is profound uncertainty. We don't know how widespread the new coronavirus is. We don't know who may have it. The lack of information is a huge obstacle to resuming normal life. Donald Trump has reservations about the expansion of testing for the disease, because it raises the quantity of known infections. "If we did very little testing, we wouldn't have the most cases," he said Wednesday. "So, in a way, by doing all of this testing, we make ourselves look bad." With Trump, of course, optics are everything. In March, he didn't want a cruise ship with some ill passengers to disembark in California because it would boost the number of confirmed U.S. cases. "I like the numbers being where they are," he said. "I don't need to have the numbers double because of one ship that wasn't our fault." It was like trying to cure a fever by breaking the thermometer. This is just one of the many realities that the president doesn't understand about the pandemic. After backtracking on his plan to disband the White House Coronavirus Task Force, he tweeted that it would continue in operation but focus on "safety & opening up our country again" as well as "Vaccines & Therapeutics." What does that leave out? Testing. But a massive expansion of testing is the surest, safest way to speed our return to something resembling life as we knew it. A vaccine could take years to develop, and any big improvements in treatment may require time-consuming clinical trials to ensure safety and effectiveness. But testing could greatly reduce the need for them by greatly reducing transmission. And we know it could be deployed on a vast scale right away because other countries have already done it. The South Korean government responded to the pandemic by pushing private companies to quickly mass-produce test kits. "Korean officials opened 600 testing centers and pioneered the use of drive-through testing stations to reduce face-to-face contact indoors," reported Derek Thompson in The Atlantic, and "these pop-up centers offered patients 10-minute tests without forcing them to leave their cars." The results have been extraordinary. South Korea, with a population of 51 million, has recorded only 256 deaths from the disease -- compared with more than 77,000 in the United States, which has 331 million people. What's more, it achieved this low number without lockdowns -- allowing factories, theaters and restaurants to stay open. Testing is valuable in this fight for two big reasons. The first is that it facilitates the quarantining of everyone who tests positive. The second is that it allows tracing of those with whom they have come in contact, so that they can be tested promptly. But it has another virtue: giving people who test negative the confidence to mingle with others who also test negative. Even if routine dental visits were allowed, Nobel Prize-winning economist Paul Romer explained in an interview with The New Yorker, "I don't want to go back to the dentist's office in New York City until I know that he can show me a recent negative test, and he doesn't want me to come into his office until I can show him that I've got a recent negative test." As soon as both can get tested, they can proceed without much worry. Once tests are easily accessible, the fear of contagion will subside. Friends and relatives will feel comfortable getting together without masks and social distancing. Employees will be more willing to go back to work knowing their co-workers have tested negative. Restaurants, gyms and airlines might be allowed to operate without onerous restrictions by accepting only customers who can show recent confirmation that they are uninfected. This method isn't foolproof, because someone can test negative Monday and contract the virus Tuesday. But frequent testing on a mass scale would greatly reduce the chance that someone would unknowingly expose others. The federal government could come out ahead by putting money into making tests available at low cost to all. The recent shutdowns have cost trillions of dollars in government outlays and lost economic activity. If the federal government spent $100 billion to make tests available, as Romer suggests, it would recoup its investment many times over in a short time. Trump fears that more testing will make him look bad, but he's mistaken. Done enough, it could do him and the rest of us a lot of good. ---------- Steve Chapman, a member of the Tribune Editorial Board, blogs at www.chicagotribune.com/chapman . schapman@chicagotribune.com Twitter @SteveChapman CAPTION: Photo: Medical workers peer out from the tents before the start of coronavirus testing at the Vida Wellness Center in Little Village on Wednesday. ANTONIO PEREZ/CHICAGO TRIBUNE CREDIT: Steve Chapman 
They were mothers and fathers, daughters and sons. Many were proud grandparents. Two were sisters from a tight-knit South Side family. All were loved, relatives say, and will be forever missed. As the number of deaths attributable to COVID-19 ticks upward, the Tribune is working to chronicle those who have lost their lives in the Chicago area or who have connections to our region. These are some of those victims. \ JOHN LARRY SARTAIN, 77 From Des Plaines, died April 18. A gregarious Alabama native who rose each morning at 5 a.m. to read the Bible, John Larry Sartain "always loved to get a rise out of people," his daughter, Nicole Scholpp, recalled. "He had all these funny sayings: 'I'm fine as a froghair,'" Scholpp said. Or, she added, he would stand at the entrance to a Starbucks and say to a person about to enter: "Oh, they're out of coffee." "He just brought laughter into the world," she added. "That's what made him happy." A resident of Chicago's northwest suburbs, Sartain, who was known as Larry, died April 18 at Advocate Lutheran General Hospital in northwest suburban Park Ridge. He was 77. The Cook County medical examiner's office listed acute respiratory failure, a COVID-19 infection and dementia as causes of death. Born in Birmingham, Alabama, in 1942, Sartain moved to Chicago in his late teens or 20s, his daughter said, and settled in the city's Uptown neighborhood. There, he met his future wife of 51 years, Diane. Her parents owned the apartment building where they lived. From separate apartments, the two talked at night, communicating via the windows that faced an air shaft. "And love blossomed," Scholpp said. Sartain served in the U.S. Army in the 1960s. He was stationed in Korea, his family said. Over the years, his daughter said, he held many jobs, including selling State Farm insurance, delivering Dannon yogurt, washing windows and cleaning concrete. He and his wife lived in northwest suburban Des Plaines and in Elk Grove Village. Before his death, his daughter said, Sartain lived in the Generations at Oakton nursing and rehabilitation facility in Des Plaines. In addition to his wife and daughter, survivors include his son, Eric, and three grandchildren. Private services were held at the G.L. Hills Funeral Home in Des Plaines. A longtime fan of the University of Alabama Crimson Tide football team, Sartain was buried at Irving Park Cemetery wearing a camouflage green hat with the red Alabama "A" on the front. -- Blair Kamin  MORRIS LOEB, 90 From Northbrook, died April 7. Morry Loeb lived many lives across almost a century, with the final act of his 90 years landing on his birthday. Loeb was a performer, salesman, family man and executive. He wrote stories and plays. He trained for marathons. In his 80s, he was still heading into the office to mentor young colleagues and every day picking up his newspaper, reading cover to cover. His family said he was endlessly curious, never really finished. "He has lots of interesting stories because he's lived so many different lives," said his daughter Sandra Loeb. Morris Loeb -- known to many as "Morry" -- died April 7 of complications from the coronavirus. It was his 90th birthday. "He always felt like there was something else to experience or to do or to know or to hear about or investigate," his daughter Barbara Loeb said. "He still had an interest in what was going to happen next." In the early 1900s, Morris Loeb's parents emigrated from Russia and Poland. Loeb was born in Milwaukee and grew up on the West Side, attending Marshall High School. With his theatrical knack, Loeb loved making others laugh. He performed at Theater on the Lake and studied at Second City. His daughter Teri Sosa remembers film director William Friedkin casually visiting the apartment. Loeb married early, raised a family and launched into a professional career, starting as a salesman and becoming an executive vice president at United Insurance Company. He settled in Northbrook after his second marriage to Florence Anderson. Between the two marriages, he had three daughters and a son, who preceded him in death. Loeb was so proud of his children and grandchildren and all of their accomplishments, Sandra Loeb said. Her father never pursued an advanced degree, but he was able to watch his daughters become a lawyer, a physician and a professor. "A girl needed to have a profession, he used to say," said Sandra Loeb, an attorney. "That way I could marry whoever I want for love and not be dependent on some schmuck." The daughters said their father was progressive, a believer in equal rights for all people. His left leanings informed his life, Sosa said. He didn't shy from speaking truth to power. "What I really valued about him was the fact that he was just clear as a bell," said Sosa, the professor. "He was just smart as a whip." Her father's intellect was formidable, Sosa said. She delved into the family's genealogy, sharing information with her father about long-forgotten cousins, as well as relatives who were murdered in the Holocaust. Her father seemed curious about each new piece of his past, Sosa said, and wanted to know more. Loeb kept working through his mid-80s. His last job was for AccuQuote, an online insurance company. "At the time, I couldn't understand why someone so overqualified would want to come work for us," his former boss posted on social media. "But he just wanted to be able to have a meaningful way to continue to help people. And that's exactly what he did. Every day. "Honesty, integrity, and character matter," the post continued. "People can feel it. We felt it. His clients felt it. He was smart. He was knowledgeable. He cared. He lived his life following the golden rule, and he was a pleasure to be around. A true mensch. A gentleman. One of the really good guys." In his later years, Loeb kept in touch with his artistic side by participating in a writing group where he pulled from his own experiences to create plays and short stories. He kept attending shows at the Marriott Theatre in Lincolnshire or in the Loop. Sandra Loeb said one of the last shows she remembers seeing with him was "The Book of Mormon." "He loved it," she said. "He laughed louder than anyone in the audience." Morris Loeb also often had a response to whatever was happening on MSNBC. Or with the Bears. Sosa said she remembers visiting her dad when she was living in Philadelphia. "And I started cheering for the Eagles, and he just, oh, he let me have it," Sosa laughed. "Are you kidding me?" he said. "You've just been gone a few years and now you're an Eagles fan?" Now, she wishes there had been more time to say goodbye. "I will just miss the opportunity to know him more," Sosa said. In recent months, Loeb was living at the Warren Barr North Shore rehab facility. Sandra Loeb last saw her father during his brief stay at Highland Park Hospital before the shutdown. Sandra Loeb said she was working on finding a way to get him out of the North Shore facility when she received a call that his fever had spiked. Her father was taken to Glenbrook Hospital, where his condition deteriorated. Barbara Loeb, a doctor, said she worked as the go-between communicator for physicians and her family. The day he died, Barbara Loeb saw a cardinal in her backyard, a visit she saw as a possible sign of comfort. At her father's funeral at Montrose Cemetery, she read a poem about how past generations always find a way to carry forward. "Know that I am always with you," she began, continuing on to a small, masked crowd. "Even when you can no longer hear my voice or know my face. A loving part of you forever." The lilt of bagpipes from the funeral of a Chicago firefighter carried over to Loeb's burial site. "I like to think," the rabbi said, "that Morry, who loved to be the center of attention, perhaps would have appreciated the fanfare that is happening right now." -- Morgan Greene  JOSEPHINE TAPIRU, 56 From Chicago, died April 18. LUIS TAPIRU JR., 20 From Chicago, died April 14. Josephine Tapiru had been pulling extra shifts, working from 9 a.m. until sometimes 11 p.m., because the North Side nursing home was getting more and more short-staffed as co-workers fell ill. She kept a close watch on her temperature: still 98. Fine, she thought. After clocking out on April 3 from Park View Rehab, Tapiru told a friend her throat was getting sore and she was coughing. She stopped at a drug store, picked up a bottle of NyQuil and went to bed as soon as she got home. Sometime that night, she slipped into a coma. The world's novel coronavirus was beginning to take its terrible toll on her family. Tapiru was taken to the intensive care unit at St. Francis Hospital in Evanston. Her husband, Luis Tapiru Sr., would be admitted there within a week. Four days later, on April 14, their 20-year-old son Luis Tapiru Jr. was found dead on the couch of their home. Four more days passed and Josephine Tapiru died, too, without coming out of her coma. Friends and family waited nearly a week, when Luis Sr. was finally removed from a ventilator, to tell him about the deaths of his wife and son. The couple's lone surviving son watched the tragedy unfold from Ottawa, Canada, where most of his close friends and relatives live. "I can't be there right now, and that's the toughest thing,'' Justin Tapiru, 28, said April 24. "They were feeling fine. I haven't had time to think or grieve.'' His brother is one of the youngest people in Illinois to die from the disease. Luis Jr. had played football at Senn High School and seemed healthy, family and friends said. An autopsy found no underlying medical conditions that contributed to his death from COVID-19, a rare finding for someone so young. Josephine Tapiru had suffered from endometrial cancer, and it was listed as a contributing factor in her death, according to the Cook County medical examiner's office. She was 56. She and her husband had both worked as caregivers, in private homes and at long-term senior centers, though Luis Sr. had recently been working for a manufacturing company. Josephine Tapiru, a licensed practical nurse, worked at Park View Rehab in Edgewater, a short drive from the family's high-rise apartment, according to the family. "Good Jesus, it is really hard," said Josephine Tapiru's best friend, Joselyn Smith, crying. "I'm still denying it. But we have to move on. So we have to fight and move on. But it's just hard. I feel like I'm in a trance, that this is not so true. It's a big loss. It really happened so fast.'' On March 21, Josephine Tapiru was looking forward to her regular weekend chat with Smith. Catching up after a busy week was always fun, but this time she shared some disturbing news. "She was really so upset because one of her office mates was showing some symptoms of the virus,'' Smith said. "She was mad.'' Under state health guidelines, you were not supposed to work if you felt ill. "She was scared to death,'' said another close friend, Donna Oduca. Workers at the senior center wore masks, she said, but Tapiru was still worried. On April 1, Tapiru told friends that she was getting more and more worried as others on the staff called in sick and she was working longer hours. On the morning of April 4, her husband and son Luis Jr. went to work and assumed she was sleeping in because she had worked so late the night before. They checked in later in the day, but she didn't pick up the phone. Sometime after lunch, Luis Jr. called his father and rushed home to check on her. "My mom won't wake up,'' he frantically told Oduca, also a nurse, who lives nearby. "Call 911,'' she told him as she headed to the Tapirus' seventh-floor apartment in the 6800 block of North Kedzie Avenue. Using his CPR training from a job as a camp counselor, the son began chest compressions as Oduca walked in wearing "full PPE,'' she said. Josephine Tapiru remained unconscious as she was taken to St. Francis Hospital. The next day, the hospital called to say she had tested positive for COVID-19 and was on life support. "That was so sad,'' Oduca said. Luis Sr. began feeling ill on April 5. "Hey, I'm not feeling better,'' he told Oduca on April 10. Later that day, he was also taken to St. Francis and placed on a ventilator as he, too, tested positive for the virus. Oduca and her husband, Cezar, along with other friends and relatives, kept in close contact with Luis Jr., who remained at the family's home, and Justin. But they soon had trouble reaching Luis Jr. Normally, he would always text or call back. On April 14, Oduca and her husband called 911. A few minutes later, police called back. "They just said they found him on the couch, and he passed on,'' Oduca said. Four days later, on April 18, Josephine Tapiru was pronounced dead at St. Francis Hospital. For days, family kept the news of the deaths from Luis Sr., who remained on a ventilator and was not allowed visitors. Terrified he would find out on his own, Justin said he broke the news to his father on April 23 via video hook-up while his father was with a chaplain, a doctor and a nurse. Justin Tapiru says he will miss his little brother's maturity. "He was more of a big brother to me,'' he said. "When my mom got sick, I was sad and freaking out. I was in shock ... and Luis said: 'You know what? She's going to pull through this. She's the strongest woman we know.' His dream was to become a full-time Twitch streamer. But he had a backup plan: He would get a degree in communications. He loved pop music and electronic dance music. One of his favorite groups was Twice. He loved singing and even auditioned for "The Voice'' a few times, Justin said. He would have turned 21 in June. The brothers never got the chance to make birthday plans. Josephine and Luis Tapiru met in the Philippines and moved to Canada, where they both worked as caregivers. About 13 years ago, they moved to Chicago because "they wanted a better opportunity,'' Donna Oduca said. Both were praised in local obituaries for the care they gave to the elderly. Smith said she was like a sister, watching out for her and Oduca. "We were like the Three Stooges,'' she said. Smith, 45, an accountant who is working from home these days, recalled the first few weeks of the stay-at-home order. Josephine Tapiru would call her during her commute and say, "Be careful. Nobody's out here. It's scary outside. It's like a ghost town.'' -- Rosemary Sobol CAPTION: Photo: (John Larry Sartain) FAMILY PHOTO ; Photo: (Morris Loeb) FAMILY PHOTO ; Photo: (Josephine Tapiru) DONNA ODUCA ; Photo: (Luis Tapiru Jr.) DONNA ODUCA CREDIT: Blair Kamin, Morgan Greene, Rosemary Sobol 
US allows use of experimental drug to aid in virus recovery WASHINGTON -- U.S. regulators on Friday allowed emergency use of an experimental drug that appears to help some coronavirus patients recover faster. It is the first drug shown to help fight COVID-19, which has killed more than 237,000 people worldwide. The FDA said that Gilead Science's intravenous drug would be specifically indicated for hospitalized patients with "severe disease," such as those experiencing breathing problems requiring supplemental oxygen or ventilators. The FDA acted after preliminary results from a government-sponsored study showed that remdesivir shortened the time to recovery by 31% for hospitalized COVID-19 patients. The study of 1,063 patients is the largest and most strict test of the drug and included a comparison group that received just usual care so remdesivir's effects could be rigorously evaluated. Those given the drug were able to leave the hospital in 11 days on average versus 15 days for the comparison group. The FDA said that performance warranted Friday's decision, though regulators acknowledged "there is limited information known about the safety and effectiveness of using remdesivir." The drug's side effects include potential inflammation of the liver and problems related to its infusion, which could lead to nausea, vomiting, sweating and low blood pressure. The National Institutes of Health's Dr. Anthony Fauci said this week the drug would become a new standard of care for severely ill COVID-19 patients.  Duchess of Sussex dealt setback in lawsuit against newspaper LONDON -- The Duchess of Sussex lost an early round in a London court Friday when a judge dismissed part of her lawsuit against a British newspaper publisher that put out excerpts of a letter to her estranged father. Meghan sued Associated Newspapers for invasion of privacy and copyright infringement last year over articles in the Mail on Sunday that reproduced parts of the letter she wrote in August 2018 after the former actress known as Meghan Markle married Britain's Prince Harry. Judge Mark Warby threw out some of the causes of action argued in her lawsuit, including the claim that the newspaper publisher acted "dishonestly." Warby also struck the claim that Associated Newspapers deliberately "stirred up" a dispute between Meghan and her father, Thomas Markle.  NKorea report: Kim Jong Un makes public appearance SEOUL, South Korea -- North Korean state media says leader Kim Jong Un has made his first public appearance in 20 days. The Korean Central News Agency said Saturday that he attended a ceremony marking the completion of a fertilizer factory near the capital of Pyongyang. Photos from the ceremony weren't immediately released. Kim Jong Un was last seen during a ruling party meeting on April 11 to discuss coronavirus prevention. Speculation about his health swirled after he missed the April 15 celebration of the birthday of his late grandfather and state founder, Kim Il Sung. South Korea's government had downplayed rumors and unconfirmed reports that Kim was in poor health following a medical procedure.  NASA administrator urges launch spectators to stay home CAPE CANAVERAL, Fla. -- NASA and SpaceX on Friday urged spectators to stay home for the first home launch of astronauts in nearly a decade because of the pandemic. Top officials warned the public against traveling to Florida for the May 27 launch of two NASA astronauts aboard a SpaceX rocket to the International Space Station. For shuttle launches, hundreds of thousands of spectators descend on Kennedy Space Center and nearby beaches, said NASA Administrator Jim Bridenstine. "The challenge that we're up against right now is we want to keep everybody safe," he said. "And so we're asking people not to travel to the Kennedy Space Center." Bridenstine urged the public to watch the launch online or on TV from home.  Prison delayed for 2 in college bribery scandal An heir to the Hot Pockets fortune and a former investment executive who participated in the college admissions cheating scheme won't get to serve their punishments at home, but they can delay going to prison until this summer because of the pandemic, a judge has ruled. Michelle Janavs, whose family invented Hot Pockets, and Douglas Hodge, the ex-CEO of Pacific Investment Management Co., can remain free until at least June 30, U.S. District Judge Nathaniel Gorton ruled Thursday. Gorton denied their requests for home confinement, saying he will "not forfeit his obligation to impose a sentence that is warranted by a defendant's criminal conduct" despite the "evolving cause of concern" posed by COVID-19. Lawyers for Janavs and Hodge had argued it's too dangerous to send them to prison.  Lawsuit: DOE continued to garnish wages after order The U.S. Education Department has continued to garnish wages from workers who are behind on their student loan payments even after Congress ordered the agency to suspend the practice during the pandemic, a new lawsuit charges. The complaint, filed Thursday in federal court in Washington, alleges that thousands of workers are getting up to 15% of their pay held back because the Education Department failed to notify employers that they must stop withholding pay. It was filed by consumer and student advocacy groups on behalf of Elizabeth Barber, a 59-year-old home health aide in New York, and any others who have lost wages during the crisis. The department declined to comment on the lawsuit but said it has taken immediate action to halt garnishments.  In Honduras: References to the Honduran president appear throughout U.S. prosecutors' statements announcing drug trafficking charges against the former chief of Honduras' national police this week. For months, the U.S. Attorney's Office in Manhattan has been signaling that the ultimate objective of years of investigation and methodically built cases could be President Juan Orlando Hernandez. The president's brother, Tony Hernandez, has already been convicted and is awaiting sentencing next month. The president has always denied any ties to drug trafficking and did so again late Thursday, though most Hondurans long ago wrote off their president as corrupt. CAPTION: Photo: Pepper, a robot wearing a white surgical mask, greets Tokyo Gov. Yuriko Koike on Friday in the lobby of a hotel repurposed for mildly sick coronavirus patients. The switch is part of a new plan to free up beds at hospitals overburdened with more severe cases. EUGENE HOSHIKO/AP CREDIT: Staff and news services 
US allows use of experimental drug to aid in virus recovery WASHINGTON -- U.S. regulators on Friday allowed emergency use of an experimental drug that appears to help some coronavirus patients recover faster. It is the first drug shown to help fight COVID-19, which has killed more than 237,000 people worldwide. The FDA said that Gilead Science's intravenous drug would be specifically indicated for hospitalized patients with "severe disease," such as those experiencing breathing problems requiring supplemental oxygen or ventilators. The FDA acted after preliminary results from a government-sponsored study showed that remdesivir shortened the time to recovery by 31% for hospitalized COVID-19 patients. The study of 1,063 patients is the largest and most strict test of the drug and included a comparison group that received just usual care so remdesivir's effects could be rigorously evaluated. Those given the drug were able to leave the hospital in 11 days on average versus 15 days for the comparison group. The FDA said that performance warranted Friday's decision, though regulators acknowledged "there is limited information known about the safety and effectiveness of using remdesivir." The drug's side effects include potential inflammation of the liver and problems related to its infusion, which could lead to nausea, vomiting, sweating and low blood pressure. The National Institutes of Health's Dr. Anthony Fauci said this week the drug would become a new standard of care for severely ill COVID-19 patients.  Duchess of Sussex dealt setback in lawsuit against newspaper LONDON -- The Duchess of Sussex lost an early round in a London court Friday when a judge dismissed part of her lawsuit against a British newspaper publisher that put out excerpts of a letter to her estranged father. Meghan sued Associated Newspapers for invasion of privacy and copyright infringement last year over articles in the Mail on Sunday that reproduced parts of the letter she wrote in August 2018 after the former actress known as Meghan Markle married Britain's Prince Harry. Judge Mark Warby threw out some of the causes of action argued in her lawsuit, including the claim that the newspaper publisher acted "dishonestly." Warby also struck the claim that Associated Newspapers deliberately "stirred up" a dispute between Meghan and her father, Thomas Markle.  NKorea report: Kim Jong Un makes public appearance SEOUL, South Korea -- North Korean state media says leader Kim Jong Un has made his first public appearance in 20 days. The Korean Central News Agency said Saturday that he attended a ceremony marking the completion of a fertilizer factory near the capital of Pyongyang. Photos from the ceremony weren't immediately released. Kim Jong Un was last seen during a ruling party meeting on April 11 to discuss coronavirus prevention. Speculation about his health swirled after he missed the April 15 celebration of the birthday of his late grandfather and state founder, Kim Il Sung. South Korea's government had downplayed rumors and unconfirmed reports that Kim was in poor health following a medical procedure.  NASA administrator urges launch spectators to stay home CAPE CANAVERAL, Fla. -- NASA and SpaceX on Friday urged spectators to stay home for the first home launch of astronauts in nearly a decade because of the pandemic. Top officials warned the public against traveling to Florida for the May 27 launch of two NASA astronauts aboard a SpaceX rocket to the International Space Station. For shuttle launches, hundreds of thousands of spectators descend on Kennedy Space Center and nearby beaches, said NASA Administrator Jim Bridenstine. "The challenge that we're up against right now is we want to keep everybody safe," he said. "And so we're asking people not to travel to the Kennedy Space Center." Bridenstine urged the public to watch the launch online or on TV from home.  Prison delayed for 2 in college bribery scandal An heir to the Hot Pockets fortune and a former investment executive who participated in the college admissions cheating scheme won't get to serve their punishments at home, but they can delay going to prison until this summer because of the pandemic, a judge has ruled. Michelle Janavs, whose family invented Hot Pockets, and Douglas Hodge, the ex-CEO of Pacific Investment Management Co., can remain free until at least June 30, U.S. District Judge Nathaniel Gorton ruled Thursday. Gorton denied their requests for home confinement, saying he will "not forfeit his obligation to impose a sentence that is warranted by a defendant's criminal conduct" despite the "evolving cause of concern" posed by COVID-19. Lawyers for Janavs and Hodge had argued it's too dangerous to send them to prison.  Lawsuit: DOE continued to garnish wages after order The U.S. Education Department has continued to garnish wages from workers who are behind on their student loan payments even after Congress ordered the agency to suspend the practice during the pandemic, a new lawsuit charges. The complaint, filed Thursday in federal court in Washington, alleges that thousands of workers are getting up to 15% of their pay held back because the Education Department failed to notify employers that they must stop withholding pay. It was filed by consumer and student advocacy groups on behalf of Elizabeth Barber, a 59-year-old home health aide in New York, and any others who have lost wages during the crisis. The department declined to comment on the lawsuit but said it has taken immediate action to halt garnishments.  In Honduras: References to the Honduran president appear throughout U.S. prosecutors' statements announcing drug trafficking charges against the former chief of Honduras' national police this week. For months, the U.S. Attorney's Office in Manhattan has been signaling that the ultimate objective of years of investigation and methodically built cases could be President Juan Orlando Hernandez. The president's brother, Tony Hernandez, has already been convicted and is awaiting sentencing next month. The president has always denied any ties to drug trafficking and did so again late Thursday, though most Hondurans long ago wrote off their president as corrupt. CAPTION: Photo: Pepper, a robot wearing a white surgical mask, greets Tokyo Gov. Yuriko Koike on Friday in the lobby of a hotel repurposed for mildly sick coronavirus patients. The switch is part of a new plan to free up beds at hospitals overburdened with more severe cases. EUGENE HOSHIKO/AP CREDIT: Staff and news services 
While they are few in number, those who've decided it's their duty as Americans to protest coronavirus lockdowns are putting their self-interest over the health of others. Period. You can disagree with me and call me a liberal schmuck and stand by President Donald Trump and the protesters he's egging on all you want, but that won't change the fundamental facts of the coronavirus, how it spreads and where our country stands in dealing with the pandemic. In fact, by violating social-distancing rules, not wearing masks and encouraging like-minded folks to follow their lead, anti-coronavirus protesters are likely delaying the very thing they claim to desire: a reopening of America. Here are some facts the virus doesn't care whether or not you believe. Until there's widespread testing and contact tracing (tracking down and isolating everyone an infected person has come in contact with), it will be hard to prevent additional outbreaks or measure how many Americans have been infected. One of the most nettlesome problems with this virus is it can be spread by people who aren't showing symptoms. A new study of a town in Italy found 43.2% of people diagnosed with the virus were asymptomatic. According to an NPR report earlier this month, a third of the 82 people who tested positive for the coronavirus at a Washington state nursing home were "free of fever, malaise and coughing when they were swabbed for the virus, though most went on to develop symptoms." There are people in parts of the country saying "Well, no one around here has it." That's a statement based on zero factual evidence. People crowding around state capitol buildings calling for lockdowns to be lifted have no clue whether they're standing next to fellow protesters carrying the virus. As a country, we don't have the data to say any place is virus-free. Say you live in a small town in downstate Illinois. Nobody you know has gotten sick. That's certainly a positive sign. But do you have gas stations and restaurants in your town? Are you near an interstate that carries people from areas that have higher infection rates? Suppose someone from St. Louis is infected but not showing any symptoms, and that person decides to drive to Chicago and, on the way, pulls into at a truck stop just outside your town. Say two of your friends are there and they get exposed to that infected person in the truck stop diner. That's the first problem -- an asymptomatic person spreading the virus. The next problem is that coronavirus is highly contagious. Too many have equated the virus with the flu, thanks in part to Trump and other Republican lawmakers and conservative pundits making such comparisons. Hugh Montgomery, director of the Institute for Human Health and Performance at University College London, told a British television network the virus that causes COVID-19 is three times as infectious as the flu. That doesn't sound that bad, until you crunch the numbers. On average, a person with the flu will infect 1.3 people. So if you take that through 10 transmissions, one person will have infected about 14 people. "This coronavirus is very, very infectious, so every person passes to it three," Montgomery said. "Now that doesn't sound like much of a difference, but if each of those three pass it to three and that happens in 10 layers, I have been responsible for infecting 59,000 people." The "one passing it to three" is considered a high estimate. So say a person with coronavirus, on average, infects two people, a figure lower than epidemiological estimates. In 10 transmissions, one person would still be responsible for 1,024 other people getting the virus. "If you are irresponsible enough to think that you don't mind if you get the flu," Montgomery said, "remember it's not about you -- it's about everybody else." In February, a 61-year-old woman in South Korea tested positive for the coronavirus, at a time when the country had only 30 other cases. Hundreds from the woman's church wound up testing positive for COVID-19 and that one patient led to a massive outbreak. Just recently there have been coronavirus outbreaks at three Iowa food processing plants, a pork factory in South Dakota, a meat packing plant in Colorado and a wind power plant in North Dakota. What happens when there's an outbreak at a plant? It gets shut down. If one asymptomatic person at one protest has the coronavirus and spreads it to two more, then those two return to their hometowns and each spreads it to two more, you have the potential for another outbreak. And how will any state respond to a surge of new infections? By shutting down. I understand the worries protesters and many others are facing. My industry is being walloped by the coronavirus shutdown. Pay cuts, furloughs and layoffs are either happening or being weighed at news organizations across the country, including this one. I'd give anything for a swift return to normalcy. But until there's enough testing nationwide to allow public health officials to smartly and confidently start slowly easing restrictions, a rushed "great reopening" will almost certainly be followed by a less-great re-closing. If you want to protest something, protest the lack of adequate testing. Listen to governors, Democratic and Republican, saying it's the key to the realm. Help them push the federal government to recognize the urgency. But protest via phone calls and emails. Don't go out in large groups and think your chants will repel a virus. You put yourself at risk. You put others -- possibly hundreds of others -- at risk. And the end result may well be a longer lockdown time for everyone. ---------- rhuppke@chicagotribune.com CAPTION: Photo: A demonstrator leads protest chants during a rally Sunday in Olympia, Washington, against Gov. Jay Inslee's 'Stay Home, Stay Healthy' emergency order in response to the coronavirus pandemic. RUTH FREMSON/THE NEW YORK TIMES CREDIT: Rex W. Huppke 
Influential Congressional Black Caucus PAC backs Biden's bid DETROIT -- The Congressional Black Caucus PAC endorsed Joe Biden's presidential bid on Monday, further cementing his support among the nation's influential black political leadership. The political action committee's unanimous endorsement came on the heels of several key nods of support among caucus leadership and members, including civil rights icon Rep. John Lewis of Georgia and caucus Chairwoman Rep. Karen Bass of California. The PAC is the caucus's separate campaign arm. "There's no question that Joe Biden is badly needed by this country," CBC PAC Chairman Rep. Gregory Meeks of New York said. "His leadership, his experience, his understanding on how to get things done and his ability to work and pull people together is needed now more than ever. We need someone that is a healer and not a divider, and that's Joe Biden." Biden, who is on the cusp of clinching the Democratic presidential nomination, had already scored key endorsements from 38 of the 54 members of the group, which is composed of most African American members of Congress. Black voters have long anchored the former vice president's White House bid with overwhelming support in South Carolina, on Super Tuesday and in Midwestern states like Michigan. But that was before the coronavirus pandemic disrupted the race, forcing several states with significant black populations, like Georgia, to postpone their primaries. African Americans have been disproportionately affected by COVID-19.  US report: Kim Jong Un in 'grave danger' after surgery SEOUL, South Korea -- The South Korean government on Tuesday was looking into U.S. media reports saying North Korean leader Kim Jong Un was in fragile condition after surgery. Officials from South Korea's Unification Ministry and National Intelligence Service said they couldn't immediately confirm the report. CNN cited an anonymous U.S. official who said Kim was in "grave danger." The Unification Ministry, which deals with inter-Korean affairs, said it couldn't confirm another report by Daily NK, which cited anonymous sources to report that Kim was recovering from heart surgery in the capital Pyongyang and that his condition was improving. Speculation on Kim's health was raised after he missed the celebration of his late grandfather and state founder Kim Il Sung on Wednesday.  Court: To help fight virus, Texas can ban medication abortions NEW ORLEANS -- Texas can ban medication abortions as part of the state's effort to fight the spread of the new coronavirus, a federal appeals court panel ruled Monday. The 5th Circuit Court of Appeals in New Orleans last week temporarily blocked the state's prohibition on medication abortions while it gave more consideration to the issue. The same panel, in a 2-1 decision, said Monday the state was within its rights to ban that -- and other abortion procedures -- as it sought to slow the use of masks, gowns and other protective medical gear. The majority opinion said a lower court erred by treating a medication abortion as "an absolute right." Clinics have argued that medication abortions do not require personal protective equipment.  Brazil's Bolsonaro calls for social isolation to end this week SAO PAULO -- Four days after firing his health minister amid the coronavirus pandemic, Brazilian President Jair Bolsonaro said Monday he wants social isolation policies to end nationwide this week, though many Brazilian states are committed to such policies. Nearly all states have stay-home measures in place, some slated to extend until mid-May. The country's top court has ruled governors and mayors can decide on social isolation measures regardless of the federal government's position. Bolsonaro, meanwhile, wants a quick reopening to stop the deterioration of Brazil's faltering economy. The Brazilian president favors a less restrictive model in which only those in high-risk groups would be quarantined at home until the end of the outbreak.  Burkina Faso killed 31 unarmed men, report says OUAHIGOUYA, Burkina Faso -- Burkina Faso's security forces reportedly killed 31 unarmed men in the country's north, according to a report on Monday by Human Rights Watch. The killings occurred on April 9 after the men were detained during a government counterterrorism operation in the town of Djibo, the report said. The West African nation continues to be wracked by violence linked to Islamic extremists and local defense militias, which has displaced nearly 840,000 people within Burkina Faso. The report's writers interviewed 17 people with knowledge of the killings and found all of the victims were ethnic Fulani. The Fulani have been increasingly targeted by the military and local defense militias for their alleged affiliation with Islamist groups.  Trump plans temporary suspension on immigration WASHINGTON -- President Donald Trump said late Monday he will sign an executive order "to temporarily suspend immigration into the United States" because of the coronavirus. "In light of the attack from the Invisible Enemy, as well as the need to protect the jobs of our GREAT American Citizens, I will be signing an Executive Order to temporarily suspend immigration into the United States!" Trump tweeted. He offered no details as to what immigration programs might be affected. The White House did not immediately elaborate. Trump has taken credit for his restrictions on travel from China and hard-hit European countries, arguing it contributed to slowing viral spread in the U.S. He's yet to extend those restrictions to other nations now experiencing virus outbreaks.  In Turkey: Turkey's president on Monday accused the Syrian government of taking advantage of the world's preoccupation with the coronavirus pandemic to increase attacks in rebel-held northwestern Syria in violation of a truce. In an address to the nation following a Cabinet meeting, President Recep Tayyip Erdogan threatened to take action if the alleged Syrian government violations in Idlib province continue. Erdogan's threat came amid reports of limited Syrian violations and exchanges of fire between troops and Turkey-backed opposition forces. The cease-fire deal was brokered March 5 between Russia and Turkey, which back opposing sides in the Syrian conflict. CAPTION: Photo: Stormy South: The heavily damaged home of Brian and Penny Templesis of Baxterville, Mississippi, is seen Monday, one day after a tornado hit. Suspected twisters and a house fire from a lightning strike left three people dead in Alabama, Mississippi and Georgia. CAM BONELLI/THE CLARION-LEDGER CREDIT: Staff and news services 
Amid possible tornado threat, storms rake Southern states MONTGOMERY, Ala. -- High winds, hail and heavy rain pounded parts of Alabama on Sunday, as forecasters warned residents to brace for possible tornadoes and flooding later in the day across a wide swatch of the southern United States. Tornado watches covered a swath of east Texas and large parts of Louisiana and Mississippi on Sunday afternoon. More than 24,000 customers were without electricity early Sunday, according to www.poweroutage.us. It was the second Sunday in a row that the South was hit with severe weather. Four Alabama counties were under a flash flood warning through the late morning because of heavy rain: Bibb, Chilton, Coosa and Shelby, the National Weather Service said. High winds had uprooted trees and left blankets of hail on the ground in some areas, the National Weather Service reported. "Two to three inches of rain has already fallen and an additional one to two inches is possible," the agency said on its website. A second wave of storms was expected to develop Sunday afternoon and bring the risk of strong tornadoes into the evening, the National Weather Service said. Large twisters were a possibility for parts of Louisiana, Mississippi and Alabama. A zone from the Texas-Louisiana line that extends eastward across the southern parts of Mississippi, Alabama and into Georgia will be at greatest risk of severe weather and tornadoes. The area is home to more than 5 million people. Damaging winds and a tornado threat will also extend across Georgia and parts of South Carolina.  Biden wins mail-in Wyoming Democratic presidential caucus CHEYENNE, Wyo. -- Joe Biden has won Wyoming's Democratic presidential caucus, which had been postponed for two weeks and scaled back to just mail-in ballots because of the coronavirus pandemic, state party officials said Sunday. The results come less than two weeks after Bernie Sanders dropped out and endorsed Biden, who is the only candidate still actively seeking the Democratic nomination. Biden beat Sanders 72% to 28%. A total of 15,428 votes were cast. Biden gets 12 delegates and Sanders gets two. Biden led Sanders in the delegate count 1,305 to 939. The Biden and Sanders campaigns are in talks over allowing Sanders to keep some of his statewide delegates. The Wyoming Democratic Party announced the results after tabulating votes Saturday and auditing the results overnight.  Official: Police kill gunmanwho hijacked Dallas-area bus ROWLETT, Texas -- A man opened fire on a Dallas-area bus on Sunday, hijacking it with two people aboard and leading officers on a chase that ended in a shootout in which the man was killed and three officers were wounded, according to police officials. A man got on the Dallas Area Rapid Transit bus in Richardson, just north of Dallas, at around 11 a.m. and opened fire, shattering windows, a DART spokesman said. The man took the driver hostage and fired at DART officers who tried to stop the vehicle, said Garland police officer Pedro Barineau. Police eventually used a spike strip to stop the vehicle, Barineau said. The man continued firing as he exited the bus after it stopped, and officers returned fire, killing him, Barineau said.  North Korea denies that Kim sent Trump 'a nice note' SEOUL, South Korea -- North Korea on Sunday dismissed as "ungrounded" President Donald Trump's comment that he received "a nice note" from the North's leader, Kim Jong Un. Trump said during a press briefing on the coronavirus pandemic Saturday that "I received a nice note from him recently. It was a nice note. I think we're doing fine." Trump also defended now-stalled nuclear diplomacy with Kim, saying the U.S. would have been at war with North Korea if he had not been elected. North Korea's Foreign Ministry said in a statement that there was no letter addressed to Trump recently by "the supreme leadership," a reference to Kim. It said it would examine why the U.S. leadership released "the ungrounded story" to the media.  Iran admits encounter with US ship during a drill TEHRAN, Iran -- Iran's paramilitary Revolutionary Guard acknowledged Sunday it had a tense encounter with U.S. warships in the Persian Gulf last week, but alleged without offering evidence that American forces sparked the incident. The incident Wednesday saw the U.S. Navy release video of small Iranian fast boats coming close to American warships as they operated in the northern Persian Gulf near Kuwait, with U.S. Army Apache helicopters. In the Guard's telling, its forces were conducting a drill and faced "the unprofessional and provocative actions of the United States and their indifference to warnings." It said the Americans later withdrew. The Guard released no evidence to support its allegation, but did release a video showing an Iranian boat traveling in parallel with a U.S. warship.  Israelis accuse Netanyahu of endangering democracy TEL AVIV, Israel -- More than 2,000 Israelis took to the streets of Tel Aviv on Sunday, demonstrating against Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu's attempts to form an "emergency" government with his chief rival and accusing him of using the coronavirus crisis to escape prosecution on corruption charges. Demonstrators wore face masks and largely kept their distance from one another, in line with social-distancing rules, as speakers criticized Netanyahu's possible partnership with rival Benny Gantz. Gantz, who during three bitter elections over the past year vowed never to sit in a government with Netanyahu due to his legal problems, announced last month that he had accepted the prime minister's suggestion to form an "emergency" government.  In Yemen: Yemen's rebels on Sunday detained a former culture minister and writer who was a vocal critic of their rule, his family and lawyer said. The rebels, known as Houthis, stormed Khalid al-Rwaishan's home in a suburb of the capital Sanaa at dawn, seizing documents. Al-Rwaishan was then taken to an undisclosed location, said his lawyer, Waddah Qutaish. The former minister's son, Waddah al-Rwaishan, confirmed the arrest, saying that the Houthis "abducted" him. A spokesman for the Houthi rebels did not respond to phone calls seeking comment. Khalid al-Rwaishan served as culture minister in 2006 in the government of former President Ali Abdullah Saleh. CAPTION: Photo: Ecumenical Patriarch Bartholomew I, left, the spiritual leader of the world's Orthodox Christians, leads the Orthodox Easter service Sunday at the Patriarchal Church of St. George in Istanbul, which was held without worshippers to help contain the coronavirus. SAHIN ERDEM/EPA CREDIT: Staff and news services 
Mark Weidemaier is scanned daily upon entering KIA Champions Field, and it doesn't bother him one bit. "We're probably in the safest place in the world," Weidemaier, a coach for the KIA Tigers, said Friday morning before an intrasquad game in Gwangju, South Korea. "We're playing baseball." Weidemaier, 65, a former scout and coach for nine major-league teams, expressed optimism that the Korea Baseball Organization will start exhibition play Tuesday and open the season May 5, about 3 1/2 months after the coronavirus outbreak hit the country. "It's pretty much business as usual," Weidemaier said. "The government has done a great job of testing. We get body scanned as soon as we walk into the stadium. The front office workers wear masks." Weidemaier, however, wonders if Major League Baseball will play this season, based on what he has seen of the United States on CNN compared with the progressive steps taken in Korea. "One thing is for sure," Weidemaier said, "a lot of things are going to change." Tigers workouts are "what you see in a normal spring training," Weidemaier said. But he anticipates that they'll play home games in front of 20,500 empty seats as a safety measure. Weidemaier, who worked as an advance scout for the White Sox in the late 1990s and has worked in the Far East before this season, was aware that some Korean players wore masks during workouts in Seoul, which is about four hours north of Gwangju. That hasn't been the case with the Tigers, but manager (and former Giants and Diamondbacks slugger) Matt Williams, the coaching staff -- which includes former Cubs first baseman Hee Seop Choi as hitting coach and former Mets pitcher Jae Weong Seo as pitching coach -- players and support staff have practiced social distancing with few exceptions, such as handshakes and an occasional hug. The team started testing all employees, and any with a fever was sent home and quarantined. Signs are posted throughout the Tigers clubhouse and dugout emphasizing social distancing. "You've got to go out and eat at some point," Weidemaier said. "But you just adhere to social distancing and keep your fingers crossed. "The testing has been great." The coronavirus has been in the minds of the Tigers since they departed for Fort Myers, Fla., to start spring training Jan. 28 -- eight days after the first case was diagnosed in Korea, according to the World Health Organization. The Tigers, who have won 11 Korea Series titles since the league's inception in 1982, played 20 exhibition games and were ready to return March 6 but stayed in Florida for health and safety reasons. The family of one of the players was part of a Daegu, South Korea, church community that the virus infected, and the family remains quarantined in the city of nearly 2.5 million, Weidemaier said. Despite the delay, the Tigers found some independent-league teams to play in Florida before returning to Korea on March 16. "We were ready to play (by March 6)," Weidemaier said. "It's been a grind to keep guys mentally sharp." The Tigers returned to their homes immediately and were not quarantined upon arriving from the U.S. The team also has emphasized to Americans Preston Tucker, Drew Gagnon and former Cubs minor-leaguer Aaron Brooks and their families to limit travel from their apartments to the ballpark. "Some teams let their American players go home to the states, and they had to go into quarantine when they returned," Weidemaier said. "We've been very fortunate here." CAPTION: Photo: The LG Twins play an intrasquad game in an empty ballpark on April 5 in Seoul, South Korea. The game was aired through the team's YouTube channel. LEE JIN-MAN/AP CREDIT: By Mark Gonzales 
Richest countries will freeze poorer nations' debt payment JOHANNESBURG -- The world's richest countries agreed Wednesday to freeze poor nations' debt obligations, shortly after nearly 20 European and African leaders made a joint appeal for a massive international effort to boost Africa's coronavirus response, saying that "only a global victory that fully includes Africa can bring this pandemic to an end." Finance ministers of the G-20 group of major economies, which includes the U.S., China, India and others, said they will immediately put on hold poor countries' obligations to service debt they owe. The statement issued after a video conference put to rest concerns that China would block such a measure, which is aimed at helping the poorest nations focus their spending on health care and assistance to vulnerable people to contain the outbreak and its fallout. The joint appeal signed by the leaders of France, Ethiopia, Germany, South Africa and other nations, published in the Financial Times, had called for dramatic measures that include an immediate moratorium on all debt payments, public and private, until the pandemic is over. While the G-20 did not specify how many countries would benefit, French Finance Minister Bruno Le Maire said 76 countries were eligible for the moratorium, including about 40 in sub-Saharan Africa. Debt payments worth $20 billion will be suspended, including $8 billion owed to private creditors and $12 billion owed to other countries, he said. An additional $12 billion in debt payments to multilateral institutions like the World Bank are also under consideration for a debt freeze.  High turnout in South Korean election despite pandemic fears SEOUL, South Korea -- Millions of South Koreans wore masks and disposable gloves as they voted in parliamentary elections Wednesday, the highest turnout in nearly three decades despite the coronavirus. The government resisted calls to postpone the elections billed as a midterm referendum on President Moon Jae-in, who enters the final two years of his single five-year term grappling with a historic public health crisis that is unleashing massive economic shock. Exit polls conducted by TV stations indicated that Moon's Democratic Party and a satellite party it created to win proportional representative seats would combine for a majority in the 300-seat National Assembly. The long lines followed record-high early voting Friday and Saturday, and defied expectations of a low turnout.  FDA OKs low-cost ventilator developed by U. of Minnesota MINNEAPOLIS -- The U.S. Food and Drug Administration on Wednesday approved a low-cost ventilator developed by the University of Minnesota. The FDA authorized use of the compact device, known as the Coventor, that was developed and designed by a team of university researchers, a medical school resident and an engineer. The developers hope the Coventor will be used in clinical settings where traditional ventilators are unavailable. "With FDA authorization, we are closer to that happening," said Stephen Richardson, a cardiac anesthesiology fellow in the Medical School, M Health Fairview. Ventilators are used to help increase blood oxygen levels and have been in short supply as hospitals deal with COVID-19.  Students could take SAT at home if schools remain closed A home version of the SAT college entrance exam is being prepared in case schools remain closed into the fall, College Board officials said Wednesday as they announced the cancellation of June testing. Instead of a paper-and-pencil test given under proctors' supervision, the home version would be digital and rely on "remote proctoring." That could include using the computer's camera and microphone to monitor movement or talking, College Board President Jeremy Singer said on a conference call with reporters. Coronavirus-related school closures forced cancellation of spring testing for 1 million first-time test-takers, the majority of them juniors planning to enter college in 2021, officials said. The national June 6 session is the latest to be canceled.  DOJ watchdog reviewing prisons for virus safety WASHINGTON -- The Justice Department's inspector general will conduct remote inspections of Bureau of Prisons facilities to ensure they are following best practices to mitigate the spread of the coronavirus after hundreds of federal inmates tested positive for the virus. The review announced Wednesday comes as the federal prison system struggles with a growing number of coronavirus cases and complaints from inmates, advocacy groups and correction officers about how officials are handling the pandemic among their 122 facilities. Attorney General William Barr recently sent some of his closest advisers to federal prisons identified as coronavirus hot spots, a Justice Department official said. The attorney general's counselors were sent to observe the conditions on the ground firsthand and report back to Barr.  Calif. to give cash payments to immigrants hurt by virus SACRAMENTO, Calif. -- California will be the first state to give cash payments to immigrants living in the country illegally who are hurt by the coronavirus, offering $500 apiece to 150,000 adults who were left out of the $2.2 trillion stimulus package approved by Congress. Many Americans began receiving $1,200 checks from the federal government this week, and others who are unemployed are getting an additional $600 a week from the government that has ordered them to stay home. But people living in the country illegally are not eligible for any of that money, and advocates have been pushing for states to fill in the gap. Wednesday, Gov. Gavin Newsom announced he would spend $75 million of taxpayer money to create a Disaster Relief Fund for immigrants living in the country illegally.  In Iran: The death toll in Iran from the coronavirus pandemic is likely nearly double the officially reported figures, due to undercounting and because not everyone with breathing problems has been tested for the virus, a parliament report said. Iranian health officials offered no comment on the report, which represents the highest-level charge yet from within the Islamic Republic's government of its figures being questionable, something suspected by international experts. Iran on Wednesday put the death toll at 4,777, out of 76,389 confirmed cases of the virus. The report, released Tuesday, comes as Iranian President Hassan Rouhani continues to push for a slow reopening of the country's economy. CAPTION: Photo: People stop in front of Notre Dame Cathedral as the bells ring Wednesday to mark the one-year anniversary of its blaze. A year after the devastating fire, the restoration of cathedral has been suspended by a lockdown in Paris to battle the coronavirus. CHRISTOPHE ENA/AP CREDIT: Staff and news services 
To get personal protective equipment for state workers on the front lines of the coronavirus pandemic, the governor of Illinois has had to spend nearly $2 million on charter flights that will haul "millions of masks and gloves" -- from China. That's ridiculous. And it should make you mad. The Federal Emergency Management Agency last week agreed to buy 750,000 coronavirus test kits -- from South Korea. That's also ridiculous. And it should also make you mad. In the span of eight days -- from last Tuesday to this Tuesday -- the coronavirus killed five times as many Americans as terrorists did on 9/11. Five times. In just those eight days, 14,974 souls gone. And America, self-branded as the most-powerful country on the planet, is chartering flights to bring masks and gloves in from China? The U.S. government is buying test kits from South Korea because we can't manufacture our own quickly enough? What's happening in this country right now -- from the lack of widespread testing to states bidding against each other for safety gear to keep health care workers and first responders healthy -- is outrageous. It's a disgrace. There's no reason, more than three months into this pandemic, that the governor of any state should be having to hunt down gloves and masks in far-flung places. American companies should long ago have started producing the personal protective equipment that's needed, as well the testing kits that are desperately needed to get a hold on this outbreak. From the jump, President Donald Trump has had the power, through the Defense Production Act, to unleash the might of America's manufacturing companies. Instead, he has been hesitant to use that power, costing states money, time and, undoubtedly, lives. From the Tribune report on Gov. J.B. Pritzker's chartered flights: "Had the president directed American companies to produce more masks, ventilators and other equipment, 'we wouldn't be paying $5 or $6 sometimes for an N95 mask that in a normal circumstance costs 85 cents or a dollar,' " Pritzker said. On Tuesday, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention reported that as of April 9, more than 9,000 health care workers had contracted the coronavirus. And 27 had died from COVID-19. The agency said those numbers are "likely an underestimation." Let's not beat around the bush: our federal government has responded to the coronavirus outbreak with rank incompetence. The seriousness of the virus was grossly downplayed through much of January. Any additional time the country gained from Trump's decision to ban some travelers from China (more than 40,000 travelers from China arrived in the U.S. after the "ban" was in place) was wasted in a feckless February. And now? Now we have governors who know they're largely on their own, a stunning lack of coronavirus testing nationwide and the world's largest coronavirus death toll. As of Tuesday night it was 25,992 people. We lost 2,977 people on Sept. 11, and having lived through that day, I recall the fear that swept across America as we collectively processed such a massive loss. But I also remember anger. We were livid over the attack, united in our outrage and determined to do whatever was necessary to prevent it from happening again. The deaths from the coronavirus pandemic have eclipsed the toll of that awful day. And we have ample fear and frustration. But I don't see the anger. Maybe it's muted because we're locked down and socially distanced. Maybe it's because we're so fiercely divided, with loyalty to the president driving individuals and even entire states to treat a virus like something that can be beaten with stubborn defiance and good ol' American gumption. It's ridiculous. This isn't a game. The president can stand in the White House briefing room each day for however many hours he wants and blabber lies and blame everyone -- governors, China, the media, Barack Obama, Nancy Pelosi -- until he turns from orange to blue. But until governors don't have to fetch basic supplies from China, until there's enough testing and contact tracing to allow medical experts to safely guide us out of our lockdown, Trump's words mean even less than usual. Consider this: According to NBC News, during Trump's more than two-hour coronavirus press briefing Monday, a lie-filled circus of distortions and narcissism, there were 93 coronavirus deaths reported. Forty-two in California. Sixteen in Georgia. Eight in Washington. Seven in Kentucky. Six in Delaware. Five each in New Mexico and South Carolina. And four in Alabama. That's over the course of just a couple hours. That should make you mad. It should hurt, the same way the lives we lost in one day in 2001 hurt. As we did then, we should unite to do everything humanly possible to prevent more deaths. As we did then, we shouldn't accept failure. Failure is the governor of any state spending $2 million on charter flights to get equipment from China that should be made here in America. Failure is promising a virus test to anyone who wants one and not keeping that promise Failure is exactly what we have right now. And that should make you blood-boiling mad. ---------- rhuppke@chicagotribune.com CAPTION: Photo: Sample testing devices used in diagnosing the novel coronavirus are checked on a production line as they are prepared to be included in kits near Cheongju, south of Seoul. ED JONES/AFP CREDIT: Rex W. Huppke 
For weeks, officials from the White House to Chicago's City Hall told people that wearing a face mask in public isn't necessary as the novel coronavirus spread -- and that it could even cause more harm than good. But other countries took a different route, especially some Asian nations -- including South Korea, Hong Kong and Singapore -- where mask wearing became common practice. In Europe, the Czech Republic went so far as to require that people wear masks when they venture from their homes. Public health officials in those nations contend that widespread mask use limited the scope of their outbreaks, or "flattened the curve" in pandemic parlance. Medical professionals are taking notice, and some are now pressing for more frequent mask wearing. Writing in the British medical journal The Lancet, a group of scientists suggested "universal use of face masks could be considered if supplies permit." The supply question is key, especially amid a grave shortage of the masks used by front-line medical workers in the United States. Advocates say they aren't encouraging people to buy specialized N95 respirator masks or even regular surgical masks. Clean, homemade cloth masks that cover the nose and mouth will do the trick, they say. "I think if everyone used masks, it would decrease the amount of transmission of the virus," said Dr. Rahul Khare, CEO of the Innovative Express Care immediate care facility on the North Side. "By putting a face mask over your nose and mouth, you're decreasing the amount of the virus particles and therefore decreasing transmission rates." Khare said he wants government officials to switch gears and advise people to wear masks if they must leave their homes. The White House on Thursday was finalizing a recommendation that many U.S. residents wear face coverings when they go out, according to published reports, and Los Angeles Mayor Eric Garcetti urged his city's residents to wear masks outside. The science is not definitive, and experts' opinions are not unanimous. Surgeon General Jerome Adams this week was still expressing deep reservations during an appearance on television's "Fox & Friends." And even those who advocate for wearing masks don't want people to feel like they can ignore stay-at-home orders if they use a mask. Nevertheless, medical opinions and government advice appear to be shifting. After discouraging people early in the pandemic from hoarding masks that are in short supply and badly needed by medical personnel, Gov J.B. Pritzker on Wednesday said "we're thinking about" advising people to wear masks. "I would not discourage people from wearing masks, and in fact I think that there's some evidence to show it can be effective," Pritzker said. Dr. Allison Arwady, director of the Chicago Public Health Department, also began to soften her earlier stance that masks won't help much and could even cause people to touch their face more frequently -- a big no-no given the highly contagious nature of the virus. Arwady said new studies have concluded that some people who are infected with the new coronavirus have no symptoms. But they can still spread the virus, making others sick, and wearing a mask could reduce that risk, she said. "We'll continue to make changes to our recommendations if we think that's necessary," she said Wednesday. "Stay tuned." She made her comments at a news conference called by Mayor Lori Lightfoot, who quickly stepped up to the microphone to make sure people understand that even if the advice changes, people must still try to stay at home, wash their hands frequently and absolutely not leave the house if they are feeling sick. "I don't want people to think that the mask makes them invincible, because it doesn't," Lightfoot said. "I don't want people to be misled that simply because you wear a mask you are fine going out and not practicing any of the other guidance that goes along with that." Asked why the advice is shifting, Khare and other experts said authorities were initially afraid of people buying up medical-grade masks. They also were worried about sowing fear, he said. Potential hoarding of the high-quality masks -- such as the N95 respirator masks the world is learning so much about these days -- is indeed a concern, said Dr. Robert Murphy, executive director of the Institute for Global Health at the Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine. "The hospitals can't even get the damn masks," he said, calling the shortage "a national disgrace and embarrassment." Khare said he's not suggesting that people go out and buy medical-quality masks, but rather that they should fashion their own. While not as protective as the masks used in hospitals and clinics, homemade fabric versions could still reduce the spread of the virus. "Bandanas, cloths, anything you put over your nose and your mouth," Khare said. As the idea of wearing a mask spreads, many businesses and groups have begun posting tutorials on how to make masks at home. Some groups have begun coordinating efforts to sew homemade masks. The idea of wearing a mask, Murphy said, is not to protect oneself but to protect others. "Originally, we were not recommending that because it does not protect the person wearing the mask from getting infected," Murphy said. "What the mask does is protect the people around you in case you are infected and don't know it." "People will think, 'I have the mask, I'm not going to get it,' " Murphy added. "That's not why you wear the mask. You wear the mask because you might have it and give it to somebody else." And the days of trying to avoid frightening the populace are over, Khare said. "We're here and we know what this virus is doing now," said Khare, adding that he believes wearing a mask also provides some protection from getting infected. "And looking at the science, I think it's clear that the risks of wearing masks is very low, and the benefits of wearing masks is very high." ---------- hdardick@chicagotribune.com CAPTION: Photo: Jimmy Smart, 32, wears a mask while walking in Chicago's Streeterville neighborhood. ARMANDO L. SANCHEZ/TRIBUNE ; Photo: Two men wear medical masks while walking along the Lakefront Trail last month. JOHN J. KIM/CHICAGO TRIBUNE CREDIT: By Hal Dardick; Chicago Tribune's Dan Petrella and Gregory Pratt contributed. 
Just past a sign advertising "drive-thru COVID-19 testing," a medical provider in full protective gear -- a blue gown, gloves, hair covering and face mask -- walked up to the driver's side of a brown Honda Civic. The testing site area -- a small white tent erected in the parking lot of Advocate Lutheran General Hospital in northwest suburban Park Ridge -- was cordoned off with yellow caution tape, and the worker maintained a distance of several feet. As the state and the nation struggle to make testing for the new coronavirus more widely available, Advocate Aurora Health has begun to offer drive-thru screenings at several of its Chicago-area hospitals, though only by appointment for patients with physician authorization. The in-vehicle testing method, which involves a nasal swab, is designed to efficiently screen more patients while mitigating the spread of the highly contagious virus. With the disease already sickening thousands across the country, medical providers and politicians alike have called out federal officials for the slow launch of drive-thru screening in the U.S. compared with other nations, including South Korea and Australia. Dr. Ronald Hershow, an infectious disease expert at the University of Illinois at Chicago, called the rollout of coronavirus testing in the U.S. a "disappointment" in comparison with other countries fighting the pandemic. "Testing is such a central feature of responding to an outbreak because it's part of surveillance," he said in an interview Wednesday. "If we don't know where (cases are) occurring, we can't appropriately apportion prevention and treatment resources." Hershow said ideally anyone with symptoms would be able to get tested rather than focusing on only the most at-risk populations, as is the case now. Fighting the pandemic is more complicated because it's also the season for other respiratory viruses. "That's the beauty of drive-thru testing," he said. "You're in the safety of your own car. That why that model is so attractive. You'll be doing more harm than good if you pack waiting rooms with sneezing people, some of whom might have COVID-19 -- a minority ... at this point, but they're packed into a waiting room with people who have other viral disease who may be susceptible to COVID-19." Locally and across the country, medical providers are seeking innovative ways to combat the health crisis while limiting patient and health care worker exposure, including expanded use of telemedicine and tented screening sites outside main hospitals. Several states opened their first drive-thru coronavirus testing sites this week, including Florida and Alaska, as well as Washington, D.C. Other states like Connecticut, Washington and Colorado were experimenting with drive-thru testing for health care workers earlier this month. South Korea launched drive-thru stations in February, part of the nation's system for providing large-scale testing on a level unavailable in the United States. These roadside facilities often allow anonymous screenings, and in one South Korean city, a temporary site in a public parking lot reportedly tested more than 100 residents in a day, according to Reuters. In Illinois, 288 cases of coronavirus have been confirmed as of Wednesday, and one death has been linked to the new disease, which originated in Wuhan, China, in December and has since sickened more than 200,000 people around the globe. Illinois became the first state to test for the new coronavirus in February; other states had a lag time of several weeks before they were able to provide testing at their public health labs. At Advocate Lutheran General Hospital on Wednesday, a half-dozen signs dotting the property directed patients to the drive-thru coronavirus testing site. The test is intended only for sick patients, said Dr. Robert Citronberg, director of infectious diseases at Advocate Lutheran General. "This is not designed to test what we call the worried well," he said. The line on Wednesday morning was only about two or three cars, and there didn't appear to be a long wait. All drive-thru patients must first call their physician and then make an appointment, according to Advocate officials. Several drivers were turned away from the Park Ridge site on Wednesday because they didn't have appointments. Dmitra Miller, 43, from Chicago's West Side, said she had heard reports of drive-thru testing and pulled up, but was told she needed to call her doctor first and make an appointment. Miller, who was wearing a face mask, said she's had symptoms of the highly contagious new virus and was frustrated that it isn't easier to get tested. "There should be a better setup," she said, adding that she plans to try to come back to Lutheran General later. Christine Palmieri, 42, of the Lakeview neighborhood said that after seeking testing for some days, she was successfully tested at Lutheran General's drive-thru on Wednesday. The process took about five minutes, she said. First she pulled up in her vehicle to a white tent, and a health care worker checked to make sure she had a physician's order; then she drove a little farther to a second white tent at the site, where other medical providers swabbed each of her nostrils in a circular motion for about 10 seconds, which she described as uncomfortable. "I'm very lucky to get tested," she said. "We've come in contact with people who are immunocompromised; I want to know what to tell them." The Advocate hospital system is in the process of expanding drive-thru testing to more sites, officials said. Last week, Advocate Good Shepherd Hospital in northwest suburban Barrington began a pilot drive-thru program in an ambulance bay on its property. Another medical provider, Family First Medical Group in south suburban Evergreen Park and Mokena, began providing curbside coronavirus testing at both locations Monday, according to marketing director Ryan Dawson. As the number of local coronavirus cases surged recently, the smaller south suburban medical provider decided safe and convenient drive-up testing was the best way to serve the community, he said. The testing process only takes a few minutes and doesn't require patients to exit their vehicle; a phone screening followed by a video visit is required first. "It became apparent that this is the best thing our patients need right now," Dawson said. ---------- eleventis@chicagotribune.com CAPTION: Photo: Drive-thru COVID-19 testing, which involves a nasal swab, takes place at Advocate Lutheran Hospital in Park Ridge on Wednesday. E. JASON WAMBSGANS/CHICAGO TRIBUNE ; Photo: People drive through a COVID-19 testing site at Advocate Lutheran Hospital in Park Ridge on Wednesday. E. JASON WAMBSGANS/CHICAGO TRIBUNE CREDIT: By Angie Leventis Lourgos, Lisa Schencker and Peter Nickeas 
Rush University Medical Center on Thursday began testing suspected coronavirus patients inside tents erected in a repurposed ambulance bay, part of the hospital's ongoing effort to help prevent the spread of this highly contagious new virus. Rather than sitting in a general waiting room, those with influenza-like symptoms will be diverted to the ambulance bay, which hospital officials refer to as "forward triage." Patients will then be given a mask, seated in chairs spaced 6 feet apart and assessed by health care workers wearing full protective gear -- including gowns, gloves, face masks and eye protection, said Dr. Paul Casey, Rush acting chief medical officer and an emergency room physician. "This is part of what Rush was specifically built for, emergency preparedness," he said. "What we've learned about the experience throughout the world is that the more we can stay one step ahead of this, the more we can mitigate the spread of coronavirus." Hospitals here and across the country are adopting new measures to help combat coronavirus, which has so far sickened more than two dozen in Illinois and more than 100,000 worldwide, prompting the World Health Organization to declare the disease a pandemic earlier this week. The University of Washington Medical Center ? Northwest earlier this month opened a drive-thru coronavirus testing site for employees exhibiting upper respiratory symptoms. Other countries such as South Korea and Germany are also offering testing in this manner, where patients drive up to health care providers and are swabbed without having to leave their vehicles. Some health care providers -- including Rush -- are relying more on telemedicine to screen for coronavirus, offering services remotely in an attempt to free up medical resources while mitigating the spread of the disease. "We encourage health care providers to look at telemedicine or other ways to connect with patients for assessment without having the worried-well flood facilities and tie up health care providers," said Melaney Arnold, spokeswoman for the Illinois Department of Public Health. She said the state is evaluating resources and emergency supplies at hospitals across the state, numbers which change frequently. A daily electronic reporting system also tracks hospital beds, she added. "At this time we have no reports of a shortage of supplies," Arnold said. Many hospitals and health systems are focused on keeping their own workers safe amid the outbreak. More than 120 health care workers at UC Davis Medical Center in California were under self-quarantine after possible exposure to a coronavirus patient last month. National Nurses United, a nationwide union representing registered nurses, has argued U.S. hospitals are unprepared to handle the coronavirus epidemic. The union -- which represents more than 6,000 nurses in Illinois -- organized about a dozen rallies and protests at medical facilities across the country Wednesday to demand more protections for health care workers; locally, the union also held a vigil Wednesday at Stroger Hospital of Cook County. At Rush, the tented space is separate from the rest of the hospital, isolating folks who might have coronavirus from other hospital patients, particularly those who are more at-risk such as the elderly or individuals with underlying medical issues, Casey said. Air inside the tent is also exhausted outside, further limiting exposure for the rest of the hospital. The designated area also limits hospital staff contact with those who are ill, keeping health care workers healthier, Casey added. "That keeps our staff safe from contracting the upper respiratory disease, whether that's influenza or coronavirus," he said. The concept of "forward triage" was implemented in 2012 and designed for many types of emergencies, from health epidemics to contamination disasters to incidents with mass casualties. "In this case, we're using it for coronavirus, but there's a potential to use for many different pandemic or disaster scenarios," Casey said. Rush last week treated a patient with coronavirus -- a university student who contracted the disease while studying abroad in Italy. He was discharged to recover under home quarantine. Casey noted that most coronavirus patients will not require hospitalization; he encouraged anyone concerned about possible coronavirus symptoms or exposure to contact medical providers through video appointments via telemedicine, rather than showing up at the hospital. Many other local hospital systems say they're prepared for the public health crisis. The University of Chicago Medicine says patients and visitors should expect additional screenings and the possibility of more visitor restrictions as the outbreak evolves. "In the coming weeks, we anticipate a surge in demand for our medical care, particularly in our already-busy emergency rooms and intensive care units," a spokeswoman for the medical provider said. "We encourage those with less severe illnesses and injuries to consider seeking care in non-hospital settings, if possible." Dr. Sharon Welbel, director of infection control and hospital epidemiology at Cook County Health, said the health system has trained over 1,000 health care workers, from nurses to transporters, to help manage the epidemic. Cook County health is working with their hospitals to figure out floor plans and designate wards to use if there is a sudden increase in cases, she said. Arnold added that health providers across the state are ready to handle this type of outbreak. "Public health departments, hospitals and emergency medical services statewide prepare year round, and have for many years, for emergency events -- including mass casualty events, earthquakes, flooding and pandemics," said Arnold. ---------- eleventis@chicagotribune.com CAPTION: Photo: Emergency room nurses familiarize themselves with a special isolation bay for suspected coronavirus patients at the Emergency Center at Rush University Medical Center. ZBIGNIEW BZDAK/CHICAGO TRIBUNE CREDIT: By Angie Leventis Lourgos and Sophie Sherry 
Major airlines are relaxing policies around flight change and cancellation fees and joining Chicago's airports in stepping up their cleaning efforts as the coronavirus continues to spread. The global travel industry has taken a hit from the novel respiratory virus known as COVID-19, which has killed 11 people in the U.S. and about 3,200 globally. Companies are restricting travel and pulling out of conferences to protect employees, and airlines are canceling flights to a growing number of affected areas. Here's what to know if you're thinking about planning a trip:  Some airlines are waiving change fees United Airlines is waiving flight change fees for any domestic or international flight purchased between March 3 and 31. Passengers who decide to cancel a flight have one year from when they purchased the original ticket to apply its value to a new flight with no fee. No advance notice is required. American Airlines is waiving change fees on any tickets purchased between March 1 and 16. Passengers must cancel at least 14 days before their flight to avoid the fees. Delta Air Lines is letting travelers make a one-time change to any international flight booked between March 1 and 31 with no fee. Customers flying to Shanghai or Beijing in China; Seoul, South Korea; and all locations in Italy can make a change at no fee through April 30. JetBlue was the first to announce broad suspensions of fees for changing or canceling flights. The policy covers flights before June 1, booked between Feb. 27 and March 11. The U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention currently recommends people avoid nonessential travel to China, Iran, South Korea and Italy, and advises older adults or people with chronic medical conditions to consider postponing travel to Japan. Data from travel app Hopper suggest people aren't avoiding travel, but they may be taking trips closer to home. Searches for flights from the U.S. to destinations in Europe and Asia were down roughly 6% and 23%, respectively, during the week ending March 2, compared with the first week of January. But searches for U.S. destinations grew 6.5% during the same period, suggesting people are shifting their focus to travel in the U.S. and Canada, said Hopper economist Hayley Berg.  Travel insurance options are limited If someone cancels a trip because they're worried about being exposed to an illness, standard trip cancellation policies rarely will cover those losses. Travelers can upgrade to policies that let them cancel a trip for any reason, but premiums can be 40% greater than those on standard packages, and they often only cover about 75% of the person's losses. Cancel-for-any-reason policies must be purchased at the time of booking or shortly thereafter. Some travel insurance providers have stopped offering those policies, but that doesn't mean travelers are out of luck. One insurance company reported there weren't many claims because travelers affected by the outbreak were being reimbursed by airlines and other travel suppliers, said Kasara Barto, spokeswoman for travel insurance website Squaremouth.  Chicago's airports are stepping up cleaning The Chicago Department of Aviation installed 109 new hand sanitizer stations in the city's airports, focusing on busy areas like food courts. Airport workers are cleaning surfaces in high-traffic areas more frequently. The extra cleaning initially focused on O'Hare International Airport's Terminal 5, which handles international flights. As of this week, it's expanded to all of O'Hare and Midway Airport, McGrath said. CTA officials said they were not doing anything out of the ordinary to respond to the coronavirus threat. A CTA spokesperson said in an email that the CTA cleans its vehicles daily, and also does "deep cleans" every two weeks.  Some planes are getting a deep clean Airlines say their cleaning routines follow guidelines from health officials. Planes get cleaned to varying degrees between flights, but Southwest Airlines, United and Delta all said their aircraft get an end-of-day cleaning that includes wiping hard surfaces with disinfectant. Some are adding extra measures, especially on flights from areas affected by the outbreak. United said it is "deep cleaning" any aircraft that carried a passenger later diagnosed with the COVID-19 virus. A deep clean, which normally happens every 50 to 55 days, includes washing ceilings and overhead bins and scrubbing the plane's interiors, said spokesman Charles Hobart. Delta began using machines that spray aircraft arriving in the U.S. from Asia with disinfectant in February. The new procedure makes sure the disinfectant reaches more surfaces than hand-wiping the aircraft, said Delta spokeswoman Adrian Gee. Flights from Italy to New York and Atlanta also get the "fogging" treatment, and Delta said it is working to get additional machines to use on planes arriving from more cities outside Asia with reported cases of the coronavirus. Cutlery, glassware and dishes are being sanitized before they're washed on Delta flights from Asia to the U.S., and linen and headphones are being cleaned separately from those on flights from other destinations.  Flight attendants are providing hand sanitizer The U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention said the risk of contracting an infection is low on an airplane but advises travelers to take precautions like avoiding contact with passengers who appear to be sick, washing hands frequently and using hand sanitizer. Delta said it is stocking more hand sanitizer, gloves and surgical masks on flights in and out of Asia and giving customers on long international flights amenity kits with hand sanitizer or cleansing towelettes. American is stocking extra hand sanitizer wipes at departure gates and in flight attendants' service kits on flights to and from Asia. It is also allowing flight attendants to wear masks on certain flights if that makes them more comfortable, executives said in a Feb. 28 letter to employees. Alaska Airlines said flight attendants can wear gloves during food and beverage service. The airline has temporarily stopped refilling used beverage cups, offering hot towels in first class and collecting recycling onboard, to reduce the number of times crew need to handle passenger items. It also stopped using fingerprint biometric scanners in airport lounges. Passengers can use antibacterial wipes to clean armrests and tray tables, but Alaska Airlines asked travelers not to use them on its leather seats, since they can damage the leather. The Association of Flight Attendants, a union representing flight attendants at airlines including United, said it's been working with airlines to encourage measures designed to prevent the spread of the virus, like making sure all flights are stocked with additional hand sanitizer, said spokeswoman Taylor Garland. ---------- lzumbach@chicagotribune.com CAPTION: Photo: Travelers wear protective masks Sunday as they walk through Terminal 5 at O'Hare International Airport in Chicago. NAM Y. HUH/AP ; Photo: Emily Blumberg, of Chicago, wipes down her surroundings on an American Airlines flight to Washington from Detroit Metro Airport in Romulus, Michigan, on Tuesday. ALYSSA SCHUKAR/THE NEW YORK TIMES CREDIT: By Lauren Zumbach; Chicago Tribune's Mary Wisniewski contributed. 
At AllCell Technologies' facility in Chicago's Back of the Yards neighborhood, dozens of employees are cranking out lithium-ion batteries, destined to power drones, electric vehicles and more. The key component of the rechargeable batteries comes from China and other Asian countries, where the coronavirus has caused factories to shut down or operate at reduced capacity, and travel restrictions have hindered shipping. Knowing the flow of parts could soon dry up, AllCell stocked up on materials to keep production going. That's "a big financial burden" for a 40-employee company, said CEO Said Al-Hallaj. "Who would have thought a small company from the South Side of Chicago would be impacted?" he said. "World trade wars, viruses, global epidemics. You would think, 'I don't have to plan for this, I'm not that big.' ... But that's not the case." The spread of the coronavirus -- and the effort to contain it -- is rocking supply chains around the world, and Chicago-area companies are not immune. They are searching for alternative suppliers while they worry about how much slowed -- or stopped -- production will affect their bottom lines and their workforces. Drug and medical device manufacturers in China are also being disrupted, causing shortages of certain medicines in the U.S. Disruptions from the coronavirus are predicted to limit the growth of the global average gross domestic product to 2.3% this year, its weakest mark since 2009, according to financial forecaster Oxford Economics. In the U.S., GDP growth is expected to slow to 1.5%. In a report, titled "No mask can prevent financial market contagion," Oxford Economics predicts that if the coronavirus outbreak becomes a global pandemic, it could lead to a recession. Few expect a quick resolution. Initially, the Lunar New Year celebration cushioned the economic fallout of the outbreak, as many factories and businesses in China typically close for one to two weeks for the holiday and workers travel home to visit family. American companies placed orders in advance of the holiday to ensure a steady supply. But that cushion is eroding. "We've been lulled into a false sense of security," said Justin Formella, chief strategy officer at MBX Systems, which provides server and computing equipment for streaming services, security companies and other customers. The Libertyville-based company stocked up on storage and graphic processing hardware from U.S. distributors. But Formella said access to those products is becoming constrained. "It's like when there's a tsunami, and you know a wave is coming," Formella said. "It's just delayed in how it's going to hit." The World Health Organization has confirmed more than 80,200 cases of the new coronavirus, called COVID-19, and about 2,800 people have died. Most of the cases have been in China. Though the epidemic appears to be slowing in China's Hubei province, the virus' epicenter, clusters of cases have popped up in Iran, South Korea and Italy. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention has advised travelers to avoid China and South Korea, and told older adults and those with chronic medical conditions to postpone nonessential travel to Iran, Italy and Japan. In the U.S., stocks tumbled for seven consecutive days over fears coronavirus might become a pandemic, marking its worst week since 2008. On Wednesday, health officials warned Americans to prepare for an outbreak. A total of 61 coronavirus cases have been confirmed in the U.S., according to data from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. On Saturday, health officials in Washington state reported the death of a person from COVID-19, the first such reported death in the United States. U.S. consumers are just beginning to see the effects of a disrupted global supply chain, but it's evident at companies of all sizes and in multiple industries. Apple, Microsoft and Macy's are among the large companies that have warned about the effects of the virus on their business. How quickly they, as well as small local businesses, can recover remains to be seen. The outbreak is affecting supplies of drugs and other medical products as well. The Food and Drug Administration said in a statement Thursday that a coronavirus-related disruption at a manufacturer in China is causing at least one drug shortage, though it did not say which drug. Northfield-based Medline Industries makes hospital supplies such as masks and gowns, among other products. A spokesman declined to give specifics about how the virus is affecting its business, but it said in a statement that restrictions on exporting certain items, such as face masks, could lead to shortages or delayed shipments throughout the industry. A large percentage of the protective equipment made in China is manufactured in the Hubei province, and the province has extended a mandatory factory closure through March 10, Medline said. "Other medical supplies manufactured in the Hubei province -- traditional wound care products, surgical drapes and gowns and some surgical pack components -- likely will be impacted by the events in China if the restrictions continue for an extended time," Medline said. Abbott Laboratories' manufacturing and research and development facilities in China are operational, spokeswoman Darcy Ross said in a statement. She declined to comment on whether the virus was affecting the north suburban-based company's supplies or sales. Much of Abbott's manufacturing in China focuses on its nutritional products, and China is a significant market for Abbott's infant formula business, said Debbie Wang, a senior equity analyst at Morningstar. She said Abbott's overall sales in the first quarter could be soft as a result of the virus. It's also possible that Abbott, which sells generic drugs outside the U.S., could, like other companies selling pharmaceuticals, have a tough time making those drugs because a number of active ingredients for medications come from China, she said. It's also possible, however, that Abbott could benefit, if it succeeds in making a test to diagnose the virus, she said. Abbott has confirmed it is working to develop a test. Outside of the medical industry, Logan Square-based Shop4ties had to turn away more than a dozen orders for apparel like ties and shirts because it wouldn't be able to deliver orders on time, including one $18,000 order due March 13, said CEO and co-owner Becky Feinberg-Galvez. All of the company's products are made in China. Though Feinberg-Galvez has been in regular contact with her suppliers, some factories didn't reopen until Feb. 17 or 18 and with only half their normal workforce, she said. A dye factory still hasn't reopened, she said. Shop4ties received its first shipment in about six weeks Monday and was able to fill two orders. In a typical month, the company would handle about 70 orders, Feinberg-Galvez said. "We were looking at big growth this year, but our first quarter is going to be 25 to 30% of what it was last year," she said. "It's hard to know what the long-term effect will be." Shop4ties' six full-time employees and three contracted graphic designers are fully aware of the situation, Feinberg-Galvez said. Without knowing how the outbreak will affect sales this year, they're working to mitigate what they can. she said. Managing the situation is about the only thing U.S. companies can do at this point, said Phillip Braun, a clinical professor of finance at Northwestern University's Kellogg School of Management. It's still unclear whether employers will resort to layoffs. "If this becomes a global pandemic, the results on economic growth are going to be even worse," he said. In South Elgin at Hoffer Plastics, the family owned custom injection molding company is awaiting four orders from a Chinese tool shop that was temporarily closed by the epidemic. The Shenzhen factory has only recently reopened with a reduced staff, likely delaying delivery of metal molds needed to make plastic components used in everything from dishwashers to auto engines. "From a production standpoint, we need one mold to make millions of parts," said Alex Hoffer, chief revenue officer. Among the orders Hoffer Plastics is awaiting is a mold to make a plastic tube for an oral hygiene product used in hospitals. The mold was to be delivered by March 30, with Hoffer set to begin production on a "hot timeline" for a Chicago-area medical equipment manufacturer. Delays on the $500,000 medical tube order could prove costly. "It won't jeopardize the whole order, but it will be lost revenue for us in 2020," Hoffer said. Hoffer Plastics employs 380 people working three shifts to produce about 3 billion parts a year, generating about $90 million in annual sales. The company is telling employees to stay vigilant and communicate about any changes in production or demand, Hoffer said. It's business as usual, but there's a heightened threat level in terms of uncertainty. Even companies with production in the U.S. have experienced coronavirus-related disruptions. Hazel Technologies, which makes a product that extends the shelf life of produce and other foods, was awaiting delivery on a machine needed to make some of its products when the travel restrictions hit, said co-founder and CEO Aidan Mouat. Unwilling to wait months, the Chicago company spent 10 times as much to buy the machine elsewhere, Mouat said. He said he had to reallocate resources from other projects to make that happen. Problems associated with the virus come at an inopportune time for companies that already have been forced to deal with tariffs on Chinese goods imposed by the Trump administration. "It's kind of a one-two punch," said Joe Born, CEO of Chicago-based Bluetooth speaker brand Aiwa. Born said he's seen prices that consumers pay for electronics hiked -- likely a result of the tariffs coupled with coronavirus issues -- and his company might have to do the same. A shipment of wireless earbuds that was set to arrive in early March will be delayed at least a month because of the coronavirus, Born said. Aiwa had to adjust marketing budgets and stop advertising that product. For some companies, lessons learned from the tariffs or changes made to ease their blow have proved helpful. Best Buy has seen a dip in inventory due to coronavirus disruptions in the supply chain, but its suppliers are prepared after handling uncertainty around the tariffs, CEO Corie Barry told CNBC. Vernon Hills toymaker Learning Resources stocked up on goods before the tariffs went into effect, reducing the coronavirus' interruption on all but a handful of new items, said CEO Rick Woldenberg . Factories the company works with in China are opening back up and restarting production. Some economists say tariffs could deliver a more serious blow to companies in Chicago and elsewhere because they are more permanent. "The virus is a temporary thing," said Lawrence Officer, an economics professor at the University of Illinois at Chicago. "In a few months, all will be back to normal." Experts say it is difficult to predict how long the effects of the supply chain disruption will ripple through the global economy. Those that haven't been hit hard are being cautious. During a call with investors Tuesday, Macy's CEO Jeff Gennette said the company had felt delays in production of merchandise made in China but "nothing concerning yet." Less than half of the products for Macy's-owned brands are made in China, but some of its vendors also source a significant percentage of their goods from there, he said. The company is also expecting reduced tourism in the United States to affect sales, but Gennette said it's too soon to estimate the outbreak's impact. "We're watching this one very, very carefully," he said. CAPTION: Photo: AllCell Technologies employees Barry Kirkman, left, and Robert Mallett work on rechargeable battery cells Wednesday in Chicago.; Photo: AllCell Technologies' Jerlene Jackson uses a heat gun to wrap rechargeable battery cells. AllCell has stocked up on materials during the virus outbreak.; Photo: AllCell's rechargeable battery cells come from China and other Asian countries, according to CEO Said Al-Hallaj.; ABEL URIBE/CHICAGO TRIBUNE PHOTOS CREDIT: By Ally Marotti, Lauren Zumbach, Lisa Schencker and Robert Channick 
United Airlines announced Friday it won't restart flights between the U.S. and China until May and is paring back its schedule to other parts of Asia as the coronavirus epidemic spreads. The Chicago-based airline said it is reducing service to Tokyo, Osaka, Singapore and Seoul, offering fewer flights and smaller planes, beginning next month. "It is a fast-moving situation," United spokeswoman Leslie Scott said. "We are in daily contact with the CDC and other global health organizations as we continue to evaluate our schedule." While United halted flights to China in early February, this is the first time it has reduced capacity to other Asian destinations as a result of the growing epidemic, Scott said. The airline has seen a 75% drop in demand for its Asian routes, outside of China, in the wake of the coronavirus outbreak, according a filing Monday with the Securities and Exchange Commission. Before the suspension of service, United had about 12 flights each day between the U.S. and China, including flights connecting Chicago to Beijing and Shanghai at O'Hare International Airport. The additional reduction in service will cancel the O'Hare to Tokyo Narita route from March 8 to March 27. United is scheduled to resume flights between Chicago and Tokyo on March 28, when it will switch to Tokyo Haneda Airport, which is closer to the city. The change is unrelated to the virus, Scott said. American Airlines does not have direct service between Chicago and China, but earlier this month extended its suspension of all flights to China out of its Dallas and Los Angeles hubs through April 24. This week, Fort Worth, Texas-based American also added flight waivers to Italy and South Korea because of the coronavirus outbreak, allowing passengers to make travel changes without fees. Atlanta-based Delta Air Lines previously suspended all flights to China through April 30, and this week reduced service to South Korea. Delta has issued travel waivers for China, South Korea and all flights to and from Italy, including Bologna, Milan, Rome, Venice and Turin in response to increased coronavirus cases there. United also issued flight waivers for China and Hong Kong, and this week added South Korea and northern Italy to the list of no-fee travel changes. The virus, now dubbed COVID-19, has disrupted travel since reports of the new respiratory illness first surfaced in Wuhan, China, in late December. China remains the epicenter of the disease, with nearly 79,000 confirmed cases and more than 2,700 deaths as of Thursday, according to the World Health Organization. But the virus has since spread to about 50 countries, with confirmed cases on the rise in South Korea, Italy and Iran, among other countries, according to health organizations. There have been 61 confirmed cases in the U.S., according to the CDC, including two in the Chicago area. A woman who returned from a visit to Wuhan, China, in January gave the virus to her husband in the first known case of person-to-person coronavirus transmission in the U.S., according to the CDC. The couple has since been released from a hospital in northwest suburban Hoffman Estates. ---------- rchannick@chicagotribune.com CAPTION: Photo: Passengers wearing masks arrive at Narita International Airport on Jan. 24 outside Toyko, Japan. United is reducing service to the city. TOMOHIRO OHSUMI/GETTY CREDIT: By Robert Channick 
Grace Palmeri of Aurora decided to study abroad in Florence this semester to learn more about her Italian heritage and immerse herself in the culture of her ancestral homeland. But just as the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign student began acclimating to her new life and routine overseas, a recent spike in the number of coronavirus cases ignited anxiety and fear across her host country: Authorities reported 400 confirmed cases of the new virus in Italy earlier this week, a 25% increase in a period of about 24 hours. "There aren't as many tourists, and more and more people are wearing masks," said 20-year-old Palmeri, describing the scene in Florence, the capital city of the Tuscany region in central Italy. "The local supermarkets are selling out of masks and hand sanitizer, and my roommates and I have stocked up on all cleaning supplies for at least the next few weeks. ... I'd be lying if I said I wasn't a little concerned about the recent outbreak of the coronavirus, but I am doing everything I can to stay safe and healthy." While Palmeri and her roommates have decided to forgo a planned trip this weekend to Milan -- a northern Italian city that has born the brunt of the viral outbreak -- she has no intent to return to the United States until her program ends as scheduled in late May. Yet an increasing number of colleges and universities are canceling or suspending overseas programs in the wake of the recent coronavirus epidemic, which originated in Wuhan, China, and has sickened tens of thousands globally. Purdue University in West Lafayette, Indiana, announced early this week that it has suspended any university-related travel to China, South Korea, Iran, Italy and Japan, which the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention has identified as nations where there's a higher risk for contracting the virus. "The university's public health committee will continue to monitor CDC updates, will take additional steps if any countries are added to the list, and will notify the campus community of any changes to current practice," the university said in a written statement. Northwestern University officials said one of their students was studying abroad in Florence as part of a program out of Syracuse University in New York, which evacuated all students from Italy earlier this week citing the threat of coronavirus. The Northwestern student is returning to the United States to complete her coursework, said Sara Tully, director of the Global Learning Office at Northwestern. She added that the vast majority of Northwestern students study abroad in fall and summer quarters. "We haven't made any decisions about our summer programs yet, and we do have three that take place in China," she said. The University of Chicago has temporarily closed its campus in Hong Kong and center in Beijing, with programming postponed or relocated, and the university has also relocated to London a spring quarter program that was originally based in Hong Kong. "The paramount goal is maintaining the safety of faculty, students, staff and visitors," said University of Chicago spokesman Gerald McSwiggan, adding that the university hopes to resume these programs as soon as conditions allow. Palmeri is one of about 135 University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign students who are studying in Italy this semester. While the university canceled study-abroad programs in China earlier this year, administrators say they haven't taken similar action on programs in Italy. "We continue to monitor State Department and CDC guidelines, and we are prepared to respond if threat levels rise in any area of the world," said university spokeswoman Robin Kaler. Nationwide, a growing number of colleges and universities have recently pulled students out of higher-risk countries due to coronavirus fears. New York University declared earlier this week that it would suspend operations at its campus in Florence and begin holding classes remotely on March 2, urging students to leave Florence, according to a university statement. Florida International University earlier this week immediately restricted any university-related travel to Italy, Singapore, Japan and South Korea; any students or employees on university business in those nations were told to return to the U.S. immediately. As for Palmeri, she says she plans to continue studying in Florence unless her university or host institution advises her to leave. Despite the viral outbreak, she says her time abroad has been "amazing," from dining on pasta and gelato to visiting Renaissance churches and cathedrals. "This isn't the ideal situation and I, of course, wish it wasn't happening the time we are all studying abroad," she said. "I think the only thing we can do at this point is do whatever we can to prevent this virus and be as careful as possible." ---------- eleventis@chicagotribune.com CREDIT: By Angie Leventis Lourgos 
As the spring break travel season approaches, the continuing spread of coronavirus, including a cluster of cases that emerged in Italy over the weekend, has some travelers questioning whether it's safer to avoid destinations that previously raised few concerns. The vast majority of the 79,331 cases of COVID-19 confirmed worldwide have been in China, where the virus was first reported. But the outbreak's reach is spreading, with cases reported in 29 countries, including dozens of new cases in Italy. U.S. health officials only have warned against travel to mainland China, with lower-level travel advisories for a handful of other destinations in Asia -- not popular spring break destinations like Mexico or the Caribbean. Data from travel app Hopper suggests concerns about the virus aren't keeping travelers home. Searches for flights from the U.S. to international destinations only are down about 3% compared with the first week of January, and most of the decline is driven by reduced demand for trips to China, said Hayley Berg, economist at Hopper. A handful of travelers postponed spring trips to Japan, but few seemed nervous about destinations outside Asia until cases were reported in Italy, said Randy Lynch, CEO of Chicago-based private luxury travel firm Kipling & Clark. "I think most people are in that semi-pause situation," he said. "They want to go, they're just waiting to see what happens." Here's what to consider when planning a trip:  How should travelers decide which destinations to avoid? The World Health Organization and Centers for Disease Control and Prevention have been providing regular updates on the status of cases, and both the CDC and U.S. State Department offer advice on travel to particular destinations. The CDC has recommended avoiding nonessential travel to mainland China and advised older adults and those with chronic medical conditions to consider postponing nonessential travel to Japan and South Korea. The agency issued lower-level travel notices for Hong Kong, Italy and Iran but doesn't currently recommend canceling or delaying trips there. While there's reason to be cautious, travelers shouldn't feel the need to call off a trip today, said Emily Landon, medical director for infection control at the University of Chicago Medical Center. Concerns rise for destinations closer to the center of the outbreak. She advised travelers keep a close eye on updates from health and government officials and decide what level of risk they're comfortable with, taking into account personal factors like whether the traveler or a family member has health issues or works in an environment such as healthcare. "Plan what you want, build in flexibility, and understand what your line is so if something crosses the line of what's acceptable, you can change," Landon said.  Is there a reason to worry about cruises? Any time a lot of people are living in close proximity, it can be easier for illnesses to spread, but that doesn't mean people should avoid cruises, Landon said. She hopes the industry learns from the Diamond Princess in Japan, where a two-week quarantine failed to keep COVID-19 from spreading to hundreds of passengers earlier this month, and the MS Westerdam in Cambodia, which let passengers disembark only to have one later test positive for the virus. Travelers who are concerned about the virus but want to take a cruise should ask how the ship will handle a sick passenger, "and if the plan doesn't make sense, don't get on," she said. About 13% of travel agencies surveyed by Travel Leaders Network earlier this month reported large numbers of cruise cancellations, mostly in China and Asia. "While we are getting inquiries, we are not seeing many cancellations outside of China and Asia," said John Lovell, president of leisure travel, supplier relations and networks at Travel Leaders Group. "Cruise bookings in the Caribbean, Europe and Alaska are solid," he said. "People are not going to give up their vacations or stop traveling."  Should travelers wear masks? Surgical masks are good at keeping someone who's sick from spreading an illness to others, but they aren't as good at protecting the wearer, Landon said. An N95 respirator, which filters out smaller particles, is more effective, if it's used properly. Landon doesn't recommend them unless the traveler has been properly fit for the mask and knows how to keep it clean and avoid contamination. Washing hands regularly, carrying hand sanitizer or sanitizing wipes and avoiding people who are coughing can reduce the risks of picking up an illness, whether COVID-19 or the common flu.  Will insurance cover canceled trips? Trip cancellation policies cover losses associated with trips canceled for specific reasons, and fear of being exposed to an illness is rarely one of them. Only a couple of policies at travel insurance website Squaremouth cover cancellations to areas where the CDC has issued a travel alert, said chief marketing officer Megan Moncrief. Travelers can upgrade to policies that let them cancel a trip for any reason, but premiums can be 40% greater than those on a standard travel insurance package, and they often only cover about 75% of the traveler's losses. In most cases, the policy has to be purchased at the time of booking or shortly thereafter. "Usually it's not a good investment...but there are some situations where it's the only thing they can buy for what they're concerned about," said John Cook, president and CEO of QuoteWright Insurance. Travel insurance packages often will reimburse people for quarantines, but only if the traveler is quarantined, Moncrief said. It doesn't apply if the person intended to travel to a destination where a quarantine has been imposed, though some travel delay policies may cover expenses, like alternate accommodations and meals, if travel restrictions interrupt a trip, she said.  Is there any other way to recover costs? Contact the travel provider to ask about options for postponing a trip or to seek refunds. Local travel agents said some travel companies they work with in Asia are letting travelers postpone trips with no penalty. Downers Grove-based Abercrombie & Kent is allowing customers who've scheduled luxury small group trips to China through April postpone or switch to an alternate trip at no fee, said spokeswoman Jean Fawcett. Jon Davis, of Lincoln Park, said he was able to get a credit for a United Airlines flight to Japan, though he's hoping the airline will agree to a refund. Davis had planned to run the Tokyo Marathon on March 1 but canceled his trip after the race was called off for all but a select group of elite athletes due to concerns about COVID-19. Felicia Edens' family was able to get a refund on a hotel room on Boracay, an island in the Philippines, after she and her husband canceled a trip they'd planned to take earlier this month. But Edens, who lives on Chicago's North Side, said her family wasn't able to recover the cost of their flight, since the insurance they purchased expired. Edens and her husband initially planned to travel as scheduled. They didn't appreciate "the full gravity of the situation" and didn't didn't want her mother, who paid for the trip, to lose money, she wrote in an email. But her mother, who departed early, advised them not to go. "It seemed that there were so many precautionary measures being taken that she didn't want to put us at risk at all or have to deal with anxiety during the trip," she said. ---------- lzumbach@chicagotribune.com CAPTION: Photo: Women wearing protective face masks walk Monday near the closed Duomo cathedral in Milan. It closed following security measures taken in northern Italy against the novel coronavirus. ANDREAS SOLARO/GETTY-AFP CREDIT: By Lauren Zumbach 
