May 20, 2020	The way Choung Woong Ahn's family sees it, the 74-year-old South Korean immigrant should not have been in the Mesa Verde ICE Processing Center when he took his last breath. Lawyers for Ahn had submitted three requests for his release amid the coronavirus pandemic. All were rejected, the most recent by a U.S. district judge on May 13. On Sunday, he died by suicide. From the perspective of Immigration and Customs Enforcement, Ahn was exactly where he should have been.  He spent eight years at Solano State Prison in Vacaville for attempted murder with a firearm. After his sentence was served, he was transferred to the immigrant detention facility in Bakersfield in February for deportation proceedings. Ahn's criminal history made him too much of a public threat to qualify for release, according to ICE. Spokesman Jonathan Moor said that ICE has gone through a deliberative process for COVID-19 "to make sure that only the people who absolutely need to be in detention" remain there. Ahn, who arrived in the U.S. from South Korea as a permanent resident in 1988, had health issues including lung cancer, diabetes, hypertension and a history of heart attacks, his family said. They said keeping a man of his age and with his infirmities in detention was cruel while COVID-19 bears down on so many people in such institutions. Correctional and detention facilities are particularly vulnerable to outbreaks. More than 900 inmates in a federal prison in Lompoc contracted the virus, the worst outbreak in the federal prison system. And in San Diego, 151 detainees at Otay Mesa Detention Center have tested positive and one has died, the largest outbreak in the immigration detention system. No cases have been confirmed at Mesa Verde. Just before a scheduled immigration court hearing last week, Ahn was taken to a local hospital for severe chest pain, where he tested negative for COVID-19. He returned to Mesa Verde the next night. Young Ahn, 66, said his brother pleaded to be returned to the general population but was told he needed to stay in quarantine isolation for 14 days. In protest, he began refusing meals. Choung Woong Ahn had a history of suicide attempts, according to a court document and his lawyer. "If they knew he had a suicidal mind, then he shouldn't be put in an isolation room all by himself" Young Ahn said. Choung Woong Ahn called his brother several hours before his death. They talked about preparing for his court hearing, which had been rescheduled for Tuesday. He told Young Ahn, "I'll talk to you tomorrow." According to a court declaration, Choung Woong Ahn fired a shot at two men who came to the aid of a woman whom he beat and threatened to kill at a dry-cleaning business. The bullet missed and lodged in a wall. Sheriff's deputies labeled the incident in October 2011 as domestic violence-related. "These are mandatory detentions based on what Congress has outlined for us, including Mr. Ahn's case," Moor said. "Based on the nature of what his conviction is, I would have to say that was the primary reason why." But Choung Woong Ahn's lawyer, Priya Patel with Centro Legal, said his death is a failure by ICE, the private prison company GEO Group, which manages the facility, and California officials who oversee detention facilities. Patel said she thought, given his age and medical issues, the federal judge would agree with her perspective about his case. She said he had expressed fear about getting coronavirus. He had been watching the news and knew how dangerous the situation was and that he was vulnerable. "There were many, many ways it could have been prevented," she said. "On a pretty micro level, he shouldn't have been unmonitored in segregation. And also, on a macro level, he should've been released." ICE said the death is under investigation. "ICE is firmly committed to the health and welfare of all those in its custody and is undertaking a comprehensive agency-wide review of this incident, as it does in all such cases," said Moor. Young Ahn said his brother finished high school in South Korea and worked as a real estate developer until a new government limited development and his business tanked. A few years later, his older sister petitioned for him to join her in California, where he dedicated himself to selling luggage at flea markets. Another sister who lives near San Jose visited Choung Woong Ahn nearly every weekend after he went to prison. Two weeks ago, ICE had requested her address and phone number to keep on file. She had arranged for him to live with her and purchased some clothes and shoes for him in case he was released during the pandemic. But Young Ahn said the family had also begun longer-term planning for his deportation and to help him resettle in South Korea. Young Ahn said he's angry about the way his brother died. "Some people say, 'Well he has a criminal record.' But he paid his due, OK?" he said. "He served the full term. He has a lot of remorse, a lot of regret." Caption: PHOTO: CHOUNG WOONG AHN, 74, died while awaiting legal hearings. PHOTOGRAPHER: Priya Patel 
May 20, 2020	Hollywood is hoping that film shoots, shuttered more than two months ago because of the coronavirus crisis, will resume as early as mid-June. But once production gets going, there will be a new line item on studio budgets: COVID-19 prevention. Studios and production companies will have to hire additional personnel, such as health and safety experts and sanitation crews. They'll need to pay for additional equipment for cleaning sets, washing hands and checking temperatures. Work will go slower, and shoots will go longer. All of that adds up on the ledger. Experts and executives estimate that enhanced cleaning and staffing for coronavirus prevention could add more than $1 million to a typical movie budget. On top of that, staggered shifts for crew, meant to minimize the number of people on set, could stretch what would normally be an eight-week shooting schedule to as many as 10 weeks. That would significantly increase expenses for major films, which can cost up to $400,000 a day to make.  "The budgets will definitely be going up for productions," said Paul Swanson, a Los Angeles-based entertainment attorney at Loeb & Loeb. "If you have 50 days [of shooting], you might end up with 10 extra days. And depending on the production, that could be very costly." The prospect of rising production costs comes when the industry is also facing a period of falling revenues. Wedbush Securities analyst Michael Pachter estimates the 2020 box office will end with $6 billion in ticket sales, down nearly 50% from last year. New coronavirus spending will put another financial strain on studios that were already keeping a tight lid on budgets because of the challenging theatrical market, even before movie houses closed in mid-March. Analysts also expect TV networks to try to cut programming costs because of the decline of advertising and acceleration of cord-cutting. "It's going to be a hit for sure," said one production executive not authorized to speak publicly who requested anonymity. -- Cuts in other areas Studio executives have been talking internally about how to manage costs by reducing spending in other areas, such as international travel, which will be challenging anyway in the current environment. Some say they'll be able to adapt with smaller crews and casts. Companies may even boost efforts to lobby state officials for expanded tax incentives that would allow more movies to shoot in California. "It's going to vary from project to project," said Jesse Sisgold, president and chief operating officer of Santa Monica-based studio Skydance Media. The company's productions include the relatively contained Netflix comedy series "Grace and Frankie," along with expansive sci-fi epics such as the upcoming "Foundation" series for Apple TV+. "We're still looking at the same budgets we did prior to COVID, but we're just shuffling costs within those budgets." It remains unclear when productions will be able to resume locally. Los Angeles County officials recently began gradually easing restrictions on businesses to get the economy moving. Studio sources say they could begin getting back in gear as soon as next month in the U.S. and are already fielding inquiries from states that have reopened more aggressively, such as Georgia. Productions are underway in countries including Iceland and South Korea. Still, there's little doubt the coronavirus will add extra challenges for companies as they allocate funds. Plans are "obviously a work in progress," production controller Nour Dardari, who has worked on blockbusters including "Star Wars: The Rise of Skywalker," said in a recent webinar hosted by production services firm Entertainment Partners. "But we can definitely see there will be ... some allowance to make sure everyone is safe." When crews go back to work in the states, how they operate will have changed dramatically. To manage the on-set health and safety measures, studios are expected to hire "COVID coordinators" who will lead staffs of 10 to 15 people on smaller movies, according to one production source. For bigger shoots, that staff could be 30 people or more. Call times will be coordinated so that certain teams, such as set dressers, come to the set in staggered shifts to reduce crowding. In some cases, casts and crews may be quarantined before a shoot begins. Sets may be built and left to sit for several days before the filmmaking teams can come in. All of that means more time and money. "What will be costly is the whole rearrangement of the process," said Los Angeles entertainment attorney Kenneth Kleinberg of Kleinberg Lange. Crew members will also work shorter days because people are more susceptible to illness when they're exhausted. The industry may move to so-called French hours, in which crew members work up to 10 hours on set instead of pulling 14-hour days. That could extend the length of shoots. Mark Gill, chief executive of independent film company Solstice Studios, said pay for workers will have to change to prevent costs from ballooning. Crew members, he said, would be paid the same hourly wage, but their hours would be stretched over more days of filming. "This is the only way labor costs won't rise," Gill said. "And if they do rise, many films will become un-financeable." Studios' insurance costs are also likely to rise because of the risk of having to pause shooting for weeks when a member of the cast or crew gets sick. Because insurance companies have begun excluding coronavirus from their policies, major studios will probably have to bear the brunt of future shutdowns. Legal costs may also increase to cover potential litigation if employees become ill. -- Comfort zones So-called intimacy coordinators may be called upon to help performers feel comfortable during other types of shooting that require people to be near each other, said Jody Simon, an entertainment attorney at Fox Rothschild. "They're going to be increasingly important going forward," Simon said. Some of the more mundane parts of the filmmaking process will have to change as well, including craft services and security. Instead of long buffet lines for lunch breaks, studios anticipate ordering boxed lunches from catering companies. Sets will have check-in stations to perform health screenings for people coming to work, which may include temperature checks. For a century-old industry such as Hollywood, changing longstanding ways of doing the physical work is a "puzzle and a challenge," said Yolanda Cochran, Nickelodeon's senior vice president of production. "Other than some technological advances, the approach to production has been the same for decades," Cochran said during the web panel on production last week. "Getting people to think in a different way can be a challenge. Unfortunately we now have [a situation] that's unavoidable, and we're going to have to problem-solve." 
May 19, 2020	Hollywood is hoping that film shoots — shuttered more than two months ago because of the coronavirus crisis — will resume as early as mid-June. But once production gets going, there will be a new line item on studio budgets: COVID-19 prevention. Studios and production companies will have to hire additional personnel, such as health and safety experts and sanitation crews. They’ll need to pay for additional equipment for cleaning sets, washing hands and checking temperatures. Work will go slower, and shoots will go longer. All of that adds up on the ledger. Experts and executives estimate that enhanced cleaning and staffing for coronavirus prevention could add more than $1 million to a typical movie budget. On top of that, staggered shifts for crew, meant to minimize the number of people on set, could stretch what would normally be an eight-week shooting schedule to as many as 10 weeks. That would significantly increase expenses for major films, which can cost up to $400,000 a day to make. “The budgets will definitely be going up for productions,” said Paul Swanson, a Los Angeles-based entertainment attorney at Loeb & Loeb. “If you have 50 days [of shooting], you might end up with 10 extra days. And depending on the production, that could be very costly.” The prospect of rising production costs comes at a precarious time, when the industry is also facing a period of falling revenues. Wedbush Securities analyst Michael Pachter estimates the 2020 box office will end with $6 billion in ticket sales, down nearly 50% from last year. New coronavirus spending will put an another financial strain on studios that were already keeping a tight lid on budgets because of the challenging theatrical market, even before movie houses closed in mid-March. Analysts also expect TV networks to try to cut programming costs because of the decline of advertising and acceleration of cord-cutting. “It’s going to be a hit, for sure,” said one production executive who was not authorized to speak publicly and requested anonymity. Studio executives have been talking internally about how to manage costs by reducing spending in other areas, such as international travel, which will be challenging anyway in the current environment. Some say they’ll be able to adapt with smaller crews and casts. Companies may even boost efforts to lobby state officials for expanded tax incentives that would allow more movies to shoot in California. “It’s going to vary from project to project,” said Jesse Sisgold, president and chief operating officer of Santa Monica-based studio Skydance Media. The company’s productions include the relatively contained Netflix comedy series “Grace and Frankie,” along with expansive sci-fi epics such as the upcoming “Foundation” series for Apple TV+. “We’re still looking at the same budgets we did prior to COVID, but we’re just shuffling costs within those budgets.” It remains unclear when productions will be able to resume locally. Los Angeles County officials recently began gradually easing restrictions on businesses to get the economy moving. Studio sources say they could begin getting back in gear as soon as next month in the U.S., and are already fielding inquiries from states that have reopened more aggressively, such as Georgia. Productions are currently underway in countries including Iceland and South Korea. Still, there’s little doubt the coronavirus will add extra challenges for companies as they allocate funds. Plans are “obviously a work in progress,” production controller Nour Dardari, who has worked on blockbusters including “Star Wars: The Rise of Skywalker,” said in a recent webinar hosted by production services firm Entertainment Partners. “But we can definitely see there will be ... some allowance to make sure everyone is safe.” When crews go back to work in the states, how they operate will have changed dramatically. To manage the on-set health and safety measures, studios are expected to hire “COVID coordinators” who will lead staffs of 10 to 15 people on smaller movies, according to one production source. For bigger shoots, that staff could be 30 people or more. Call times will be coordinated so that certain teams, such as set dressers, come to the set in staggered shifts to reduce crowding. In some cases, casts and crews may be quarantined before a shoot begins. Sets may be built and left to sit for several days before the filmmaking teams can come in. All of that means more time and money. “What will be costly is the whole rearrangement of the process,” said Los Angeles entertainment attorney Kenneth Kleinberg, of Kleinberg Lange. Crew members will also work shorter days because people are more susceptible to illness when they’re exhausted. The industry may move to so-called French hours, in which crew members work up to 10 hours on set instead of pulling 14-hour days. That could extend the length of shoots. Mark Gill, chief executive of independent film company Solstice Studios, said pay for workers will have to change in order to prevent costs from ballooning. Crew members, he said, would be paid the same hourly wage, but their hours would be stretched over more days of filming. “This is the only way labor costs won’t rise,” Gill said. “And if they do rise, many films will become un-financeable.” Studios’ insurance costs are also likely to rise because of the risk of having to pause shooting for weeks when a member of the cast or crew gets sick. Because insurance companies have begun excluding coronavirus from their policies, major studios will probably have to bear the brunt of future shutdowns. Legal costs may also increase to cover potential litigation if employees become ill. So-called intimacy coordinators, who work with actors to ensure appropriate behavior during sex scenes, may be called upon to help performers feel comfortable during other types of shooting that require people to be near each other, said Jody Simon, an entertainment attorney at Fox Rothschild. “They’re going to be increasingly important going forward,” Simon said. Some of the more mundane parts of the filmmaking process will have to change, as well, including craft services and security. Instead of long buffet lines for lunch breaks, studios anticipate ordering boxed lunches from catering companies. Sets will have check-in stations to perform health screenings for people coming to work, which may include temperature checks. For a century-old industry such as Hollywood, changing longstanding ways of doing the physical work is a “puzzle and a challenge,” said Yolanda Cochran, Nickelodeon’s senior vice president of production. “Other than some technological advances, the approach to production has been the same for decades,” Cochran said during the web panel on production last week. “Getting people to think in a different way can be a challenge. Unfortunately we now have [a situation] that’s unavoidable, and we’re going to have to problem-solve.”
May 19, 2020	Ever since the coronavirus crisis put entertainment production in a deep freeze, Hollywood has been eager to get the cameras rolling again. After all, box office revenue has sunk to virtually zero and more than 100,000 entertainment industry workers have lost their jobs. With stay-at-home orders in place and domestic production at a standstill, filmmakers are starting to see a thaw abroad.  In recent weeks, several countries have raised their flags, vying for production. They tout their incentives, facilities and locations but also their low COVID-19 numbers, testing capabilities and measures to keep productions safe and minimize outbreaks. "It's about options," said Joseph Chianese, executive vice president at Entertainment Partners, an industry consultancy based in Burbank. "Before it was who had the higher incentives, infrastructure and crew to support my production." Now Chianese says, the formula has shifted, with people also asking: Is it safe and is it close? The globe began spinning last month when Netflix's content chief, Ted Sarandos, mentioned during an earnings call that the streaming giant was shooting in Iceland and South Korea. With its vigilant COVID-19 testing, a Netflix endorsement and a plan for safe and secure production on the table, Iceland received an upsurge in interest from filmmakers. Last week, Iceland announced it would open the country to foreign film crews beginning May 15 under strict testing and tracking measures. Those entering the country will be offered a variety of quarantine and testing options and will be asked to comply with stringent safety requirements on set. Further easing of restrictions is expected on June 15. -- Progress abroad In recent weeks, as governments review border policies and airlines have limited travel, film commissions and producers have been establishing guidelines and protocols to get a jump on filming. "We want to get that production out of suspended animation," said Adrian Wootton, chief executive at the British Film Commission, noting that film was one of the country's fastest growing sectors. Major players including Walt Disney, Netflix and Warner Bros. have made substantial investments in the United Kingdom. Last year Disney signed a long-term lease at Pinewood Studios outside of London, while Netflix locked up 14 soundstages at Shepperton Studios. Warner Bros. has its own studios at Leavesden, near the capital. Major U.S. studios "have got production that is suspended here that they want to start up again," Wootton said. The British Film Commission, which hopes to reopen this summer, has compiled a 26-page set of proposals to restart high-end TV and film production with feedback from unions and other industry groups. The recommendations include requirements for coronavirus health and safety training for all crew members; the use of masks, gloves, hand-washing, cleaning and twice daily temperature checks; a dedicated COVID-19 health and safety supervisor; and quarantining of foreign crews. Elsewhere in Europe, the Czech Republic was among the first countries to resume production. The country's film commissioner has said international filming halted by the pandemic would begin this month. Before the shutdown, Cara Delevingne and Orlando Bloom were filming Amazon Studios' second season of "Carnival Row," and Disney's Marvel Studios was filming "The Falcon and the Winter Soldier." The country has exempted actors and performers from wearing masks while working but requires testing proof every 14 days. Foreign actors and crew members must test negative for the virus before boarding a flight to the country, and within 72 hours of arrival, undergo a second test, and remain quarantined until they receive a negative result. Neighboring Slovakia, meanwhile, touts the fact that it never closed for filming. "Unlike in other countries, filming was not banned, as it is considered manufacturing and not a cultural event," said Zuzana Bielikova, head of the Slovak Film Commission. However, she noted that most production outside of small-scale projects was halted until the country got the virus under control. Local films and TV shows are expected to begin again in June. "We do have quite a few requests from international [mostly U.K., German, U.S.] film crews that would like to film in Slovakia in the summer and autumn," she said. Bielikova said the commission offers online location scouting so international crews don't have travel in person while searching for locations. Among the new protocols, anyone entering the country must first undergo a 14-day quarantine (except for those with proof they are COVID-19 negative). In New Zealand, where Disney's "Avatar" sequels were being filmed before the virus halted production, and where early and strict restrictions resulted in low infection rates and containment, the government has approved protocols for domestic filming, some of which are already underway. "We also look forward to welcoming back international productions that were shooting here and those that had planned to shoot here and want to create a safe environment for that," said Annabelle Sheehan, chief executive of the New Zealand Film Commission. "I think every country will create effective [health and safety plans] that account for COVID issues as they move toward resuming production in their countries." While Australia's borders remain closed to international filming, the country has been opening up its domestic production. In March, Tom Hanks and his wife, Rita Wilson, announced they'd both tested positive for the coronavirus while Hanks was in Australia filming the untitled Baz Luhrmann Elvis Presley biopic. The longstanding Australian soap opera "Neighbors" resumed production this month under strict health and sanitation protocols, including no kissing or hand holding. Cast and crew isolated into three groups and deployed camera tricks to make actors appear more intimate on screen then they are on set. Back in the U.S., some enterprising film executives are urging producers to look closer to home. Lynn-Wood Fields, the marketing producer at Montana Studios in Hamilton, suggests Montana. "It is in the U.S., there are direct fights, we have unbelievable resources, including testing, and we're open," she said. "We have a joke here: 'Six feet, that seems a little close.' " Fields said that the 12,000 square feet of operational soundstage space in Hamilton and its postproduction space in Butte can compete with any country. As well, she said it has partnered with a primary care doctor to test crews weekly and cast daily and a manufacturing partnership producing antiviral masks. Last year, the state passed a competitive production rebate of up to 35%. "We have progressive COVID-19 testing," Fields said, also noting: "Our numbers are so much lower than New Zealand." (As of Thursday, the state had 16 total deaths and 462 confirmed cases.) In part, the appeal of filming abroad is because the U.S. has yet to contain the virus or provide adequate testing, and safety and health measures on set have yet to be established, let alone implemented. Another hurdle: Insurance companies that have long protected studios from a multitude of circumstances that could hamper or delay filming are reluctant to underwrite productions, regardless of geography. -- Here in L.A. Locally, film officials are working with the Los Angeles County Department of Public Health to establish criteria for filming on set and on location. Despite progress, no date has been set for the start of filming, said Paul Audley, president of FilmLA. "I see no reason why we shouldn't have production back in the next few months," L.A. Mayor Eric Garcetti said Monday. Attorney Dan Stone, a partner in the litigation and entertainment and media groups of Greenberg Glusker, says the lack of a unified approach could further delay the return of domestic production. "Ultimately the industry will need some form of uniform guidelines," he said. Hollywood unions, including SAG-AFTRA and the Directors Guild of America, are playing a key role. "Companies and studios are putting out their thoughts and recommendations on how production will work," Chianese said. "But if you look at the U.S., it's the unions and guilds that will dictate what they need to make sure their members are safe." IATSE International President Matthew Loeb has said the union and its locals, whose 150,000 members work behind the scenes of productions in the U.S. and Canada, will negotiate with studios to establish a "uniform set of terms and conditions so that there's no differences based on where a given production may take place." This week the union announced it had hired three epidemiologists to consult on reopening procedures. Film industry officials north of the border are also proceeding cautiously. Lisa Beare, British Columbia's minister of tourism, arts and culture, said earlier this month, "We are confident that the motion picture industry will be able to restart under enhanced protocols" in June and July. In Ontario this week, postproduction and animation teams will be allowed to return to their studios under strict set sanitation requirements, said Lisa MacLeod, Ontario's minister of heritage, sport, tourism and culture industries. When will actual filming restart? "It's tough to say simply because we are waiting for the spread of COVID-19 to really slow," MacLeod said. For an industry that operates under constant uncertainty, COVID-19 presents a complex, possibly intractable set of unknowns. Kevin Klowden, executive director of the Milken Institute's Center for Regional Economics, said, "I think some productions are absolutely looking at other countries and saying, 'We've got an option here; let's go ahead and jump on this. We are going to film somewhere else, especially if it makes a difference in being able to keep going and keep our financing.' " But, he cautions, "What do you do if there is simply a breakout on set? Long-term, coronavirus is a problem everywhere, even if places like New Zealand or South Korea have done a better job of managing it." Caption: PHOTO: "CARNIVAL ROW," with Orlando Bloom and Cara Delevingne, had to suspend filming in the Czech Republic. The country is now reopening for production. PHOTOGRAPHER:Jan Thijs Amazon Studios
May 19, 2020	Beijing and Washington faced off Monday at a virtual global health gathering, with Chinese President Xi Jinping announcing a $2-billion contribution and urging solidarity with the World Health Organization in battling a pandemic that has claimed more than 317,000 lives and devastated many economies worldwide. The United States, by contrast, renewed bitter accusations against the U.N.'s health agency and jabbed at it and China over secrecy in the crucial weeks after the virus' emergence in the central city of Wuhan. Health and Human Services Secretary Alex Azar, speaking by video link, declared that the WHO had "failed at its core mission of information-sharing and transparency" in confronting the outbreak.  "Although we are all focused on the immediate response, we need a more effective WHO -- right now," Azar told a meeting of the World Health Assembly, the WHO's decision-making body. The United States was largely isolated in its excoriation of the WHO, with the governments of France, Germany and South Korea expressing support for the organization. At the urging of the European Union and others, however, the WHO agreed to an independent review of its coronavirus response, to be launched at the "earliest appropriate moment." U.S. relations with allies have been contentious in the course of the outbreak, and in some cases, China has moved to fill the void. In March, President Trump failed to give European leaders a heads-up before announcing sweeping travel restrictions on the 27-nation EU. This month, the Trump administration was conspicuously absent from a high-profile European-led online conference on developing vaccines and soliciting pledges to fight the pandemic's effects. The WHO's acquiescence to calls for a review of its actions came after an oversight body raised questions about the organization's procedures for alerting the world to outbreaks including this one, and about the decision-making on travel advice the organization provides at such times. But the review will not address the origins of the novel coronavirus, which the Trump administration has placed at the center of its scathing criticism of both the health body and China. The U.S. president has advanced the theory -- unsupported by any publicly disclosed intelligence or scientific findings -- that the coronavirus originated at a lab in China. Virology experts generally believe the virus probably jumped from animal to human. China supports the independent review of the WHO. It would presumably touch on some of China's own early actions, although Xi said the evaluation should wait until the immediate crisis subsided. He said any evaluation should be based on "science and professionalism" and "conducted in an objective and impartial manner." The conciliatory tone of Xi's remarks, coupled with China's announcement of a financial contribution at a time when the U.S. has temporarily cut its support for the WHO, was the latest example of China seeking the leadership mantle amid the crisis, despite being the country where the outbreak was first detected. Azar, echoing a prime White House talking point, cast blame on Beijing, though without naming China. He said at least "one member state made a mockery of their transparency obligations, with tremendous costs for the entire world." Xi defended China's early actions, saying it had moved in a "timely fashion" to provide information, including the virus' genetic sequence, to the WHO and other parties. China's $2-billion contribution to fighting the virus and the ensuing economic wreckage, especially in developing countries, will be provided over two years, he said. The WHO's head, Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, said he welcomed the review but characterized the U.N. body's tracking of the outbreak's course as appropriate. The organization declared a global health emergency Jan. 30, in the outbreak's early stages, and designated it a pandemic on March 11. Addressing the gathering from Geneva, Tedros bemoaned the divisions between countries exacerbated by the coronavirus crisis but said there had also been heartening shows of unity. He acknowledged that "geopolitical divisions have been thrown into sharp relief" but said "nations have come together as never before." Xi's support for the independent review represented something of a softening of China's angry insistence that there was nothing untoward about its own actions in the early stages of the virus' explosive spread. Beijing's reputation would probably suffer if it sought to block the evaluation outright. However, China could do as it did when WHO experts were allowed into the country to look into the outbreak, controlling access to key locales and witnesses. China's contribution to the WHO, about $86 million last year, has traditionally been dwarfed by that of the U.S. Trump announced last month that his administration would suspend its contribution to the organization, which amounts to about $550 million annually, via various programs. Caption: PHOTO: PRESIDENT Xi Jinping said China had provided information on the coronavirus in a "timely fashion." PHOTOGRAPHER:Li Xueren Xinhua 
May 18, 2020	Ever since the coronavirus crisis put entertainment production in a deep freeze, Hollywood has been eager to get the cameras rolling again. After all, box office revenue has sunk to virtually zero and more than 100,000 entertainment industry workers have lost their jobs. For the record: 11:00 AM, May. 18, 2020 An earlier version of this article said that Adrian Wootton is chief executive of the British Film Institute. He holds that title with the British Film Commission. With stay-at-home orders in place and domestic production at a standstill, filmmakers are starting to see a thaw abroad. In recent weeks, several countries have raised their flags, vying for production. They tout their incentives, facilities and locations but also their low COVID-19 numbers, testing capabilities and measures to keep productions safe and minimize outbreaks. “It’s about options,” said Joseph Chianese, executive vice president at Entertainment Partners, an industry consultancy based in Burbank. “Before it was who had the higher incentives, infrastructure and crew to support my production.” Now Chianese says, the formula has shifted, with people also asking: Is it safe and is it close? The globe began spinning last month when Netflix’s content chief, Ted Sarandos, mentioned during an earnings call that the streaming giant was shooting in Iceland and South Korea. With its vigilant COVID-19 testing, a Netflix endorsement and a plan for safe and secure production on the table, Iceland received an upsurge in interest from filmmakers. Last week, Iceland announced it would open the country to foreign film crews beginning May 15 under strict testing and tracking measures. Those entering the country will be offered a variety of quarantine and testing options and will be asked to comply with stringent safety requirements on set. Further easing of restrictions is expected on June 15. In recent weeks, as governments review border policies and airlines have limited travel, film commissions and producers have been establishing guidelines and protocols to get a jump on filming. “We want to get that production out of suspended animation,” said Adrian Wootton, chief executive at the British Film Commission, noting that film was one of the country’s fastest growing sectors. Major players including Walt Disney, Netflix and Warner Bros. have made substantial investments in the United Kingdom. Last year Disney signed a long-term lease at Pinewood Studios outside of London, while Netflix locked up 14 soundstages at Shepperton Studios. Warner Bros. has its own studios at Leavesden, near the capital. Major U.S. studios “have got production that is suspended here that they want to start up again,” Wootton said. The British Film Commission, which hopes to reopen this summer, has compiled a 26-page set of proposals to restart high-end TV and film production with feedback from unions and other industry groups. The recommendations include requirements for coronavirus health and safety training for all crew members; the use of masks, gloves, hand-washing, cleaning and twice daily temperature checks; a dedicated COVID-19 health and safety supervisor; and quarantining of foreign crews. Elsewhere in Europe, the Czech Republic was among the first countries to resume production. The country’s film commissioner has said international filming halted by the pandemic would begin this month. Before the shutdown, Cara Delevingne and Orlando Bloom were filming Amazon Studios’ second season of “Carnival Row,” and Disney’s Marvel Studios was filming “The Falcon and the Winter Soldier.” The country has exempted actors and performers from wearing masks while working but requires testing proof every 14 days. Foreign actors and crew members must test negative for the virus before boarding a flight to the country, and within 72 hours of arrival, undergo a second test, and remain quarantined until they receive a negative result. Neighboring Slovakia, meanwhile, touts the fact that it never closed for filming. “Unlike in other countries, filming was not banned, as it is considered manufacturing and not a cultural event,“ said Zuzana Bieliková, head of the Slovak Film Commission. However, she noted that most production outside of small-scale projects was halted until the country got the virus under control. Local films and TV shows are expected to begin again in June. “We do have quite a few requests from international [mostly U.K., German, U.S.] film crews that would like to film in Slovakia in the summer and autumn,“ she said. Bieliková said the commission offers online location scouting so international crews don’t have travel in person while searching for locations. Among the new protocols, anyone entering the country must first undergo a 14-day quarantine (except for those with proof they are COVID-19 negative). In New Zealand, where Disney’s “Avatar” sequels were being filmed before the virus halted production, and where early and strict restrictions resulted in low infection rates and containment, the government has approved protocols for domestic filming, some of which are already underway. “We also look forward to welcoming back international productions that were shooting here and those that had planned to shoot here and want to create a safe environment for that,” said Annabelle Sheehan, chief executive of the New Zealand Film Commission. “I think every country will create effective [health and safety plans] that account for COVID issues as they move toward resuming production in their countries.” While Australia’s borders remain closed to international filming, the country has been opening up its domestic production. In March, Tom Hanks and his wife, Rita Wilson, announced they’d both tested positive for the coronavirus while Hanks was in Australia filming the untitled Baz Luhrmann Elvis Presley biopic. The longstanding Australian soap opera “Neighbors” resumed production this month under strict health and sanitation protocols, including no kissing or hand holding. Cast and crew isolated into three groups and deployed camera tricks to make actors appear more intimate on screen then they are on set. Back in the U.S., some enterprising film executives are urging producers to look closer to home. Lynn-Wood Fields, the marketing producer at Montana Studios in Hamilton, suggests Montana. “It is in the U.S., there are direct fights, we have unbelievable resources, including testing, and we’re open,” she said. “We have a joke here: ‘Six feet, that seems a little close.’” Fields said that the 12,000 square feet of operational soundstage space in Hamilton and its post-production space in Butte can compete with any country. As well, she said it has partnered with a primary care doctor to test crews weekly and cast daily and a manufacturing partnership producing antiviral masks. Last year, the state passed a competitive production rebate of up to 35%. “We have progressive COVID-19 testing,” Fields said, also noting: “Our numbers are so much lower than New Zealand.” (As of Thursday, the state had 16 total deaths and 462 confirmed cases.) In part, the appeal of filming abroad is because the U.S. has yet to contain the virus or provide adequate testing, and safety and health measures on set have yet to be established, let alone implemented. Another hurdle: Insurance companies that have long protected studios from a multitude of circumstances that could hamper or delay filming are reluctant to underwrite productions, regardless of geography. Locally, film officials are working with the Los Angeles County Department of Public Health to establish criteria for filming on set and on location. Despite progress, no date has been set for the start of filming, said Paul Audley, president of FilmLA. “I see no reason why we shouldn’t have production back in the next few months,” L.A. Mayor Eric Garcetti said Monday. Attorney Dan Stone, a partner in the litigation and entertainment and media groups of Greenberg Glusker, says the lack of a unified approach could further delay the return of domestic production. “Ultimately the industry will need some form of uniform guidelines,” he said. More on the impact on entertainment  Hollywood unions, including SAG-AFTRA and the Directors Guild of America, are playing a key role. “Companies and studios are putting out their thoughts and recommendations on how production will work,” Chianese said. “But if you look at the U.S., it’s the unions and guilds that will dictate what they need to make sure their members are safe.” IATSE International President Matthew Loeb has said the union and its locals, whose 150,000 members work behind the scenes of productions in the U.S. and Canada, will negotiate with studios to establish a “uniform set of terms and conditions so that there’s no differences based on where a given production may take place.” This week the union announced it had hired three epidemiologists to consult on reopening procedures. Film industry officials north of the border are also proceeding cautiously. Lisa Beare, British Columbia’s minister of tourism, arts and culture, said earlier this month, “We are confident that the motion picture industry will be able to restart under enhanced protocols” in June and July. In Ontario this week, post-production and animation teams will be allowed to return to their studios under strict set sanitation requirements, said Lisa MacLeod, Ontario’s minister of heritage, sport, tourism and culture industries. When will actual filming restart? “It’s tough to say simply because we are waiting for the spread of COVID-19 to really slow,” MacLeod said. For an industry that operates under constant uncertainty, COVID-19 presents a complex, possibly intractable set of unknowns. Kevin Klowden, executive director of the Milken Institute’s Center for Regional Economics, said, “I think some productions are absolutely looking at other countries and saying, ‘We’ve got an option here; let’s go ahead and jump on this. We are going to film somewhere else, especially if it makes a difference in being able to keep going and keep our financing.’” But, he cautions, “What do you do if there is simply a breakout on set? Long-term, coronavirus is a problem everywhere, even if places like New Zealand or South Korea have done a better job of managing it.”
May 17, 2020	To hear public health experts describe it, defeating the coronavirus is a massive but straightforward problem, difficult but not impossible while waiting for a vaccine. First, administer tens of millions of tests to find out who has the disease. Then trace all their recent contacts, using a cellphone app that tells the government whom they met. Finally, track down all those people and order them into isolation for 14 days, possibly in a quarantine hotel. Now think about that scenario. In a country where armed men are marching to defend their right not to wear masks, how will intrusive measures like those go down? Answer: Not easily. “My public health friends are working out brilliant solutions for the technical problems, but they haven’t confronted the challenge of political culture,” Keith Humphreys, a professor of psychiatry at Stanford’s Medical School, told me. “What are we going to do if millions of people refuse to take the tests? What are we going to do if they refuse to isolate themselves or close their businesses?” He’s right. Our political culture often puts individual rights before communal interests. We’re not obedient people by heritage; the Constitution enshrines our right to rebel. That’s not a complaint. Our small-L libertarian streak, by which I mean our attachment to the Bill of Rights, is one of the glories of American life. But in the face of a pandemic, it gets in the way of protecting the larger community. We’ve already seen widespread protests against the shutdown orders imposed by many governors — protests encouraged, bizarrely, by President Trump, even though the governors are following White House guidelines. There’s been scattered violence by hotheads who refuse shop owners’ requests to wear masks. A security guard at a Family Dollar store in Flint, Mich., was shot and killed after he ordered a maskless customer to leave. A clerk at a Target in Van Nuys ended up with a broken arm after he was slugged by another mask-averse knucklehead. Even before widespread contact tracing has begun, some have denounced the idea — especially the proposed phone app — as an unwarranted data grab by Google and Apple. And conspiracy theorists are busy denouncing the pandemic as a hoax cooked up by Bill Gates, the Democratic National Committee, or some other imaginary supervillain. The resistance to masks and other public health measures, while noisy, is still a small minority. A poll released by the Washington Post and the University of Maryland last week found that only 11% of Americans think the anti-pandemic measures have been too severe, including only 32% of Republicans. Still, “it doesn’t take much noncompliance to create problems,” Humphreys pointed out. Smart public health planners are already thinking about making the next stage work, including how much to ask of those who may have been exposed to the virus. “I don’t think you necessarily want to ask people to quarantine for 14 days,” Ashish Jha, director of Harvard’s Global Health Institute, told me. “I could see a system that asks people to self-isolate for three to five days, gives them a couple of tests, and if both are negative tell them they are OK as long as they avoid large gatherings,” he added. “Is that the ideal scientific outcome? No. But we can live with it.” Bottom line: We’ll never see 100% compliance, but we don’t need it. If doctors can get 60% or 70% to cooperate, the contagion can still be contained — just more slowly. That means a long, uneven slog toward reducing the danger, with some states imposing tougher measures than others — a crazy quilt of slightly different approaches. That creates problems too. People are still largely free to travel from one state to another, which gives the virus more ways to spread. As Humphreys put it, “it’s like building a no-peeing section in the swimming pool.” And all this is merely awaiting an effective vaccine to protect people from the virus. Did I mention that the anti-vaccine movement has roared back to life, denouncing Trump’s call for a crash program to develop, test and deploy 300 million doses by January as another dangerous plot? Thanks to the anti-vaxxers, even an effective vaccine is unlikely to eradicate COVID-19 completely because some Americans will choose to remain vulnerable to it. In that respect, it will be something like the measles — a threat that came back because some families refused the vaccinations. We’ll still contend with the coronavirus years from now — and still argue about the appropriate public health measures to employ. We’re not like South Korea or Taiwan. We’re not even like Canada or Germany, countries where people trust government more than we do. We’re America, and we’re going to do it our way — no matter how long it takes and how many mistakes we choose to make.
May 17, 2020	To hear public health experts describe it, defeating the coronavirus is a massive but straightforward problem, difficult but not impossible while waiting for a vaccine. First, administer tens of millions of tests to find out who has the disease. Then trace all their recent contacts, using a cellphone app that tells the government whom they met. Finally, track down all those people and order them into isolation for 14 days, possibly in a quarantine hotel. Now think about that scenario.  In a country where armed men are marching to defend their right not to wear masks, how will intrusive measures like those go down? Answer: Not easily. "My public health friends are working out brilliant solutions for the technical problems, but they haven't confronted the challenge of political culture," Keith Humphreys, a professor of psychiatry at Stanford's Medical School, told me. "What are we going to do if millions of people refuse to take the tests? What are we going to do if they refuse to isolate themselves or close their businesses?" He's right. Our political culture often puts individual rights before communal interests. We're not obedient people by heritage; the Constitution enshrines our right to rebel. That's not a complaint. Our small-L libertarian streak, by which I mean our attachment to the Bill of Rights, is one of the glories of American life. But in the face of a pandemic, it gets in the way of protecting the larger community. We've already seen widespread protests against the shutdown orders imposed by many governors -- protests encouraged, bizarrely, by President Trump, even though the governors are following White House guidelines. There's been scattered violence by hotheads who refuse shop owners' requests to wear masks. A security guard at a Family Dollar store in Flint, Mich., was shot and killed after he ordered a maskless customer to leave. A clerk at a Target in Van Nuys ended up with a broken arm after he was slugged by a mask-averse knucklehead. Even before widespread contact tracing has begun, some have denounced the idea -- especially the proposed phone app -- as an unwarranted data grab by Google and Apple. And conspiracy theorists are busy denouncing the pandemic as a hoax cooked up by Bill Gates, the Democratic National Committee, or some other imaginary supervillain. The resistance to masks and other public health measures, while noisy, is still a small minority. A poll released by the Washington Post and the University of Maryland last week found that only 11% of Americans think the anti-pandemic measures have been too severe, including only 32% of Republicans. Still, "it doesn't take much noncompliance to create problems," Humphreys pointed out. Smart public health planners are already thinking about making the next stage work, including how much to ask of those who may have been exposed to the virus. "I don't think you necessarily want to ask people to quarantine for 14 days," Ashish Jha, director of Harvard's Global Health Institute, told me. "I could see a system that asks people to self-isolate for three to five days, gives them a couple of tests, and if both are negative tells them they are OK as long as they avoid large gatherings," he added. "Is that the ideal scientific outcome? No. But we can live with it." Bottom line: We'll never see 100% compliance, but we don't need it. If doctors can get 60% or 70% to cooperate, the contagion can still be contained -- just more slowly. That means a long, uneven slog toward reducing the danger, with some states imposing tougher measures than others -- a crazy quilt of slightly different approaches. That creates problems too. People are still largely free to travel from one state to another, which gives the virus more ways to spread. As Humphreys put it, "it's like building a no-peeing section in the swimming pool." And all this is merely awaiting an effective vaccine to protect people from the virus. Did I mention that the anti-vaccine movement has roared back to life, denouncing Trump's call for a crash program to develop, test and deploy 300 million doses by January as another dangerous plot? Thanks to the anti-vaxxers, even an effective vaccine is unlikely to eradicate COVID-19 completely because some Americans will choose to remain vulnerable to it. In that respect, it will be something like the measles -- a threat that came back because some families refused the vaccinations. We'll still contend with the coronavirus years from now -- and still argue about the appropriate public health measures to employ. We're not like South Korea or Taiwan. We're not even like Canada or Germany, countries where people trust government more than we do. We're America, and we're going to do it our way -- no matter how long it takes and how many mistakes we choose to make. -- McManus' column appears on Sunday and Wednesday. Caption: PHOTO: GUN RIGHTS advocates demonstrate at Michigan's state Capitol over a ban on firearms in the building. PHOTOGRAPHER:Paul Sancya Associated Press
May 15, 2020	International Olympic Committee leaders said that postponing the Tokyo Games because of the coronavirus outbreak will cost their organization as much as $800 million. IOC President Thomas Bach offered the detailed estimate of added expenses after a remote meeting of his executive board on Thursday. "The Olympic movement is facing an unprecedented challenge," Bach said in a statement. "We shall all need to make sacrifices and compromises."  The IOC's announced total does not include costs incurred by organizers in Tokyo, who could see their budget swell by an estimated $2 billion to $6 billion. -- David Wharton -- GOLF Smith prevails in mini-tour event Zach Smith won the Scottsdale (Ariz.) Open, closing with an eight-under 62 for a three-stroke victory in the mini-tour event that saw some PGA Tour players return to competition. The PGA Tour suspended play in mid-March because of the COVID-19 pandemic. It is set to return June 11-14 for the Charles Schwab Challenge at Colonial in Fort Worth. -- Golf joined baseball and soccer as sports in South Korea that are back. The women's KLPGA Championship started with three players -- Bae Seon-woo, Kim Char-young2 and Hyun Se-lin -- tied at the top of the leaderboard at five-under 67. Three more players were a shot behind. The tournament is being played without fans. -- ETC. Akron will cut three programs Akron said it will discontinue men's cross-country, men's golf and women's tennis at the end of the academic year. Akron plans to reduce financial support to the athletic department by about 23% ($4.4 million), moves necessitated by the virus outbreak. -- Devin Kirkwood, a 247 Sports four-star cornerback from Gardena Serra High, committed to UCLA, giving the Bruins their most high-profile prospect in the class of 2021. -- Ben Bolch -- The NCAA pushed back its deadline for early entrants to the NBA draft to withdraw and return to school. The deadline was June 3 but it will wait to set a new date. -- Police in Florida were looking for New York Giants cornerback DeAndre Baker and Seattle Seahawks cornerback Quinton Dunbar after witnesses accused them of an armed robbery Wednesday, authorities said. Miramar police issued arrest warrants for both on four counts each of armed robbery with a firearm. -- Thanks to a random draw, Brad Keselowski will start on the pole when the NASCAR season resumes Sunday in Darlington, S.C.  Credit: Staff and Wire Reports
May 15, 2020	Another Thursday, another dismal unemployment statistic. This time the Department of Labor is reporting that 2.98 million Americans filed initial unemployment claims in the last week. That brings total filings over the last eight weeks to 36.5 million people. The latest figure was both mildly heartening and fairly disheartening. It marks an improvement over last week, when initial claims were 3.17 million, and a steady improvement since the peak in new filings of 6.6 million was announced April 2. On the other hand, the figure still exceeded the expectations of some economists, which were as low as 2.5 million. As has happened every week since the end of March, the number prompted fretful commentary about the breadth of the damage from COVID-19 -- or more precisely, from the nationwide stay-at-home lockdown aimed at stemming the spread of the disease.  The number also provides context for two signals about the American response to the COVID-19 pandemic. One is that many people are getting fed up with the lockdown, and not only because it throws millions of them out of work, whether temporarily or for the long term. The other is that we have made scant progress against the virus, or at least not nearly as much as the richest, most powerful and most technically adept nation on Earth should have made. The two indicators are related. One source of discontent with the shutdown is the broken promise that it would give the country time to put in place a program to successfully fight the virus. Without a program of testing and screening to identify viral hot spots and institute selective quarantines, the general public has learned it faces many months more of work, travel and recreational constraints. The impulse to return to normality is fighting an increasingly tense battle with advice to maintain social isolation. In Senate testimony this week, Dr. Anthony Fauci, the nation's most credible scientific voice in the crisis, warned that states that reopen businesses and allow public gatherings too hastily while the pandemic is still in full cry could "trigger an outbreak that you may not be able to control. ... If you think we have it completely under control, we don't. The consequences could be really serious." That triggered a pushback from President Trump, the nation's leading avatar of crisis pseudoscience, who called Fauci's position "not an acceptable answer." Here's the counterfactual. If clear progress were being made in testing and screening and clearly consistent rules were being promoted across the board, then the current shutdown would be much easier for most people to bear. That's always the case when one can see a light at the end of the tunnel. Let's examine how these two phenomena -- the lack of an acceptable antivirus program, and the urge to reopen -- remain in tension. As I've observed before, the Trump administration has only limited power to reopen the economy. Trump can order certain industries to reopen their factories. This works best when he can credibly designate them as essential and when their bosses don't care much about the consequences of the working conditions on the health of their employees, as is the case in meatpacking. It also can work where governors and local officials are content to connive with local employers to coerce employees into returning to work. The most popular tool appears to be withholding unemployment benefits from those who would stay home out of fear for their health or the necessity of caring for sick family members. (Thank you, Iowa, Texas and Ohio.) The problem is that consumers can't be coerced into the marketplace. As Jordan Weissmann observed in Slate, patrons have so far been reluctant to pile back into sit-down restaurants in great numbers even in the most aggressively reopened states. That's according to data from the restaurant booking service Open Table, which finds that as of Wednesday, reservations and walk-ins were still down by about 85% to 70% from the pre-pandemic era, even in open states. The best record was in Alabama, which never fully shut down, where patronage was only 77.5% of the pre-crisis baseline. Don't be fooled by anti-shutdown demonstrations at statehouses such as Michigan's by gun-toting goons, or by the decision by the right-wing majority on the Wisconsin Supreme Court to overturn that state's stay-at-home rules, or by news photos of diners sitting cheek by jowl in a few reopened eateries and bars. The figures from Open Table, combined with opinion polls, indicate that the vast majority of Americans still favor keeping businesses closed to combat the coronavirus. In a recent Washington Post-Ipsos poll, for example, 79% of laid-off respondents favored continuing to fight the virus' spread "even if that means keeping many businesses closed." That was a higher figure than all respondents, who favored maintaining the shutdown by 74% to 25%. It's true, however, that signs are emerging that Americans are getting fed up with restrictions that seem unnecessarily stringent. Some evidence comes from a mobility database assembled by Apple from requests for driving, walking and transit directions made to its Apple Maps app. (Apple says the data are aggregated to preserve user privacy and it doesn't keep records of individual travels.) The data indicate that Americans stopped moving around in early to mid-March, when direction searches abruptly fell by more than 60% from the baseline and bottomed out at a reduction of about 70% in the first half of April. Since then, however, searches have measurably picked up, with searches for walking routes down by only 39% and for driving directions by 40% as of May 10. Searches involving transit, however, have remained mired at negative 77%. That's unsurprising, since a reduction in commuting will keep workers off buses and trains, and any residual ridership might be stifled by concerns about sharing trips with strangers. That's one sign of exasperation with the shutdown. "#StayHome had its moment," Harvard epidemiologist Julia Marcus writes in the Atlantic. "But quarantine fatigue is real." She emphasizes the effect of emotional isolation, which can "severely damage psychological well-being, especially for people who were already depressed or anxious before the crisis started." In a recent poll by the Kaiser Family Foundation, 45% of respondents said the pandemic has harmed their mental health. Plainly it's the open-ended nature of the lockdown that's weighing on Americans. In the same poll, published on April 2, some 74% of respondents said "the worst is yet to come." That's where the Trump administration deserves the greatest blame. The pathway to crushing the pandemic in the United States by early summer was never much in doubt. As public health expert Harvey V. Fineberg laid it out in early April, it required establishing a unified command with indisputable authority to mobilize every public and private resource for the war against the virus. The nation would have to gear up to perform millions of diagnostic tests by mid-April and establish a system of disease surveillance and quarantine of infected or at-risk individuals. Most important, the American public, resistant to government regimentation even in a crisis, would have to be shown how shared action and shared sacrifice would defeat the virus. Any such intrusive system would require credible leadership to "inspire and mobilize the public," Fineberg said. Trump has accomplished none of those things. Management of the coronavirus response at the White House and throughout the federal government has given new meaning to the word "chaos." No one knows who's in charge of what, the government has broken up into fiefdoms engaged in internecine battles, and the only person known to have Trump's ear is his son-in-law Jared Kushner, who has demonstrated incompetence at every turn, compounded by arrogance. Trump vacillates between urging caution in reopening the economy and encouraging rabble-rousing gangs fighting lockdowns. He seems to think that saying something is so is the same as making it happen, as was evident when he promised that anyone in America could get a COVID-19 test on demand, then promised that drive-up testing stands would be in existence around the country in short order. That was on March 13. It still hasn't happened. As Keith Humphreys of Stanford University points out, the obstacles to mounting a nationwide "test, trace, and isolate program" aren't technical -- Germany and South Korea have managed to do so. The challenges are political and cultural in a country that has been trained since the Reagan administration to mistrust the government. That particular chicken has come home to roost. At a moment when a consistent, humanistic expression of government authority would save thousands of lives, federal leadership is in the hands of a petulant egotist whose interest appears to be in using this crisis to divide Americans, not unite them in a shared cause, and blame everyone else for his own manifest failure. Trump is getting what he seems to want: a nation mired in a chaos that benefits only those with the means to insulate themselves from the crisis. The rest of us can do nothing but gnash our teeth at a shutdown without end, amen. -- Keep up to date with Michael Hiltzik. Follow @hiltzikm on Twitter, see his Facebook page or email michael.hiltzik@latimes.com. Caption: PHOTO: A MAN in Omaha checks Thursday on the status of his unemployment claim. Since mid-March, 36.5 million people have filed new requests for jobless benefits. PHOTOGRAPHER:Nati Harnik Associated Press 
May 14, 2020	Another Thursday, another dismal unemployment statistic. This time the Department of Labor is reporting that 2.98 million Americans filed initial unemployment claims in the last week. That brings total filings over the last eight weeks to 36.5 million people. The latest figure was both mildly heartening and fairly disheartening. It marks an improvement over last week, when initial claims were 3.17 million, and a steady improvement since the peak in new filings of 6.6 million was announced April 2. On the other hand, the figure still exceeded the expectations of some economists, which were as low as 2.5 million. As has happened every week since the end of March, the number prompted fretful commentary about the breadth of the damage from COVID-19 — or more precisely, from the nationwide stay-at-home lockdown aimed at stemming the spread of the disease. #StayHome had its moment. But quarantine fatigue is real. Julia Marcus, The Atlantic The number also provides context for two signals about the American response to the coronavirus pandemic. One is that many people are getting fed up with the lockdown, and not only because it throws millions of them out of work, whether temporarily or for the long term. The other is that we have made scant progress against the virus, or at least not nearly as much as the richest, most powerful and most technically adept nation on Earth should have made. The two indicators are related. One source of discontent with the shutdown is the broken promise that it would give the country time to put in place a program to successfully fight the virus. Without a program of testing and screening to identify viral hot spots and institute selective quarantines, the general public has learned it faces many months more of work, travel and recreational constraints. The impulse to return to normality is fighting an increasingly tense battle with advice to maintain social isolation. In Senate testimony this week, Dr. Anthony Fauci, the nation’s most credible scientific voice in the crisis, warned that states that reopen businesses and allow public gatherings too hastily while the pandemic is still in full cry could “trigger an outbreak that you may not be able to control. ... If you think we have it completely under control, we don’t. The consequences could be really serious.” That triggered a pushback from President Trump, the nation’s leading avatar of crisis pseudoscience, who called Fauci’s position “not an acceptable answer.” Here’s the counterfactual. If clear progress were being made in testing and screening and clearly consistent rules were being promoted across the board, then the current shutdown would be much easier for most people to bear. That’s always the case when one can see a light at the end of the tunnel. Let’s examine how these two phenomena — the lack of an acceptable anti-virus program, and the urge to reopen — remain in tension. As I’ve observed before, the Trump administration has only limited power to reopen the economy. Trump can order certain industries to reopen their factories. This works best when he can credibly designate them as essential and when their bosses don’t care much about the consequences of their working conditions on the health of their employees, as is the case in meatpacking. It also can work where governors and local officials are content to connive with local employers to coerce employees into returning to work. The most popular tool appears to be withholding unemployment benefits from those who would stay home out of fear for their health or the necessity of caring for sick family members. (Thank you, Iowa, Texas and Ohio.) The problem is that consumers can’t be coerced into the marketplace. As Jordan Weissmann observed in Slate, patrons have so far been reluctant to pile back into sit-down restaurants in great numbers even in the most aggressively reopened states. That’s according to data from the restaurant booking service Open Table, which finds that as of Wednesday, even in open states reservations and walk-ins were still down by about 85% to 70% from the pre-pandemic era. The best record was in Alabama, which never fully shut down, where patronage was only 77.5% of the pre-crisis baseline. Don’t be fooled by anti-shutdown demonstrations at statehouses such as Michigan’s by gun-toting goons, or by the decision by the right-wing majority on the Wisconsin Supreme Court to overturn that state’s stay-at-home rules, or by news photos of diners sitting cheek by jowl in a few reopened eateries and bars. The figures from Open Table, combined with opinion polls, indicate that the vast majority of Americans still favor keeping businesses closed to combat the coronavirus. In a recent Washington Post-Ipsos poll, for example, 79% of laid-off respondents favored continuing to fight the virus’ spread “even if that means keeping many businesses closed.” That was a higher figure than all respondents, who favored maintaining the shutdown by 74% to 25%. In other words, a majority of Americans are still voting with their feet, or to put it indelicately, with their behinds on the couch, to keep infection-prone businesses closed. It’s true, however, that signs are emerging that Americans are getting fed up with restrictions that seem unnecessarily stringent. Some evidence comes from a mobility database assembled by Apple from requests for driving, walking and transit directions made to its Apple Maps app. (Apple says the data are aggregated to preserve user privacy and it doesn’t keep records of individual travels.) The data indicate that Americans stopped moving around in early to mid-March, when direction searches abruptly fell by more than 60% from the baseline and bottomed out at a reduction of about 70% in the first half of April. Since then, however, searches have measurably picked up, with searches for walking routes down by only 39% and for driving directions by 40% as of May 10. Searches involving transit, however, have remained mired at negative 77%. That’s unsurprising, since a reduction in commuting will keep workers off buses and trains, and any residual ridership might be stifled by concerns about sharing trips with strangers. That’s one sign of exasperation with the shutdown. "#StayHome had its moment,” Harvard epidemiologist Julia Marcus writes in the Atlantic. “But quarantine fatigue is real.” She emphasizes the effect of emotional isolation, which can “severely damage psychological well-being, especially for people who were already depressed or anxious before the crisis started.” In a recent poll by the Kaiser Family Foundation, 45% of respondents said the pandemic has harmed their mental health. Plainly it’s the open-ended nature of the lockdown that‘s weighing on Americans. In the same poll, published on April 2, some 74% of respondents said “the worst is yet to come.” That’s where the Trump administration deserves the greatest blame. The pathway to crushing the pandemic in the United States by early summer was never much in doubt. As public health expert Harvey V. Fineberg laid it out in early April, it required establishing a unified command with indisputable authority to mobilize every public and private resource for the war against the virus. The nation would have to gear up to perform millions of diagnostic tests by mid-April and establish a system of disease surveillance and quarantine of infected or at-risk individuals. Most important, the American public, resistant to government regimentation even in a crisis, would have to be shown how shared action and shared sacrifice would defeat the virus. Any such intrusive system would require credible leadership to “inspire and mobilize the public,” Fineberg said. Trump has accomplished none of those things. Management of the coronavirus response at the White House and throughout the federal government has given new meaning to the word “chaos.” No one knows who’s in charge of what, the government has broken up into fiefdoms engaged in internecine battles, and the only person known to have Trump’s ear is his son-in-law Jared Kushner, who has demonstrated incompetence at every turn, compounded by arrogance. Trump vacillates between urging caution in reopening the economy and encouraging rabble-rousing gangs fighting lockdowns. He seems to think that saying something is so is the same as making it happen, as was evident when he promised that anyone in America could get a COVID-19 test on demand, then promised that drive-up testing stands would be in existence around the country in short order. That was on March 13. It still hasn’t happened. As Keith Humphreys of Stanford University points out, the obstacles to mounting a nationwide “test, trace, and isolate program” aren’t technical — Germany and South Korea have managed to do so. The challenges are political and cultural in a country that has been trained since the Reagan administration to mistrust the government. That particular chicken has come home to roost. At a moment when a consistent, humanistic expression of government authority would save thousands of lives, federal leadership is in the hands of a petulant egotist whose interest appears to be in using this crisis to divide Americans, not unite them in a shared cause, and blame everyone else for his own manifest failure. Trump is getting what he seems to want: a nation mired in a chaos that benefits only those with the means to insulate themselves from the crisis. The rest of us can do nothing but gnash our teeth at a shutdown without end, amen.
May 14, 2020	President Trump has an Asia problem. As much as he would like to hold the United States out as the example of how to effectively handle the coronavirus, places such as South Korea, Hong Kong, Singapore and Taiwan keep showing him up. Take the news conference he held on Monday (before stomping out in annoyance at what he called "nasty" questioning from reporters, including one who is Asian American). The event was meant to celebrate what he considered a benchmark. At the briefing, Trump stood alongside a banner reading "America Leads the World in Testing," and he crowed about how the United States has now surpassed South Korea in per capita testing. But that misses the point entirely.  South Korea ramped up testing at the beginning of the outbreak, which enabled it to get ahead of the virus' spread with contact tracing and targeted social distancing. Consequently, it has less need of widespread testing today. As Philip Bump put it in the Washington Post: "Boasting about how we're continuing to expand our lead in tests completed over South Korea is a little like bragging about how many more burglars you've arrested than a country where there aren't many burglaries." Other Asia success stories must vex Trump as well. Hong Kong, for example, has had four deaths, Singapore 20, Taiwan seven. South Korea and the U.S. diagnosed their first COVID-19 patients on the same day in January. Since then, South Korea has had 259 deaths, the U.S. more than 83,000. Adjusted for population, Americans have died at a rate nearly 50 times that of South Koreans. Yet rather than learn from these successes, the president pointedly pooh-poohed them, the same way he did when Bong Joon Ho won the best director Oscar, and Trump dismissed "Parasite" as "some movie from South Korea." At a campaign rally shortly after the movie's six-Oscar (including best picture) win, he demanded, "What the hell is that?" Today, anyone in South Korea, regardless of citizenship, can get tested in less than 10 minutes with the results texted to them the next day. When a person in an apartment building is diagnosed, a testing center is immediately set up in the building. Jung Eun-kyeong, director of South Korea's Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, holds daily news conferences that are straightforward -- and without extravagant boasts and promises. Instead of contradictory and inaccurate information, there is only one message from the government, and the populace, to an extraordinary degree, has accepted it willingly. South Korea has also mastered self-isolation. The country is a democracy, like the U.S., where no one is forced to quarantine, but the government makes it easy to stay in by providing a "care package" that includes fresh produce, masks, hand sanitizer, Spam (a delicacy in Korea), instructions on how to dispose of garbage, and toilet paper, again regardless of citizenship status. A caseworker checks in twice a day. Dr. Jung was able to persuade a populace to allow tracking via credit cards, cellphone GPS and other methods, including getting a church to give up the records of more than 200,000 members for the purposes of public health -- a level of organization and trust the U.S. cannot match. If a person with COVID-19 leaves isolation, a text alert is issued, alerting those nearby. South Korea not only bent its curve; it did so without travel bans or shutting down its economy. Seeing photos of unclogged L.A. freeways and an empty Times Square in Manhattan, the New York Times Seoul bureau chief, Choe Sang-Hun, told me, Seoul "has never been a ghost town. Fewer people on the streets and subways. ... Otherwise life goes on." This shows that the economic devastation in the U.S. -- April's 14.7% unemployment rate is the worst since the Great Depression, with 20.5 million jobs lost -- could also have been mitigated with a proper response. During those precious early weeks, while South Korea was feverishly preparing, Trump was focusing on his most reliable brand: racism. Once the results of the pandemic could not be tweeted away, the administration turned to scapegoating Asians, speaking to the media about the "China virus," comparing the pandemic to Pearl Harbor, invoking age-old racist tropes about Asians sneaking and invading. An email chain among governmental health experts was called "Red Dawn," a nod to a movie about a group of young people trying to save their hometown from North Korean invasion. And even as Trump boasts about finally expanding testing to something approaching what is needed, another key element to Asia's success is missing: systematic contact tracing. At my workplace, Columbia University, we were told during the early days of the pandemic that "someone in the community" had tested positive. But was it a student? A colleague? How were we supposed to assess the need to self-isolate without information? Here, we aren't allowed to know if someone we've had contact with has COVID-19 because of privacy issues. But in South Korea, people are willing to give up their privacy for the common good -- and trust that their government won't illegally harvest and sell their data. My cousin Hyunmie, a nurse who immigrated to the U.S. from South Korea 31 years ago, when she was 24, has had reason to think about the differences in the country of her birth versus the country she chose. Her family of four came down with COVID-19. She picked her case up at work. Then, her daughter brought home the virus to Los Angeles after having been infected at college in Boston. Hyunmie's husband, a truck driver, suddenly worsened and spent 13 days on a ventilator fighting for his life. It's not lost on Hyunmie that in South Korea her family would likely have been spared this suffering altogether. Korean nurses wear negative-pressure spacesuits to prevent virus transfer; some U.S. nurses have had to resort to wearing garbage bags. The fact that the U.S. has finally ramped up its testing capacity is progress, I suppose. But if in the beginning the president had studied the Asian model instead of charting his own ham-handed course, where might we be now? Caption: PHOTO: SOUTH KOREA got ahead of the coronavirus crisis early, with broad testing and distancing. PHOTOGRAPHER:Ed Jones AFP/Getty Images Credit: Marie Myung-Ok Lee, author of the forthcoming novel "The Evening Hero," teaches fiction at Columbia University, where she is writer in residence at the Center for the Study of Ethnicity and Race. @MarieMyungOkLee
May 13, 2020	President Trump has an Asia problem. As much as he would like to hold the United States out as the example of how to effectively handle the coronavirus, places such as South Korea, Hong Kong, Singapore and Taiwan keep showing him up. Take the press conference he held on Monday (before stomping out in annoyance at what he called “nasty” questioning from reporters, including one who was Asian American). The event was meant to celebrate what he considered a benchmark. At the briefing, Trump stood alongside a banner reading “America Leads the World in Testing,” and he crowed about how the United States has now surpassed South Korea in per capita testing. But that misses the point entirely. South Korea ramped up testing at the beginning of the outbreak, which enabled it to get ahead of the virus’ spread with contact tracing and targeted social distancing. Consequently, it has less need of widespread testing today. As Philip Bump put it in the Washington Post: “Boasting about how we’re continuing to expand our lead in tests completed over South Korea is a little like bragging about how many more burglars you’ve arrested than a country where there aren’t many burglaries.” Other Asia success stories must vex Trump as well. Hong Kong, for example, has had four deaths, Singapore 20, Taiwan seven. South Korea and the U.S. diagnosed their first COVID-19 patients on the same day in January. Since then, South Korea has had 259 deaths; the U.S. more than 83,000. Adjusted for population, Americans have died at a rate nearly 50 times that of South Koreans. Yet rather than learn from these successes, the president pointedly pooh-poohed them, the same way he did when Bong Joon Ho won the best director Oscar, and Trump dismissed “Parasite” as “some movie from South Korea.” At a campaign rally shortly after the movie’s six-Oscar (including best picture) win, he demanded, “What the hell is that?” Today, anyone in South Korea, regardless of citizenship can get tested in less than 10 minutes with the results texted to them the next day. When a person in an apartment building is diagnosed, a testing center is immediately set up in the building. Jung Eun-kyeong, director of South Korea’s CDC, holds daily press conferences that are straightforward — and without extravagant boasts and promises. Instead of contradictory and inaccurate information, there is only one message from the government, and the populace, to an extraordinary degree, has accepted it willingly. South Korea has also mastered self-isolation. The country is a democracy, like the U.S., where no one is forced to quarantine, but the government makes it easy to stay in by providing a “care package” that includes beautiful fresh produce, Spam (a treat in Korea), masks, hand sanitizer, instructions on how to dispose of garbage, a pep talk — and toilet paper, again regardless of citizenship status. A caseworker checks in twice a day. Dr. Jung was able to persuade a populace to allow tracking via credit cards, cellphone GPS and other methods, including getting a church to give up the records of more than 200,000 members for the purposes of public health — a level of organization and trust the U.S. cannot match. If a person with COVID-19 leaves isolation, a text alert is issued, alerting those nearby. Tracing an infected person’s contacts is so rigorous that a running joke in South Korea is that you can’t even die in peace from the coronavirus because the government will still track you down. South Korea not only bent its curve; it did so without travel bans or shutting down its economy. Seeing photos of unclogged L.A. freeways and an empty Times Square in Manhattan, the New York Times Seoul bureau chief, Choe Sang-Hun, told me, Seoul “has never been a ghost town. Fewer people on the streets and subways. … Otherwise life goes on.” This shows that the economic devastation in the U.S. — April’s 14.7% unemployment rate is the worst since the Great Depression, with 20.5 million jobs lost — could also have been mitigated with a proper response. During those precious early weeks, while South Korea was feverishly preparing, Trump was focusing on his most reliable brand: racism. Once the results of the pandemic could not be tweeted away, the administration turned to scapegoating Asians, speaking to the press about the “China virus,” comparing the pandemic to Pearl Harbor, invoking age-old racist tropes about Asians sneaking and invading. An email chain among governmental health experts was called “Red Dawn,” a nod to a movie about a group of young people trying to save their hometown from North Korean invasion. And even as Trump boasts about finally expanding testing to something approaching what is needed, another key element to Asia’s success is missing: systematic contact tracing. At my workplace, Columbia University, we were told during the early days of the pandemic that “someone in the community” had tested positive. But was it a student? A colleague? How were we supposed to assess the need to self-isolate without information? Here, we aren’t allowed to know if someone we’ve had contact with has COVID-19 because of privacy issues. But in South Korea, people are willing to give up their privacy for the common good — and trust that their government won’t illegally harvest and sell their data. My cousin Hyunmie, a nurse who immigrated to the U.S. from South Korea as an adult 31 years ago, when she was 24, has had reason to think about the differences in the country of her birth versus the country she chose. Her entire family of four came down with the coronavirus. She picked her case up at work. Then, her daughter brought home the virus to Los Angeles after having been infected at college in Boston. Hyunmie’s husband, a truck driver, suddenly worsened and spent 13 days on a ventilator fighting for his life. It’s not lost on Hyunmie that in South Korea her family would likely have been spared this suffering altogether. Korean nurses wear negative-pressure space suits to prevent virus transfer; some American nurses have had to resort to wearing garbage bags. The fact that the U.S. has finally ramped up its testing capacity is progress, I suppose. But if in the beginning the president had studied the Asian model instead of charting his own ham-handed course, where might we be now? Marie Myung-Ok Lee, author of the forthcoming novel “The Evening Hero,” teaches fiction at Columbia University, where she is writer in residence at the Center for the Study of Ethnicity and Race. @MarieMyungOkLee
May 13, 2020	In recent weeks, Hollywood studios and movie theater chains have held out hope that cinemas will be back in business in July, and that audiences will be eager to return. Veteran film producer Mark Gill is betting the launch of his new studio on whether that dream becomes reality. Gill's company, Solstice Studios, will release the new Russell Crowe psychological thriller "Unhinged" in cinemas on July 1, the former Miramax executive said Tuesday. Although it's unclear how many theaters will be open by then, the film will be the first major theatrical release since the coronavirus outbreak shuttered U.S. multiplexes in mid-March.  "There's a risk attached to it, obviously," said Gill, 57. "We launched our company about 18 months ago to make movies for movie theaters. I think you need to stand up for theaters at any time, really, but especially at this time." The $33-million movie's premiere will mark an early test of whether audiences are itching to return to movie theaters after a long period of limited entertainment options and copious home binge-watching. "Unhinged" stars the "Gladiator" and "A Beautiful Mind" actor as a man whose road rage gets way out of hand. It's an especially risky debut for Hollywood-based Solstice, which Gill founded in October 2018 with $400 million in funding, including $150 million from London-based financier Ingenious Media. The company aims to produce three to five movies a year, mostly with production budgets from $30 million to $80 million. It also hopes to acquire a handful of movies for U.S. release. Solstice has 59 employees. Setting the stage for its first movie now may seem like a Hail Mary play at a time when much of the country is still in the throes of a public health emergency. The planned debut is more than two weeks before Christopher Nolan's new movie "Tenet" hits the multiplex on July 17, which will be followed by Walt Disney Co.'s live-action "Mulan" remake on July 24. But Gill said he's not deterred. He said he was heartened by a survey his company commissioned to determine the willingness of audiences to show up at cinemas. Of the 1,000 moviegoers who were polled, 80% said they wanted to go back to movie theaters in July. Moviegoers are defined as people who go six times a year or more. "I think there's a lot to be said for pent-up demand to get out of the house," Gill said. "I think that's very, very real." July is about the earliest major theater chains are expected to reopen in the U.S. Plano, Texas-based Cinemark Holdings recently pinpointed July 1, a Wednesday, as its target for getting back in business. AMC Theatres, the world's largest cinema circuit, has also signaled that it hopes to open its doors that month. States including Georgia and Texas have eased restrictions to allow theaters to operate at limited capacity, but not all chains have taken the governors up on their invitation to resume operations. Most cinema owners don't want to reopen without major studio productions to put on their screens. To hear it from Gill, though, the gamble to release in July was not a decision he took rashly. He said he landed on the release date after consulting with the National Assn. of Theatre Owners, the Washington-based lobbying organization, as well as the nation's largest exhibitors, AMC, Regal and Cinemark. The domestic release of "Unhinged" is expected to follow or coincide with its debut in countries including Australia, China, Germany, South Korea, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland and Taiwan, the company said. The still-potent disease adds a unique hurdle to the movie's box-office prospects. Social-distancing restrictions will probably still be in place in many areas, and analysts don't expect moviegoing to return to pre-pandemic levels until there's a vaccine, if ever. Theaters that open are likely to do so with limited seating, robust cleaning schedules and mask requirements. Theaters are expected to reopen with 25% to 50% capacity, with seats blocked off in a checkerboard format in many locations. And even without fears of the coronavirus, there was no guarantee "Unhinged" would be a hit. Distributors have struggled in recent years to find audiences for mid-budget movies, as the audience for such films migrates online. On the plus side, the new movie won't be facing competition for screens. Until "Unhinged," the theaters that reopen will probably be playing older titles to get customers used to the idea of going back. "It won't be, 'Do you want to go to the movies,' it'll be, 'Do you want to go to the movie?' " Gill joked. Gill was previously president of Avi Lerner's Millennium Films, where he worked on movies including "The Hitman's Bodyguard" and the "Olympus Has Fallen" series. He left in 2017 after a failed attempt to buy the company. Before that, he presided over Warner Bros.' short-lived specialty label Warner Independent Pictures. Until his abrupt departure in 2002, Gill was the L.A.-based president of Miramax Films, the studio founded by Harvey Weinstein and his brother, Bob. Gill exited the then-Disney-owned company after clashing with Harvey Weinstein. Weinstein was convicted of rape in New York 00earlier this year. Gill's credits as an executive producer include "Frida," "Under the Tuscan Sun" and "Mechanic: Resurrection." Caption: PHOTO: FILM FANS' willingness to return to multiplexes could be put to the test with the planned July 1 theatrical premiere of the Russell Crowe thriller "Unhinged." PHOTOGRAPHER: Solstice Studios
May 13, 2020	The city had begun breathing easy, life once more pulsating in its streets. Museums and art galleries reopened, gyms welcomed back regulars, baseball and soccer leagues kicked off. Traffic choked thoroughfares, and schools readied to greet students for the first time in months. For 18 days in a row, this metropolis of nearly 10 million reported zero cases of community transmissions of the novel coronavirus. It seemed, even in these uncertain times, that danger had receded in a nation praised for its handling of the pandemic. Then, a 29-year-old man who'd gone clubbing over a holiday weekend came down with COVID-19, shattering the tenuous sense of normality and setting off a frenzied search for thousands who'd been in the clubs and bars he visited.  As of Tuesday, more than 100 people had tested positive for the virus linked to a cluster stemming from the popular nightlife district of Itaewon. Co-workers and family members of clubgoers have tested positive, including an 84-year-old woman who'd dined with a grandson. The city recoiled: More than 2,000 establishments were ordered to shut down, office buildings where the infected worked were closed, and start dates for schools were, once again, pushed back. The latest outbreak unleashed a torrent of anger against the young revelers and ignited debates over personal responsibility and blame. Recriminations have led to life-and-death questions that will beset societies across the world as governments weigh the risks of when and how to ease social distancing requirements. What do we owe our neighbors at a time when individual pleasures risk unraveling the hard-earned collective reprieve from the virus' terror? And when the virus slips through the cracks of relaxed vigilance, whom do we hold to account, and how? One neighbor living in the same apartment complex as one of the recently diagnosed clubgoers did not mince words. "Are you even human?" railed a handwritten sign pasted at the entryway to the apartment building in Incheon, a city about an hour west of Seoul. "Young children and middle- and high school students aren't able to go outside, and are taking online classes. I sure hope you're happy you went dancing like a delinquent at an Itaewon club and got infected. You should be sorry," the sign said. The public vitriol has also raised concerns it could lead to vilification of sexual minorities; the clubs the 29-year-old visited mostly catered to gay patrons. Some media reports zeroed in on the fact that gay clubs were at the center of the outbreak. Civil rights advocates were alarmed that the young man's workplace and city of residence -- Yongin, a suburb of Seoul -- became known, in effect outing him in a society where homosexuality remains largely taboo. A Facebook post from Yongin with information about the man's movements had nearly 200 angry comments -- many laced with expletives -- castigating him for being reckless. Several remarked that he went to a gay club, an indication of a troubling cultural moment when panic over a virus exposed deeper societal truths. "Because of people like this, everyone suffers," one commenter wrote. Efforts to contain another outbreak by tracking down and testing those who may have been infected -- a hallmark of South Korea's virus response -- have run up against fears in the LGBTQ community that they can be discriminated against at work or face strife within their families. South Korea has a vocal Christian right that denounces and campaigns against homosexuality, to the point of violent clashes at pride parades around the country. Chingusai, a rights group for gay men, issued a statement saying media headlines had made containing the outbreak all the more difficult. "This type of reporting will only serve to create anxiety and fear about being outed and discourage those who have been in contact with the infected, making them hide," the group said. "Getting tested proves they were there and in effect reveals their sexual orientation, making it harder to get their cooperation." The recent spike in cases laid bare the double-edged nature of South Korea's approach of radical transparency, which errs on the side of disclosing detailed information about those infected. While the policy enabled the country to get a swift handle on containing the virus' spread, a response that has received worldwide acclaim, the information released about infected patients' whereabouts and personal facts have occasionally led to the public shaming of "super-spreaders." Such pressure may discourage people from seeking out testing. It was through early, efficient and widespread contact tracing and testing that South Korea curtailed its domestic outbreak despite having the first rapid surge of cases outside China. As of Tuesday, the country had just under 11,000 coronavirus cases and 259 deaths total, despite having had the first case on the same day as the U.S. -- on Tuesday alone, the U.S. had more than 18,000 new cases and more than 1,000 deaths. The Seoul chapter of the rights group Amnesty International on Tuesday cautioned against violating the rights of sexual minorities and lambasted a newspaper for highlighting that a gay club was part of the outbreak when the fact wasn't relevant to the story. The paper, Kukmin Ilbo, later changed its headline to remove the words "gay club" after receiving criticism. "Branding and fomenting hatred against a certain group is the biggest obstacle to effective disease prevention," Amnesty International said in the statement. "Disease prevention and guaranteeing human rights isn't a binary choice." Seoul Mayor Park Won-soon said Tuesday that those who may be reluctant to come forward will be allowed to get tested by providing only their phone numbers. Even though the clubs kept self-reported logs of customers, authorities said much of the information listed wasn't accurate. Park said investigators had obtained a list of more than 10,000 individuals who were in Itaewon during the dates in question based on cell tower information, as well as an additional 494 based on credit card data, and sent out text messages urging them to get tested. Caption: PHOTO: WORKERS disinfect classrooms in Seoul on Monday. School reopenings have been pushed back after South Korea reported new COVID-19 cases linked to nightclubs, reversing 18 days of zero cases of transmission. PHOTOGRAPHER:Chung Sung-Jun Getty Images PHOTO:PASSERSBY in masks outside a nightclub in Seoul's Itaewon area. The club is closed after a visit by a patron who has since tested positive for the coronavirus. PHOTOGRAPHER:Jung Yeon-je AFP/Getty Images 
May 13, 2020	If you're looking for an area in which the United States is indisputably a global standout, here it is: paid sick leave. Unfortunately, not in a good way. Of United Nations member countries, 181 provide paid leave in some form. Eleven do not, including the U.S. That places America in an elite group that includes the Pacific Island nations of Tonga, Tuvalu, and Nauru, along with Somalia (which is barely a functioning nation at all).  One developed country, South Korea, doesn't provide paid sick leave as such, but does provide all workers with three weeks of paid time off that can be used as sick leave. "We are incredibly isolated," says Jody Heymann, director of the World Policy Analysis Center at UCLA and the lead author of a newly published study by the center of sick leave policies in 192 of the 193 U.N. countries. (The study didn't cover North Korea, where policies couldn't be determined.) The center determined that the U.S. lags behind much of the world in almost every measure of sick leave design. Although the initial coronavirus relief measure passed by Congress -- the Families First Coronavirus Response Act enacted in mid-March -- provided for two employer-paid weeks of emergency medical leave, it exempted businesses with 500 employees or more and allowed small businesses with fewer than 50 workers to claim hardship exemptions. That made the U.S. the only country in the world that bases its paid leave rule on the size of an employer, Heymann told me. "The big picture story is that when you exempt big companies and small companies, you're missing vast swaths of the country," Heymann says -- an estimated 100 million workers. "Why would we possibly do that during a pandemic?" The lack of nationally mandated paid sick leave is both penny- and pound-foolish even under normal circumstances, Heymann says. "Paid sick leave pays for itself in increased productivity and fewer work hours lost due to disease," she says. In a regular non-pandemic year, influenza costs the U.S. economy $11 billion, and foodborne disease an additional $15 billion, including what's spread by food workers reporting to their jobs while sick. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention reported in 2016 that 1 in 5 food service workers had worked at least one shift while sick with vomiting or diarrhea in the previous year. During a pandemic such as the coronavirus crisis, inadequate paid sick leave almost certainly contributes to calamitous outcomes. Countries that don't offer paid sick leave from the first day of illness include some that were "hardest hit early in the global pandemic and have faced overwhelmed health care systems and large loss of life," including Italy, Iran and the U.S., the UCLA study says. The U.S. is not the only country, rich or poor, without ironclad, all-encompassing paid sick leave rights. But it's firmly among the have-not countries in the most important features. About three-quarters of all countries guarantee paid sick leave from day one of an illness and 76% provide for at least six weeks of coverage. Among high-income countries, about two-thirds cover self-employed workers. About half the countries in the UCLA database guaranteed workers at least 80% of their wages if they had worked for at least six months. As we've reported before, the threadbare safety net for American workers is an artifact of the country's choice to place workplace policies almost entirely under the control of employers. The harvest is not only spotty paid sick leave rights, but the lack of universal health coverage, both factors in our inability to control the spread of COVID-19. According to the Bureau of Labor Statistics, about a quarter of all American workers have no right to sick leave at all; about 91% of state and local government workers are eligible for paid sick leave, but only 73% of the privately employed. In the private sector, moreover, paid sick leave is a privilege reserved largely for professionals, managers, and the better-paid. In the absence of a federal mandate for paid sick leave, states and localities have picked up the slack. Fourteen states (including California) and the District of Columbia have enacted paid sick leave laws, as have 20 cities (seven in California) and three counties. Typically, these laws require paid sick leave of up to five working days, accrued as workers accumulate hours, and limit the ability to carry sick days into another year. California's law, which went into effect in 2015, allow employees, including part-time and temporary employees, to earn one hour of paid leave for every 30 hours worked. Employers can cap accruals at 48 hours, or about six conventional workdays. Without nationwide paid sick leave, keeping people at home to suppress the coronavirus is much harder. "Paid sick days do a few things," Heymann says. "When people are out because they are so gravely ill that they would never go to work, they ensure that they have an economic safety net. That's obviously crucial. But it also means that people who have mild symptoms of infectious diseases, but could readily spread it to others who might get severely ill, will stay home." Moreover, "the willingness of people to get tested when they have a mild cough and see if they're going to need to be out of work for two weeks," Heymann says, "that depends a lot on paid sick days." In fiscal terms, there's no reason why the United States can't join the rest of the developed world in offering workers suitably comprehensive sick leave. About a quarter of all countries finance their programs from government funds, and an additional fifth share the responsibility between employers and government. Low-income countries tend to place the burden solely on employers. Among high-income countries, two-thirds provide sick leave for the self-employed and 42% cover part-timers. The consequences of leaving workers without a financial safety net during a health crisis have been clear in the U.S. since the H1N1 flu epidemic of 2009. An estimated 26 million residents were infected from September through November that year, the peak months of the pandemic. But an estimated 8 million continued to go to work. By the following February, public health authorities reckoned that those carriers infected some 7 million co-workers. "Presenteeism -- attending work while ill -- among private sector employees without paid sick days may have extended the duration of the outbreak," a study by Pennsylvania State University concluded. The lessons of COVID will persist well into the future. Not only will the disease likely be with us for at least part of 2021, but it's a reminder of our vulnerability to further pandemics. In the last two decades, we've had four major respiratory infections that spread globally -- SARS in 2002, H1N1 in 2009, MERS in 2012 and now COVID-19, Heymann says. "This is not a problem that's going away. We need to be prepared for the next one, because we can't afford to have to keep shutting down our economy like this." -- Keep up to date with Michael Hiltzik. Follow @hiltzikm on Twitter, see his Facebook page or email michael.hiltzik@latimes.com. 
May 13, 2020	She sat in a corner of the hospital room, breathing into a tube designed to prevent pneumonia or the collapse of her lungs. It was the fourth week of April, and the last two months had been so long and so monotonous that Janice Brown started counting the cars rolling by her window -- just for something to do. The janitor and the nurses had become old acquaintances. So, it seemed, had the coronavirus.  In the short annals of the Desert Valley Hospital's COVID-19 unit, Brown is a person of some distinction. It's a notoriety that no one would want -- but sometimes in life you don't get to pick what makes you special. Or how. Brown, 66, was the first patient at Desert Valley to test positive for the coronavirus. One of the first to be released. She thought she was in the clear, spending weeks -- masked but confident -- walking around her sister's home and backyard in Rancho Cucamonga. Her doctor, Imran Siddiqui, certainly thought he'd seen the last of Janice Brown. Just days after he discharged her on April 3, she told Siddiqui that she was feeling great. Two weeks after that follow-up call, Siddiqui spotted her name on the patient list. She had tested positive a second time. The story of Janice Brown, two-time coronavirus patient, parallels the story of the hospital that treated her. Both narratives are built around a hope that the worst is in the past. Or, at the least, not waiting on the horizon. By the time Siddiqui, medical director of Desert Valley Medical Group, watched Brown leave for the second time, he dared to hope that the COVID-19 unit of the hospital could soon be dismantled. :: On Saturday, April 25, Siddiqui unzipped the plastic separating the rest of the hospital from the East wing, where a sign outside read "Novel Respiratory Isolation." Trailed by a reporter and a photographer, he stepped inside the "donning" area to "gown up," putting on the standard uniform: blue apron, shoe covers, a mushroom-cap hair cover, gloves and a surgical mask over his N95. Reaching the COVID unit felt a little like the scene from "E.T. the Extra-Terrestrial," Steven Spielberg's 1982 classic movie, in which Elliott walks through a huge plastic tube to reach his new best friend who's been sequestered in a medical van. Siddiqui passed a station where a handful of nurses monitored their patients' vitals on computer screens. The RNs had volunteered to work in the unit, creating an informal staff so other nurses would not have to be exposed. The doctor observed Maria Quintero as she did a deep cleaning of a patient room that had been vacated earlier in the day. Quintero, a member of the janitorial staff who works in the unit, used bleach to scrub the walls. Finally, Siddiqui headed to the end of the hall, signing his name into the log outside room 238 before he stepped inside. "Hello my dear, how are you today?" he asked. "Not good," Brown responded. She held a hand to her chest, where it felt as though it had been burning inside all day. It had nothing to do with COVID, Siddiqui reassured her -- it was just gastritis. The day before, she'd had a temperature of 101, he said, but her numbers were getting better. It was the fourth day of her second hospitalization. Brown was anticipating her birthday three days later, on April 28, and yearned to celebrate somewhere other than the hospital. "You're in good spirits, right?" Siddiqui asked. His patient hesitated before she responded, "Yeah, I'm in good spirits." Over the course of her life, Brown has dealt with cancer, two strokes, two heart attacks, renal failure and congestive heart failure. She has been on dialysis for over a year. With her age and host of underlying health issues, she is exactly the kind of person that COVID-19 chews up and spits out. The coronavirus, Brown said, with a touch of irony, just felt like "the icing on the cake." :: It all started with a cold in early March. After two weeks, Brown thought she was on the mend. She's been pastoring for 25 years, and gave a sermon at her Fontana church telling her flock, "No matter what comes, trust in God." "I didn't know I was preaching to myself," she said. In a matter of days, Brown grew so sick she couldn't stand. On March 24, she landed in the Desert Valley emergency room and tested positive. The pain was so great, she thought she was going to die. The hospital's COVID unit was set up soon after she was admitted, in order to conserve protective equipment. Brown was its first resident and Siddiqui her doctor for the 10 days before her April 3 discharge. The CDC recommends ending "transmission-based precautions" after a patient goes 72 hours with no symptoms or has two negative tests 24 hours apart. The hospital follows a symptom-based strategy. After Brown went three days with no fever -- without the use of fever-reducing medications -- and doctors saw an improvement in her respiratory symptoms, she was discharged. When Brown walked out, she thought she had escaped the clutches of the dreaded virus. "I thought it was over," Brown said. "Everybody thought it was over." Then, during dialysis on April 21, her blood pressure dropped precipitously and her temperature rose. An ambulance took her back to the hospital, where she tested positive again. In recent weeks, China and South Korea have reported that some patients who had recovered from COVID-19 tested positive again in follow-up visits. In extreme cases, patients in the Chinese city of Wuhan, where the outbreak began late last year, reportedly tested positive 70 days after recovery. Doctors in both countries said they didn't believe the patients had been reinfected, a worrisome possibility because of its implications for building widespread immunity to a disease for which there is no vaccine. Brown "was the first patient that came back to the hospital that tested positive again," Siddiqui said. "Is it a reinfection or the same infection? We don't know." :: On April 29, eight days after Brown had been readmitted, about 30 people gathered in the conference room for a COVID-19 task force meeting. They talked about the state's four-phase reopening plan and the need to stay vigilant. Experts have warned against a broad reopening of the U.S. amid the pandemic, but dozens of states have reopened their economies in some capacity. "We're just trying to avoid hitting that second wave," Brian Lugo, director of emergency preparedness and head of the COVID-19 response, told the doctors. "Let's not get lax." During the meeting, members of the task force talked about plans to reopen labs and clear backlogs of tests that had been postponed due to the virus. A whiteboard showed that 289 people at the hospital had been tested for the virus and 25 had been discharged. Only two COVID patients, including Brown, were in the East wing. Another two were on ventilators in the intensive care unit. "I'm so glad we only have two patients in our COVID unit. That's a good sign," said Fred Hunter, chief executive officer of Desert Valley Hospital and Desert Valley Medical Group. "As we reopen this hospital for elective surgeries and elective procedures, let's not make a mistake." He worried, he said, "that if we should open it up too soon, that these numbers could change in the wrong direction." After the meeting, Siddiqui headed upstairs with three balloons and a small pink cake to mark the occasion of Brown's birthday -- a day earlier. Inside the COVID unit, Becca Diaz wrote "Happy Birthday! You are an amazing patient," on a card that had been signed by the unit's workers. Diaz, a registered nurse, works in the unit three times a week and recalled how depressing it was when Brown tested positive a second time. "It was almost like, is anything helping," Diaz said. Diaz joined a small crowd headed into Brown's room -- everyone in full protective equipment -- holding a cake and singing happy birthday. "I want to say thank you guys so much," Brown said, growing teary-eyed. "It's the least we could have done for you," Siddiqui said. "You guys have done more than enough. Put your lives on the line -- for me," she said. There had, indeed, been sacrifices. Diaz used a designated "COVID bathroom" in her home to shower when she finished work; others spent weeks away from loved ones to protect them. "I truly thank you, because you don't know about the virus, I don't know about it," Brown said. "For you to put your lives on the line -- truly from the depths of my heart I say thank you." That afternoon, Diaz wheeled Brown out of the hospital so she could reunite with her family -- leaving just one person in the COVID unit. Hospital staff wondered whether it was almost time to dismantle it. Then, a few days after Brown left the hospital for the second time, Desert Valley received a surge of patients who doctors thought might be infected with the coronavirus. One by one, they tested them -- with only one positive result. As of Tuesday, one person remained in the unit. But the hospital wouldn't shut it down. At least not yet. It was hard to envision what might happen in the future. Testing is increasing in California, which could lead to an influx of new patients. In addition, various counties in the state, including San Bernardino, are easing some restrictions. Face coverings in public, while "strongly recommended," are no longer required. "We're basically living day by day," Siddiqui said. "Who knows what's going to happen tomorrow?" -- Times staff photographer Irfan Khan contributed to this report. Caption: PHOTO: JANICE BROWN grimaces as nurse Jennifer Stolpp pokes her arm for dialysis at Desert Valley Hospital in Victorville. With her age and a host of health issues, she said, the coronavirus felt like "the icing on the cake." PHOTOGRAPHER:Irfan Khan Los Angeles Times PHOTO:JANICE BROWN smiles as Dr. Imran Siddiqui, center, and nurses celebrate her birthday at Desert Valley Hospital. "You guys have done more than enough. Put your lives on the line -- for me," she said. PHOTOGRAPHER:Irfan Khan Los Angeles Times PHOTO:A RECOVERED Janice Brown leaves Desert Valley Hospital on April 29, ending her second stay. PHOTOGRAPHER:Irfan Khan Los Angeles Times 
May 13, 2020	Dr. Anthony Fauci, the nation's top infectious-disease expert, warned Congress on Tuesday that states that push too quickly to reopen businesses and allow public gatherings during the COVID-19 pandemic could "trigger an outbreak that you may not be able to control." Testifying before the Senate Health Committee, the longtime government scientist largely avoided direct criticism of President Trump or other GOP leaders, but struck a significantly more cautious tone than the president, who has pushed for states to quickly end restrictions on business and other activities that were imposed to blunt the spread of the coronavirus. "If you think we have it completely under control, we don't," Fauci told the panel, warning about potential spikes in infections if states move too fast. "The consequences could be really serious.  "My concern is that if states or cities or regions, in their attempt, understandable, to get back to some form of normality, disregard to a greater or lesser degree the checkpoints that we put in our guidelines ... there is a real risk that you will trigger an outbreak that you may not be able to control." That "paradoxically will set you back, not only leading to some suffering and death that could be avoided, but it could even set you back on the road to trying to get economic recovery, because it would almost turn the clock back," he said. Fauci, who heads the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases and is the most respected member of the president's coronavirus task force, testified amid growing tension between public health experts on the one hand and Trump and his political allies on the other. Trump increasingly has minimized the health impacts of the outbreak while calling for an end to the lockdowns that have devastated the nation's economy. The U.S. has seen more than 1.3 million infections and more than 81,000 confirmed deaths from the virus, according to a tally by Johns Hopkins University. The death toll is far and away the highest in the world. Fauci said Tuesday that the actual death toll is "likely higher," noting that in New York City, for example, many people may have died from the virus in their homes and have not been counted in official totals. He and other senior administration officials, including the heads of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and the Food and Drug Administration, also sounded encouraging notes about progress on ramping up testing and the development of potential treatments and vaccines. Fauci told senators that the U.S. has "multiple shots" at developing a vaccine for preventing the coronavirus and that researchers hope to know by winter whether at least one of the candidates will work. At least eight vaccine candidates are in development, Fauci said. Dr. Stephen Hahn, the FDA commissioner, said health officials are working aggressively to ensure that drugmakers will be able to quickly ramp up production when an effective vaccine is discovered. But Fauci warned that the efficacy of the potential vaccines remains an issue and that "negative consequences" are also a concern. And he dismissed a suggestion from the committee's chairman, Sen. Lamar Alexander (R-Tenn.), that a vaccine or treatment might be available by the time schools reopen in the fall, calling that "a bridge too far." Fauci more sharply rebuffed Sen. Rand Paul (R-Ky.), who suggested that schools should be reopened because evidence suggests the virus does not seriously affect children. "I think we'd better be careful if we are not cavalier in thinking that children are completely immune to the deleterious effects" of the illness, Fauci said, noting that there is a lot unknown about the virus and its effects. He noted recent cases of severe illness in children that may be linked to the virus. And he made clear that he did not agree with many of Trump's optimistic statements about having the disease under control. "I think we are going in the right direction, but the right direction does not mean we have by any means total control of this outbreak," he said. The main checkpoint in the guidelines, Fauci noted, is a 14-day decline in cases. Many of the states that have aggressively moved to lift restrictions on business have not achieved that. Alabama, Kentucky, Maine, Mississippi, Missouri, Nebraska, Ohio, Oklahoma, Tennessee and Utah are among the states that have moved to reopen large parts of their economies, but have not met the 14-day downward trajectory in new cases or positive test rates. At the White House, Press Secretary Kayleigh McEnany, asked about the warnings that the country could see a spike in cases, insisted that Trump has stuck to the administration's announced policies. "He has encouraged the states to follow the guidelines," she said. Also coming in for criticism at Tuesday's hearing was the administration's frequent talking point that it has successfully ramped up testing to allow Americans to resume normal activities. Adm. Brett Giroir, the assistant secretary for health at the Department of Health and Human Services who oversees the testing effort, said he expects the U.S. will be able to conduct 40 million to 50 million tests per month by September and noted the nation is now conducting more tests per capita than South Korea, which is widely held up as an international model for containing both the pandemic and the resulting economic damage. On Monday, Trump said at the White House that the testing problem had been solved. But the rosy picture was slammed by Sen. Mitt Romney (R-Utah). South Korea doesn't need to test as much as the U.S. because it was able to quickly suppress the disease by implementing widespread testing soon after the first cases were discovered, Romney noted. That's unlike the U.S., which has taken months to ramp up, he said. "I find our testing record nothing to celebrate whatsoever," Romney added. Fauci testified remotely because he is partially self-quarantining after contact with a White House staff member who tested positive for the virus. Alexander also participated remotely because one of his staff members has tested positive. Several other senators similarly stayed away from the committee room. Several committee Republicans used their questioning to defend Trump, but Alexander made clear as he opened the hearing that the defense has limits: The country still needs more "widespread testing," he said. Caption: PHOTO: SENATORS listen as Dr. Anthony Fauci testifies remotely at a hearing Tuesday. The COVID-19 crisis is not yet "completely under control," he said. PHOTOGRAPHER:Win McNamee Pool Photo 
May 12, 2020	If you’re looking for an area in which the United States is indisputably a global standout, here it is: paid sick leave. Unfortunately, not in a good way. Of United Nations member countries, 181 provide paid leave in some form. Eleven do not, including the U.S. That places America in an elite group that includes the Pacific Island nations of Tonga, Tuvalu, and Nauru, along with Somalia (which is barely a functioning nation at all). When you exempt big companies and small companies, you’re missing vast swaths of the country. Why would we possibly do that during a pandemic? Jody Heymann, UCLA One developed country, South Korea, doesn’t provide paid sick leave as such, but does provide all workers with three weeks of paid time off that can be used as sick leave. “We are incredibly isolated,” says Jody Heymann, director of the World Policy Analysis Center at UCLA and the lead author of a newly published study by the center of sick leave policies in 192 of the 193 UN countries. (The study didn’t cover North Korea, where policies couldn’t be determined.) The center determined that the U.S. lags much of the world in almost every measure of sick leave design. Although the initial coronavirus relief measure passed by Congress — the Families First Coronavirus Response Act enacted in mid-March — provided for two employer-paid weeks of emergency medical leave, it exempted businesses with 500 employees or more and allowed small businesses with fewer than 50 workers to claim hardship exemptions. That made the U.S. the only country in the world that bases its paid leave rule on the size of an employer, Heymann told me. “The big picture story is that when you exempt big companies and small companies, you’re missing vast swaths of the country,” Heymann says — an estimated 100 million workers. “Why would we possibly do that during a pandemic?” The lack of nationally mandated paid sick leave is both penny- and pound-foolish even under normal circumstances, Heymann says. “Paid sick leave pays for itself in increased productivity and fewer work hours lost due to disease,” she says. In a regular non-pandemic year, influenza costs the U.S. economy $11 billion, and food-borne disease another $15 billion, including what’s spread by food workers reporting to their jobs while sick. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention reported in 2016 that one in five food service workers had worked at least one shift while sick with vomiting or diarrhea in the previous year. During a pandemic such as the current coronavirus crisis, inadequate paid sick leave almost certainly contributes to calamitous outcomes. Countries that don’t offer paid sick leave from the first day of illness include some that were “hardest hit early in the global pandemic and have faced overwhelmed health care systems and large loss of life,” including Italy, Iran and the U.S., the UCLA study observes. The U.S. is not the only country, rich or poor, without ironclad, all-encompassing paid sick leave rights. But it’s firmly among the have-not countries in the most important features. About three-quarters of all countries guarantee paid sick leave from day one of an illness and 76% provide for at least six weeks of coverage. Among high-income countries, about two-thirds cover self-employed workers. About half the countries in the UCLA database guaranteed workers at least 80% of their wages if they had worked for at least six months. As we’ve reported before, the threadbare safety net for American workers is an artifact of the country’s choice to place workplace policies almost entirely under the control of employers. The harvest is not only spotty paid sick leave rights, but the lack of universal health coverage, both of which have become factors in our inability to put a leash on the spread of COVID-19. According to the Bureau of Labor Statistics, about a quarter of all American workers have no right to sick leave at all; about 91% of state and local government workers are eligible for paid sick leave, but only 73% of the privately-employed. In the private sector, moreover, paid sick leave is a privilege reserved largely for professionals, managers, and the better-paid. It’s available to only about 58% of service workers — who are most likely to come in contact with the public — less than half of those in the lowest 25% of the income range, and only three in 10 of those in the lowest 10% of wage earners. In the absence of a federal mandate for paid sick leave, states and localities have picked up the slack. Fourteen states (including California) and the District of Columbia have enacted paid sick leave laws, as have 20 cities (seven in California) and three counties. Typically, these laws require paid sick leave of up to five working days, accrued as workers accumulate hours, and limit the ability to carry sick days into another year. California’s law, which went into effect in 2015, allow employees, including part-time and temporary employees, to earn one hour of paid leave for every 30 hours worked. Employers can cap accruals at 48 hours, or about six conventional workdays. Without nationwide paid sick leave, the task of keeping people at home to suppress the coronavirus is obviously much harder. “Paid sick days do a few things,” Heymann says. “When people are out because they are so gravely ill that they would never go to work, they ensure that they have an economic safety net. That’s obviously crucial. But it also means that people who have mild symptoms of infectious diseases, but could readily spread it to others who might get severely ill, will stay home.” Moreover, “the willingness of people to get tested when they have a mild cough and see if they’re going to need to be out of work for two weeks,” Heymann says, “that depends a lot on paid sick days.” In fiscal terms, there’s no reason why the United States can’t join the rest of the developed world in offering workers suitably comprehensive sick leave. About a quarter of all countries finance their programs from government funds, and another fifth share the responsibility between employers and government. Low-income countries tend to place the burden solely on employers. Among high-income countries, two-thirds provide sick leave for the self-employed and 42% cover part-timers. The consequences of leaving workers without a financial safety net during a health crisis have been clear in the U.S. since the H1N1 flu epidemic of 2009. An estimated 26 million residents were infected from September through November that year, the peak months of the pandemic. But an estimated 8 million continued to go to work. By the following February, public health authorities reckoned that those carriers infected some 7 million co-workers. “Presenteeism — attending work while ill — among private sector employees without paid sick days may have extended the duration of the outbreak,” a study by Pennsylvania State University concluded. The lessons of COVID will have to persist well into the future. Not only will the disease likely be with us for at least part of 2021, but it’s a reminder of society’s vulnerability to further pandemics. In the past two decades, we’ve had four major respiratory infections that spread globally — SARS in 2002, H1N1 in 2009, MERS in 2012, and now COVID-19, Heymann says. “This is not a problem that’s going away. We need to be prepared for the next one, because we can’t afford to have to keep shutting down our economy like this.” 
May 12, 2020	In recent weeks, Hollywood studios and movie theater chains have held out hope that cinemas will be back in business in July, and that audiences will be eager to return. Veteran film producer Mark Gill is betting the launch of his new studio on whether that dream becomes reality. Gill’s company Solstice Studios will release the new Russell Crowe psychological thriller “Unhinged” in cinemas on July 1, the former Miramax executive said Tuesday. Although it’s unclear how many theaters will be open by then, the film will be the first major new theatrical release since the coronavirus outbreak shuttered U.S. multiplexes in mid-March. “There’s a risk attached to it, obviously,” said Gill, 57. “We launched our company about 18 months ago to make movies for movie theaters. I think you need to stand up for theaters at any time, really, but especially at this time.” The $33-million movie’s premiere will mark an early test of whether audiences are itching to return to movie theaters after a long period of limited entertainment options and copious home binge-watching. “Unhinged” stars the “Gladiator” and “A Beautiful Mind” actor as a man whose road rage gets way out of hand. It’s an especially risky debut for Hollywood-based Solstice, which Gill founded in October 2018 with $400 million in funding, including $150 million from London-based financier Ingenious Media. The company aims to produce three to five movies a year, mostly with production budgets from $30 million to $80 million. It also hopes to acquire a handful of movies for U.S. release. Solstice has 59 employees. Setting the stage for its first movie now may seem like a Hail Mary play at a time when much of the country is still in the throes of a public health emergency. The planned debut is more than two weeks before Christopher Nolan’s new movie “Tenet” hits the multiplex on July 17, which will be followed by Walt Disney Co.'s live-action “Mulan” remake on July 24. But Gill said he’s not deterred. He said he was heartened by a survey his company commissioned to determine the willingness of audiences to show up at cinemas. Of the 1,000 moviegoers who were polled, 80% said they wanted to go back to movie theaters in July. Moviegoers are defined as people who go six times a year or more. “I think there’s a lot to be said for pent-up demand to get out of the house,” Gill said. “I think that’s very, very real.” July is about the earliest major theater chains are expected to reopen in the U.S. Plano, Texas-based Cinemark Holdings recently pinpointed July 1, a Wednesday, as its target for getting back in business. AMC Theatres, the world’s largest cinema circuit, has also signaled that it hopes to open its doors that month. States including Georgia and Texas have eased restrictions to allow theaters to operate at limited capacity, but not all chains have taken the governors up on their invitation to resume operations. Most cinema owners don’t want to reopen without major studio productions to put on their screens. To hear it from Gill, though, the gamble to release in July was not a decision he took rashly. He said he landed on the release date after consulting with the National Assn. of Theatre Owners, the Washington-based lobbying organization, as well as the nation’s largest exhibitors, AMC, Regal and Cinemark. The domestic release of “Unhinged” is expected to follow or coincide with its debut in countries including Australia, China, Germany, South Korea, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland and Taiwan, the company said. The still-potent disease adds a unique hurdle to the movie’s box office prospects. Social distancing restrictions will probably still be in place in many areas, and analysts don’t expect moviegoing to return to pre-pandemic levels until there’s a vaccine, if ever. Theaters that open are likely to do so with limited seating, robust cleaning schedules and mask requirements. Theaters are expected to reopen with 25% to 50% capacity, with seats blocked off in a checkerboard format in many locations. And even without fears of the coronavirus, there was no guarantee “Unhinged” would be a hit. Distributors have struggled in recent years to find audiences for mid-budget movies, as the audience for such films migrates online. On the plus side, the new movie won’t be facing competition for screens. Until “Unhinged,” the theaters that reopen will probably be playing older titles to get customers used to the idea of going back. “It won’t be, ‘Do you want to go to the movies,’ it’ll be, ‘Do you want to go to the movie?’” Gill joked. Gill was previously president of Avi Lerner’s Millennium Films, where he worked on movies including “The Hitman’s Bodyguard” and the “Olympus Has Fallen” series. He left in 2017 after a failed attempt to buy the company. Before that, he presided over Warner Bros.’ short-lived specialty label Warner Independent Pictures. Until his abrupt departure in 2002, Gill was the L.A.-based president of Miramax Films, the studio founded by Harvey Weinstein and his brother, Bob. Gill exited the then-Disney-owned company after clashing with Harvey Weinstein. Weinstein was convicted of rape in New York earlier this year. Gill’s credits as an executive producer include “Frida,” “Under the Tuscan Sun” and “Mechanic: Resurrection.” 
May 12, 2020	Dr. Anthony Fauci, the nation’s top infectious disease expert, warned Congress on Tuesday that states that push too quickly to reopen businesses and allow public gatherings during the COVID-19 pandemic could “trigger an outbreak that you may not be able to control.” Testifying before the Senate health committee, the longtime government scientist largely avoided direct criticism of President Trump or other GOP leaders, but struck a significantly more cautious tone than the president, who has pushed for states to quickly end restrictions on business and other activities that were imposed to blunt the spread of the virus. “If you think we have it completely under control, we don’t,” Fauci told the panel, warning about potential spikes in infections if states move too fast. “The consequences could be really serious.” “My concern is that if states or cities or regions, in their attempt, understandable, to get back to some form of normality, disregard to a greater or lesser degree the checkpoints that we put in our guidelines ... there is a real risk that you will trigger an outbreak that you may not be able to control.” That “paradoxically will set you back, not only leading to some suffering and death that could be avoided, but it could even set you back on the road to trying to get economic recovery, because it would almost turn the clock back,” he said. Fauci, who heads the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases and is the most respected member of the president’s coronavirus task force, testified amid growing tension between public health experts on the one hand and Trump and his political allies on the other. Trump increasingly has minimized the health impacts of the outbreak while calling for an end to the lockdowns that have devastated the nation’s economy. The U.S. has seen at least 1.3 million infections and nearly 81,000 confirmed deaths from the virus, according to a tally by Johns Hopkins University. The death toll is far and away the highest in the world. Fauci said Tuesday that the actual death toll is “likely higher,” noting that in New York City, for example, many people may have died from the virus in their homes and have not been counted in official totals. He and other senior administration officials, including the heads of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and the Food and Drug Administration, also sounded encouraging notes about progress on ramping up testing and the development of potential treatments and vaccines. Fauci told senators that the U.S. has “multiple shots” at developing a vaccine for preventing the coronavirus and that researchers hope to know by winter whether at least one of the candidates will work. At least eight vaccine candidates are in development, Fauci said. Dr. Stephen Hahn, the FDA commissioner, said health officials are working aggressively to ensure that drugmakers will be able to quickly ramp up production when an effective vaccine is discovered. But Fauci warned that the efficacy of the potential vaccines remains an issue and that “negative consequences” are also a concern. And he dismissed a suggestion from the committee’s chairman, Sen. Lamar Alexander (R-Tenn.), that a vaccine or treatment might be available by the time schools reopen in the fall, calling that “a bridge too far.” Fauci more sharply rebuffed Sen. Rand Paul (R-Ky.), who suggested that schools should be reopened because evidence suggests the virus does not seriously affect children. “I think we’d better be careful if we are not cavalier in thinking that children are completely immune to the deleterious effects” of the illness, Fauci said, noting that there is a lot unknown about the virus and its effects. He noted recent cases of severe illness in children that may be linked to the virus. And he made clear that he did not agree with many of Trump’s optimistic statements about having the disease under control. “I think we are going in the right direction, but the right direction does not mean we have by any means total control of this outbreak,” he said. The main checkpoint in the guidelines, Fauci noted, is a 14-day decline in cases. Many of the states that have aggressively moved to lift restrictions on business have not achieved that. Alabama, Kentucky, Maine, Mississippi, Missouri, Nebraska, Ohio, Oklahoma, Tennessee and Utah are among the states that have moved to reopen large parts of their economies, but have not met the 14-day downward trajectory in new cases or positive test rates. At the White House, Press Secretary Kayleigh McEnany, asked about the warnings that the country could see a spike in cases, insisted that Trump has stuck to the administration’s announced policies. “He has encouraged the states to follow the guidelines,” she said. Also coming in for criticism at Tuesday’s hearing was the Trump administration’s frequent talking point that it has successfully ramped up testing to allow Americans to resume normal activities. Adm. Brett Giroir, the assistant secretary for health at the Department of Health and Human Services who oversees the testing effort, said he expects the U.S. will be able to conduct 40 million-50 million tests per month by September and noted the U.S. is now conducting more tests per person than South Korea, which is widely held up as an international model for containing both the pandemic and the resulting economic damage. On Monday, Trump said at the White House that the testing problem had been solved. But the rosy picture was slammed by Sen. Mitt Romney (R-Utah). South Korea doesn’t need to test as much as the U.S. because it was able to quickly suppress the disease by implementing widespread testing soon after the first cases were discovered, Romney noted. That’s unlike the U.S., which has taken months to ramp up, he said. “I find our testing record nothing to celebrate whatsoever,” Romney added. Fauci testified remotely because he is partially self-quarantining after contact with a White House staff member who tested positive for the virus. Alexander also participated remotely because one of his staff members has tested positive. Several other senators similarly stayed away from the committee room. Several committee Republicans used their questioning to defend Trump, but Alexander made clear as he opened the hearing that the defense has limits: The country still needs more “widespread testing,” he said.
May 12, 2020	The city had begun breathing easy, life once more pulsating in its streets. Museums and art galleries reopened, gyms welcomed back regulars, baseball and soccer leagues kicked off. Traffic choked thoroughfares, and schools readied to greet students for the first time in months. For 18 days in a row, this metropolis of nearly 10 million reported zero cases of community transmissions of the novel coronavirus. It seemed, even in these uncertain times, that danger had receded in a nation praised for its handling of the pandemic. Then, a 29-year-old man who’d gone clubbing over a holiday weekend came down with COVID-19, shattering the tenuous sense of normality and setting off a frenzied search for thousands who’d been in the clubs and bars he visited. As of Tuesday, more than 100 people had tested positive for the virus linked to a cluster stemming from the popular nightlife district of Itaewon. Co-workers and family members of clubgoers have tested positive, including an 84-year-old woman who’d dined with a grandson. The city recoiled: More than 2,000 establishments were ordered to shut down, office buildings where the infected worked were closed, and start dates for schools were, once again, pushed back. The latest outbreak unleashed a torrent of anger against the young revelers and ignited debates over personal responsibility and blame. Recriminations have led to life-and-death questions that will beset societies across the world as governments weigh the risks of when and how to ease social distancing requirements. What do we owe our neighbors at a time when individual pleasures risk unraveling the hard-earned collective reprieve from the virus’ terror? And when the virus slips through the cracks of relaxed vigilance, whom do we hold to account, and how? One neighbor living in the same apartment complex as one of the recently diagnosed clubgoers did not mince words. “Are you even human?” railed a handwritten sign pasted at the entryway to the apartment building in Incheon, a city about an hour west of Seoul. “Young children and middle- and high school students aren’t able to go outside, and are taking online classes. I sure hope you’re happy you went dancing like a delinquent at an Itaewon club and got infected. You should be sorry,” the sign said. The public vitriol has also raised concerns it could lead to vilification of sexual minorities; the clubs the 29-year-old visited mostly catered to gay patrons. Some media reports zeroed in on the fact that gay clubs were at the center of the outbreak. Civil rights advocates were alarmed that the young man’s workplace and city of residence — Yongin, a suburb of Seoul — became known, in effect outing him in a society where homosexuality remains largely taboo. A Facebook post from Yongin with information about the man’s movements had nearly 200 angry comments — many laced with expletives — castigating him for being reckless. Several remarked that he went to a gay club, an indication of a troubling cultural moment when panic over a virus exposed deeper societal truths. “Because of people like this, everyone suffers,” one commenter wrote. Efforts to contain another outbreak by tracking down and testing those who may have been infected — a hallmark of South Korea’s virus response — have run up against fears in the LGBTQ community that they can be discriminated against at work or face strife within their families. South Korea has a vocal Christian right that denounces and campaigns against homosexuality, to the point of violent clashes at pride parades around the country. Chingusai, a rights group for gay men, issued a statement saying media headlines had made containing the outbreak all the more difficult. “This type of reporting will only serve to create anxiety and fear about being outed and discourage those who have been in contact with the infected, making them hide,” the group said. “Getting tested proves they were there and in effect reveals their sexual orientation, making it harder to get their cooperation.” The recent spike in cases laid bare the double-edged nature of South Korea’s approach of radical transparency, which errs on the side of disclosing detailed information about those infected. While the policy enabled the country to get a swift handle on containing the virus’ spread, a response that has received worldwide acclaim, the information released about infected patients’ whereabouts and personal facts have occasionally led to the public shaming of “super-spreaders.” Such pressure may discourage people from seeking out testing. It was through early, efficient and widespread contact tracing and testing that South Korea curtailed its domestic outbreak despite having the first rapid surge of cases outside China. As of Tuesday, the country had just under 11,000 coronavirus cases and 258 deaths total, despite having had the first case on the same day as the U.S. — on Tuesday alone, the U.S. had more than 18,000 new cases and more than 1,000 deaths. The Seoul chapter of the rights group Amnesty International on Tuesday cautioned against violating the rights of sexual minorities and lambasted a newspaper for highlighting that a gay club was part of the outbreak when the fact wasn’t relevant to the story. The paper, Kukmin Ilbo, later changed its headline to remove the words “gay club” after receiving criticism. “Branding and fomenting hatred against a certain group is the biggest obstacle to effective disease prevention,” Amnesty International said in the statement. “Disease prevention and guaranteeing human rights isn’t a binary choice.” Seoul Mayor Park Won-soon said Tuesday that those who may be reluctant to come forward will be allowed to get tested by providing only their phone numbers, without giving their names. Even though the clubs kept self-reported logs of customers, authorities said much of the information listed wasn’t accurate. Park said epidemiological investigators had obtained a list of more than 10,000 individuals who were in the Itaewon area during the dates in question based on cell tower information, as well as an additional 494 based on credit card data, and sent out text messages urging them to get tested. “Exclusion and hatred don’t help at all in the fight against an epidemic,” he said. “The increased censure and hateful expressions aren’t advisable and will actually have the reverse effect.”
May 10, 2020	You'd be forgiven for mistaking Revolutionario, the North African taqueria in Exposition Park, for a survivalist's bunker rather than a working restaurant. The taqueria, which chef Farid Zadi and his wife, Susan Ji Young Park, opened in 2015, now resembles a hoarder's home. Shelves in the dining room are stocked with Spam, canned mackerel, dried soybeans, lentils, fortune cookies, Lawry's Seasoned Salt, packets of jam, black-eyed peas, panko, soy sauce, fish sauce, oolong tea and cup ramen. A squat bag of 500 pairs of socks sourced from Korea sits beside another shelf where Keebler cookies and Sriracha mingle.  Well before the pandemic hit Los Angeles, the couple decided to drastically curtail the restaurant's hours to focus on delivering food and other needed supplies, first to skid row, then to unhoused Korean seniors. Since then, what was a de facto food bank has become a full-time one. "I could see for myself that business was tanking in Chinatown at the end of December," said Park. "In January, it got worse and worse and I thought: 'If January is like this?' " In February, Park started a nonprofit, Asian Americans for Housing, and partnered with other nonprofits and organizations in Koreatown, Little Tokyo, Thai Town, Chinatown and the Vietnamese community in Orange County to expand their reach to other Asian American communities. "Older and poorer Asian Americans tend to be vastly ignored because of the language," said Park, who speaks Korean and some Spanish. Park connected with Zerita Jones, a community organizer in South L.A., to deliver food and supplies to black seniors. Soon, Red Boat gave them bottles of fish sauce, Nongshim dropped off pallets of instant ramen and Japanese food specialist the Mutual Trading Co. loaded an SUV with frozen food. Park and Zadi have roped their family -- they live upstairs above the taqueria -- into the effort. The couple's 21-year-old daughter, Kamilah, son Elias, 17, and Kamilah's boyfriend, Ziad Shalabi, pitch in. Jones conscripted daughter Zenae Lawrence to help too. Jones started distributing hot meals from Revolutionario first to the seniors in her own complex, Chesapeake Apartments. "Sometimes we'll reach out, giving out bags with notes inside. 'Hey, hope you're OK,' with a note and a phone number. I'm not a stranger; that helps." On a recent weekday, Park sat at the restaurant's communal dining table, her laptop dwarfed by the sacks of various rices -- she sources "culturally conscious" food for each community she serves. "If they have rice, kimchi and soybean paste, tofu and cabbage, that's food security," Park said of Korean seniors. Zadi, a French-Algerian chef who for years was an instructor at Pasadena's Cordon Bleu, cooks hot meals for the food bank with help from Susan, Kamilah and Brittany Ko, Revolutionario's operations manager. On weekends, he makes a partial Revolutionario menu -- including soup harira, merguez kefta and halal fried chicken -- for contactless pickup. Park raises funds by partnering with other organizations, big and small, and by asking people to donate (Revolutionario has not yet received a loan from the Paycheck Protection Program). "Our mission is to fill in gaps and cracks," Park said, by supplying not only meals and food but also clothing, personal care products, even cash. "I understand supply chain and wholesale distribution," said Park, whose parents, first-generation Korean immigrants, ran a wholesale business. "Need a COVID-19 T-shirt? I can hook you up," she said. Jones was seated across a mountain of toilet paper from Park, her mask pulled up on her head like a yarmulke. "I ask local people, especially the women. They remember," Jones said of how the community comes together to identify seniors in need. Jones and her team are now distributing to almost 500 seniors in Crenshaw and nearby neighborhoods. (Jones and Park share more than their outreach program: They recently discovered that they attended the same Encino junior high, where Jones was among the first group of African Americans bused into the Valley neighborhood.) What parts of the dining room walls aren't obscured by supplies are graffitied with well wishes in English, Spanish and Mandarin, and taped with paper bills like a neighborhood bar. An Algerian flag hangs from the ceiling. "There's enough food for our family of four here to eat for two years," said Park. "What were we going to do? Isolate? Hoard?" She smiled. "We don't have a choice; the whole system has been reset." Caption: PHOTO: VOLUNTEERS Zerita Jones, clockwise from below left, daughter Zenae Lawrence and Ziad Shalabi help Revolutionario North African Tacos' Farid Zadi, Brittany Ko, Kamilah Zadi and Susan Ji Young Park distribute meals. PHOTOGRAPHER: Jay L. Clendenin Los Angeles Times PHOTO:VOLUNTEERS Zerita Jones, clockwise from below left, daughter Zenae Lawrence and Ziad Shalabi help Revolutionario North African Tacos' Farid Zadi, Brittany Ko, Kamilah Zadi and Susan Ji Young Park distribute meals. PHOTOGRAPHER:Jay L. Clendenin Los Angeles Times PHOTO:VOLUNTEERS Zerita Jones, clockwise from below left, daughter Zenae Lawrence and Ziad Shalabi help Revolutionario North African Tacos' Farid Zadi, Brittany Ko, Kamilah Zadi and Susan Ji Young Park distribute meals. PHOTOGRAPHER:Jay L. Clendenin Los Angeles Times 
May 10, 2020	Major league owners are expected to ask players Tuesday to agree to a regular season that would cover about 80 games. The Dodgers have not won a World Series championship in 32 years, and their manager believes victory would taste just as sweet after what would normally be considered half a season. "This is something unprecedented," Dave Roberts said Saturday. "To keep guys focused and together in mind and body, and then to win a championship, I see no reason why anyone should even entertain an asterisk." Under the owners' plan, players would report to training camp in June and start an abbreviated season in early July. Teams would play regionally to minimize travel, so the Dodgers and Angels would play largely along the West Coast. Rosters would be expanded to account for the probable cancellation of the minor league season, and the postseason would be expanded too. Fans would not be admitted, at least at the start.  Owners could tweak some of those concepts, first reported by the Athletic, in a conference call Monday. The commissioner's office would then begin what could be a contentious negotiation with the players' union. "I'm still hopeful," Roberts said. "I don't see how we can't come to some consensus on both sides. Everyone will benefit. It's time for the fans to have baseball in their homes. I think it can be a therapeutic and nice diversion." It is uncertain what alterations the league might propose in the event local authorities do not let teams play in their home ballparks, or a coronavirus outbreak occurs or recurs. It also is uncertain how the owners might propose to protect the health and safety of players and other personnel. "I don't think anything can be done until that [safety] can be guaranteed and we feel comfortable with it," St. Louis Cardinals pitcher Andrew Miller told ESPN. "We want to put a good product on the field, but that's totally secondary to the health of the players. We are generally younger and healthier, but that doesn't mean our staff is, that doesn't mean the umpires are going to be in the clear. "It's not hard to get one degree of separation away from players who have kids who may have conditions, or other family members that live with them. I'm confident that before anything happens, we'll sort through all those issues." On the ESPN broadcast of the UFC fight Saturday, President Trump said: "Get the sports leagues back. Let's play. You do the social distancing and whatever else you have to do. But we need sports. We want our sports back." However, fighter Ronaldo Souza tested positive for the coronavirus, as did two of his cornermen. He was removed from the card Friday but seen on video Saturday mingling with others at the event. Agent Scott Boras said MLB can learn from the experiences of baseball leagues underway in Taiwan and South Korea, and from soccer leagues around the world. Boras, who represents about 100 major league players, said none of his clients has expressed concerns about playing. However, he said, any player with a medical issue that might put him at risk should be allowed to choose whether he wants to play. "These contracts aren't servitude," Boras said. In March, owners and players agreed to extend the regular season through October if necessary and conduct the postseason in November. Boras would like MLB to do just that, with a longer schedule. "There's no reason I can see that, if you start in July and you have four months, we shouldn't be playing 110 to 120 games, minimum," he said. "That's why we negotiated that extra month." That agreement also provided that the players would be paid on a prorated basis depending on the number of games played. The owners say that provision assumed fans would be in attendance, and if not the parties should negotiate lower salaries to account for the lack of revenue from tickets, food, drinks and merchandise. The players say the provision covers all scenarios. Boras is wary that owners would try to cut salaries for regular-season games and then expand the postseason, where owners keep almost all of the money. He would, however, like to see a deal, and with it a season. "For those people that we need to keep at home, we need baseball," Boras said, "so they have some incentive to stay at home, so we don't have social unrest." 
May 10, 2020	When it arrived in the unforgiving industrial towns of central Mexico, the sand-swept sprawl of northern Nigeria and the mazes of metal shanties in India's commercial capital, Mumbai, COVID-19 went by another name. People called it a "rich man's disease." Pandemics throughout history have been associated with the underprivileged, but in many developing countries the coronavirus was a high-class import -- carried in by travelers returning from business trips in China, studies in Europe, ski vacations in the Rockies.  As infections initially concentrated in better neighborhoods, many poor and working-class people believed the disease wouldn't touch them, as if something terrible but rarefied. The misperception was fed by elites, including the governor of Mexico's Puebla state, Luis Miguel Barbosa, who said in March: "If you're rich, you're at risk, but if you're poor, you're not. The poor, we're immune." By now it is clear that COVID-19 spares no one and disproportionately harms the hungry, the forgotten and those with preexisting illnesses and substandard healthcare. But historians say it may be remembered as the first pandemic that spread, to a significant extent, from the affluent to the lowly -- agitating class grievances in some of the world's most unequal societies and adding a dark twist to a pandemic that has killed more than 270,000 people. "At the very, very early stages it could be considered a rich man's disease," said Joshua Loomis, an assistant professor of biology at East Stroudsburg University in Pennsylvania and author of a history of epidemics. "But as we know, it didn't take long to become entrenched among the poor, and that is where most pandemics gravitate." The rich have long erected barriers to insulate themselves -- whether walls to hide slums in India or the gated communities and private jets favored among the wealthy in the United States. The well-off have been refining social distancing for years, and when contagion appears, societies' first instinct has often been to target and sequester the poor. During the cholera epidemic of the early 19th century, harsh quarantines of lower-class neighborhoods sparked riots in the Russian city of St. Petersburg that were suppressed only when Tsar Nicholas I sent in the army. In the 1930s, the Nazis used typhus prevention as a pretext to confine Jews to ghettos that accelerated the disease's spread, ensuring it killed as many as possible. But when a pandemic begins with the rich, the poor have nowhere to hide. "Throughout history, the rich would wall in the poor to let disease wipe them out," Loomis said. "There are not many examples of the poor having the power or the means to do that." The 1918 influenza outbreak was also propelled by transcontinental travel, but it is widely believed that American soldiers -- not leisure travelers -- brought the disease to Europe when they fought the closing battles of World War I. Tuberculosis, for a time in the 19th century, was associated with the elite because it killed a series of Romantic writers and artists. But it has always spread most ferociously among slum-dwellers and factory workers. Since the first infections were reported in Wuhan, China, late last year, COVID-19 has been different. The disease hopscotched around the world aboard commercial jets, quickly appearing in Japan, South Korea, Thailand and the U.S. The first case in India was detected in late January in a middle-class medical student who had flown home from studying in Wuhan. Only Indians with travel histories were tested in the early weeks. Most of daily life ground on as normal; the maids and drivers who are the backbone of India's cities left their crowded neighborhoods every morning to come to work in middle- and upper-class households, returning home after dark on train cars jammed with commuters. In mid-March the first case was found in a poor person: a 68-year-old housekeeper in Mumbai. Doctors said she was probably infected by her employer, who had tested positive after returning from the U.S. The government soon imposed a nationwide lockdown. But as infections continued to soar, Harjit Singh Bhatti, a physician and activist, said the government should have closed the international airports in New Delhi and Mumbai in early March and isolated arriving passengers more strictly. "Those returning from abroad are obviously not poor," Bhatti said. "If we had quarantined them in the beginning, India would be in a better position today." In Mexico, some of the earliest cases were detected in prominent business leaders who had traveled in private jets to Vail, Colo., for a ski vacation. They included a top banking official, the chief executive of the company that makes Jose Cuervo tequila and the chairman of Mexico's stock exchange, Jaime Ruiz Sacristan, who died from the virus in mid-April. In recent weeks, the virus has taken hold in some of the country's poorest communities, including in the working-class slums that ring Mexico City and in northern border cities such as Juarez, where an outbreak at a U.S.-owned auto-parts plant has killed at least 14 workers, authorities say. The virus has so far spared Mexico's rural poor, in part because people in those regions have gone to extremes to bar outsiders from bringing it in. Many remote towns across Mexico have erected roadblocks manned by self-styled health vigilantes. In beach resorts up and down the Pacific Coast, some towns have expressly sought to keep out foreign tourists. Abel Barrera Hernandez, a human rights activist in the mountains of Guerrero state, said rural Mexicans simply can't afford to get sick. "The grave problem here is that there isn't the infrastructure needed if people fall ill," Barrera said. "There aren't ventilators here. These are communities that sometimes don't even have water." Stories of callous behavior by elites have spread along with the virus. A Bollywood singer refused to self-isolate upon returning from London, then attended three parties where she came into contact with hundreds of families who had to go into quarantine. The daughter of a prominent politician in Malaysia flouted a nationwide lockdown to meet with a public official but got off with a relatively minor $184 fine. In March and April, South Korea saw a new wave of infections among privileged offspring returning home, many from universities in the U.S. and Europe that had closed their campuses. Some of the students appeared as aloof as they were careless. One student who had a fever reportedly swallowed 20 acetaminophen pills to evade detection by airport temperature scans; another broke quarantine multiple times to go to Starbucks in Seoul. Anger exploded when a 19-year-old from Seoul's wealthy Gangnam district tested positive for the coronavirus after returning from college in Boston. It was reported that she and her mother had vacationed on the southern island of Jeju for five days before her test, visiting resorts, restaurants and cafes without wearing masks even though she had begun to feel ill. One of their stops was a pharmacy. Officials in Jeju said they would sue the pair for about $100,000 in damages. A petition to the South Korean president asking that they be jailed or fined gathered nearly 200,000 signatures. Kim Jungyoung, a sociology professor at South Korea's Kyung Hee University, said public anxiety found a target in the students, who are seen as having been quick to leave Korea but are flocking back now that the situation looks better at home, taking advantage of the country's free or low-cost healthcare. "The wealthy class has the transnational advantage of being able to choose to study abroad," he said. "Now that they're in a tough spot and coming back, to some people they seem like selfish opportunists." In Nigeria -- Africa's largest economy but also one of its most unequal, where 2 in 5 people survive on $1 a day or less -- some of the first COVID-19 patients were political figures, including the president's chief of staff, Abba Kyari. Some were believed to have been infected while traveling in Europe or Egypt, drawing snickers from working-class Nigerians fed up with official corruption and the perks enjoyed by a moneyed class famous for its passports and plane tickets. "A lot of Nigerians were very happy, saying, 'Maybe all of our leaders will get sick and we'll get a new government,' " said Kingsley Ndoh, an assistant professor of global health at the University of Washington. "It was seen as a 'big man's disease,' so there was this low risk perception. And then community spread started taking root." Last month, after Kyari died of the illness, Nigeria's health minister said the virus was no longer just "something for big men and women who came from abroad." But the message was undermined when hundreds violated the country's social distancing policies to attend Kyari's funeral -- many not wearing masks. -- Bengali reported from Singapore, Linthicum from Mexico City and Kim from Seoul. Special correspondent Parth M.N. in Mumbai, India, contributed to this report. Caption: PHOTO: CEMETERY workers lower the casket of Juan Velasco, who died with COVID-19 symptoms, in Tijuana. Some of Mexico's first cases were business leaders who'd traveled abroad; now the virus is hitting poor communities. PHOTOGRAPHER:Marcus Yam Los Angeles Times 
May 9, 2020	Major league owners are expected to ask players Tuesday to agree to a regular season that would cover about 80 games. The Dodgers have not won a World Series championship in 32 years, and their manager believes victory would taste just as sweet after what would normally be considered half a season. “This is something unprecedented,” Dave Roberts said Saturday. “To keep guys focused and together in mind and body, and then to win a championship, I see no reason why anyone should even entertain an asterisk.” Under the owners’ plan, players would report to training camp in June and start an abbreviated season in early July. Teams would play regionally to minimize travel, so the Dodgers and Angels would play largely along the West Coast. Rosters would be expanded to account for the probable cancellation of the minor league season, and the postseason would be expanded too. Fans would not be admitted, at least at the start. Owners could tweak some of those concepts, first reported by The Athletic, in a conference call Monday. The commissioner’s office would then begin what could be a contentious negotiation with the players’ union. “I’m still hopeful,” Roberts said. “I don’t see how we can’t come to some consensus on both sides. Everyone will benefit. It’s time for the fans to have baseball in their homes. I think it can be a therapeutic and nice diversion.” It is uncertain what alterations the league might propose in the event local authorities do not let teams play in their home ballparks, or a coronavirus outbreak occurs or recurs. It also is uncertain how the owners might propose to protect the health and safety of players and other personnel. “I don’t think anything can be done until that [safety] can be guaranteed and we feel comfortable with it,” St. Louis Cardinals pitcher Andrew Miller told ESPN. “We want to put a good product on the field, but that’s totally secondary to the health of the players. We are generally younger and healthier, but that doesn’t mean our staff is, that doesn’t mean the umpires are going to be in the clear. “It’s not hard to get one degree of separation away from players who have kids who may have conditions, or other family members that live with them. I’m confident that before anything happens, we’ll sort through all those issues.” On the ESPN broadcast of the UFC fight Saturday, President Trump said: “Get the sports leagues back. Let’s play. You do the social distancing and whatever else you have to do. But we need sports. We want our sports back.” However, fighter Ronaldo Souza tested positive for the coronavirus, as did two of his cornermen. He was removed from the card Friday but seen on video Saturday mingling with others at the event. Agent Scott Boras said MLB can learn from the experiences of baseball leagues underway in Taiwan and South Korea, and from soccer leagues around the world. Boras, who represents about 100 major league players, said none of his clients has expressed concerns about playing. However, he said, any player with a medical issue that might put him at risk should be allowed to choose whether he wants to play. “These contracts aren’t servitude,” Boras said. In March, owners and players agreed to extend the regular season through October if necessary and conduct the postseason in November. Boras would like MLB to do just that, with a longer schedule. “There’s no reason I can see that, if you start in July and you have four months, we shouldn’t be playing 110 to 120 games, minimum,” he said. “That’s why we negotiated that extra month.” That agreement also provided that the players would be paid on a prorated basis depending on the number of games played. The owners say that provision assumed fans would be in attendance, and if not the parties should negotiate lower salaries to account for the lack of revenue from tickets, food, drinks and merchandise. The players say the provision covers all scenarios. Boras is wary that owners would try to cut salaries for regular-season games and then expand the postseason, where owners keep almost all of the money. He would, however, like to see a deal, and with it a season. “For those people that we need to keep at home, we need baseball,” Boras said, “so they have some incentive to stay at home, so we don’t have social unrest.”
May 8, 2020	You’d be forgiven for mistaking Revolutionario, the North African taqueria in Exposition Park, for a survivalist’s bunker rather than a working restaurant. The taqueria, which chef Farid Zadi and his wife, Susan Ji Young Park, opened in 2015, now resembles a hoarder’s home. Shelves in the dining room are stocked with Spam, canned mackerel, dried soybeans, lentils, fortune cookies, Lawry’s seasoning salt, packets of jam, black-eyed peas, panko, soy sauce, fish sauce, oolong tea and cup ramen. A squat bag of 500 pairs of socks sourced from Korea sits beside another shelf where Keebler cookies and Sriracha mingle. Well before the pandemic hit Los Angeles, the couple decided to drastically curtail the restaurant’s hours to focus on delivering food and other needed supplies, first to skid row, then to unhoused Korean seniors. Since then, what was a de facto food bank has become a full-time one. “I could see for myself that business was tanking in Chinatown at the end of December,” said Park. “In January, it got worse and worse and I thought: ‘If January is like this?’” In February, Park started a nonprofit, Asian Americans for Housing, and partnered with other nonprofits and organizations in Koreatown, Little Tokyo, Thai Town, Chinatown and the Vietnamese community in Orange County to expand their reach to other Asian American communities. “Older and poorer Asian Americans tend to be vastly ignored because of the language,” said Park, who speaks Korean and some Spanish. Park connected with Zerita Jones, a community organizer in South L.A., to deliver food and supplies to black seniors. Soon, Red Boat gave them bottles of fish sauce, Nongshim dropped off pallets of instant ramen and Japanese food specialist the Mutual Trading Co. loaded an SUV with frozen food. Park and Zadi have roped their family — they live upstairs above the taqueria — into the effort. The couple’s 21-year-old daughter, Kamilah, son Elias, 17, and Kamilah’s boyfriend, Ziad Shalabi, pitch in. Jones conscripted daughter Zenae Lawrence to help too. Jones started distributing hot meals from Revolutionario first to the seniors in her own complex, Chesapeake Apartments. “Sometimes we’ll reach out, giving out bags with notes inside. ‘Hey, hope you’re OK,’ with a note and a phone number. I’m not a stranger; that helps.” On a recent weekday, Park sat at the restaurant’s communal dining table, her laptop dwarfed by the sacks of various rices — she sources “culturally conscious” food for each community she serves. “If they have rice, kimchi and soybean paste, tofu and cabbage, that’s food security,” Park said of Korean seniors. Zadi, a French-Algerian chef who for years was an instructor at Pasadena’s Cordon Bleu, cooks hot meals for the food bank with help from Susan, Kamilah and Brittany Ko, Revolutionario’s operations manager. On weekends, he makes a partial Revolutionario menu — including soup harira , merguez kefta and halal fried chicken — for contactless pick-up. Park raises funds by partnering with other organizations, big and small, and by asking people to donate (Revolutionario has not yet received a loan from the Paycheck Protection Program). “Our mission is to fill in gaps and cracks,” Park said, by supplying not only meals and food but also clothing, personal care products, even cash. “I understand supply chain and wholesale distribution,” said Park, whose parents, first-generation Korean immigrants, ran a wholesale business. “Need a COVID-19 T-shirt? I can hook you up,” she said. Jones was seated across a mountain of toilet paper from Park, her mask pulled up on her head like a yarmulke. “I ask local people, especially the women. They remember,” Jones said of how the community comes together to identify seniors in need. Jones and her team are now distributing to almost 500 seniors in Crenshaw and nearby neighborhoods. (Jones and Park share more than their outreach program: They recently discovered that they attended the same Encino junior high, where Jones was among the first group of African Americans bused into the Valley neighborhood.) What parts of the dining room walls that aren’t obscured by supplies are graffitied with well wishes in English, Spanish and Mandarin, and taped with paper bills like a neighborhood bar. An Algerian flag hangs from the ceiling. “There’s enough food for our family of four here to eat for two years,” said Park. “What were we going to do? Isolate? Hoard?” She smiled. “We don’t have a choice; the whole system has been reset.” 
May 8, 2020	When it arrived in the unforgiving industrial towns of central Mexico, the sand-swept sprawl of northern Nigeria and the mazes of metal shanties in India’s commercial capital, Mumbai, COVID-19 went by another name. People called it a “rich man’s disease.” Pandemics throughout history have been associated with the underprivileged, but in many developing countries the coronavirus was a high-class import — carried in by travelers returning from business trips in China, studies in Europe, ski vacations in the Rockies. As infections initially concentrated in better neighborhoods, many poor and working-class people believed the disease wouldn’t touch them, as if something terrible but rarefied. The misperception was fed by elites, including the governor of Mexico’s Puebla state, Luis Miguel Barbosa, who said in March: “If you’re rich, you’re at risk, but if you’re poor, you’re not. The poor, we’re immune.” By now it is clear that COVID-19 spares no one and disproportionately harms the hungry, the forgotten, those with preexisting illnesses and substandard health care. But historians say it may be remembered as the first pandemic that spread, to a significant extent, from the affluent to the lowly — agitating class grievances in some of the world’s most unequal societies and adding a dark twist to a pandemic that has killed more than 270,000 people. “At the very, very early stages it could be considered a rich man’s disease,” said Joshua Loomis, an assistant professor of biology at East Stroudsburg University in Pennsylvania and author of a history of epidemics. “But as we know, it didn’t take long to become entrenched among the poor, and that is where most pandemics gravitate.” The rich have long erected barriers to insulate themselves — whether walls to hide slums in India or the gated communities and private jets favored among the wealthy in the United States. The well-off have been refining social distancing for years, and when contagion appears, societies’ first instinct has often been to target and sequester the poor. During the cholera epidemic of the early 19th century, harsh quarantines of lower-class neighborhoods sparked riots in the Russian city of St. Petersburg that were suppressed only when Tsar Nicholas I sent in the army. In the 1930s, the Nazis used typhus prevention as a pretext to confine Jews to ghettos that accelerated the disease’s spread, ensuring it killed as many as possible. But when a pandemic begins with the rich, the poor have nowhere to hide. “Throughout history, the rich would wall in the poor to let disease wipe them out,” Loomis said. “There are not many examples of the poor having the power or the means to do that.” The 1918 influenza outbreak was also propelled by transcontinental travel, but it is widely believed that American soldiers — not leisure travelers — brought the disease to Europe when they fought the closing battles of World War I. Tuberculosis, for a time in the 19th century, was associated with the elite because it killed a series of Romantic writers and artists. But it has always spread most ferociously among slum-dwellers and factory workers. Since the first infections were reported in Wuhan, China, late last year, COVID-19 has been different. The disease hopscotched around the world aboard commercial jets, quickly appearing in Japan, South Korea, Thailand and the U.S. The first case in India was detected in late January in a middle-class medical student who had flown home from studying in Wuhan. Only Indians with travel histories were tested in the early weeks. Most of daily life ground on as normal; the maids and drivers who are the backbone of India’s cities left their crowded neighborhoods every morning to come to work in middle- and upper-class households, returning home after dark on train cars jammed with commuters. In mid-March the first case was found in a poor person: a 68-year-old housekeeper in Mumbai. Doctors said she was likely infected by her employer, who had tested positive after returning from the U.S. The government soon imposed a nationwide lockdown. But as infections continue to soar, Harjit Singh Bhatti, a physician and activist, said the government should have closed the international airports in New Delhi and Mumbai in early March and isolated arriving passengers more strictly. “Those returning from abroad are obviously not poor,” Bhatti said. “If we had quarantined them in the beginning, India would be in a better position today.” In Mexico, some of the earliest cases were detected in prominent business leaders who had traveled in private jets to Vail, Colo., for a ski vacation. They included a top banking official, the chief executive of the company that makes Jose Cuervo tequila and the chairman of Mexico’s stock exchange, Jaime Ruiz Sacristan, who died from the virus in mid-April. In recent weeks, the virus has taken hold in some of the country’s poorest communities, including in the working-class slums that ring Mexico City and in northern border cities such as Juarez, where an outbreak at a U.S.-owned auto-parts plant has killed at least 14 workers, authorities say. The virus has so far spared Mexico’s rural poor, in part because people in those regions have gone to extremes to bar outsiders from bringing it in. Many remote towns across Mexico have erected roadblocks manned by self-styled health vigilantes. In beach resorts up and down the Pacific Coast, some towns have expressly sought to keep out foreign tourists. Abel Barrera Hernández, a human rights activist in the mountains of Guerrero state, said rural Mexicans simply can’t afford to get sick. “The grave problem here is that there isn’t the infrastructure needed if people fall ill,” Barrera said. “There aren’t ventilators here. These are communities that sometimes don’t even have water.” Stories of callous behavior by elites have spread along with the virus. A Bollywood singer refused to self-isolate upon returning from London, then attended three parties where she came into contact with hundreds of families who had to go into quarantine. The daughter of a prominent politician in Malaysia flouted a nationwide lockdown to meet with a public official but got off with a relatively minor $184 fine. In March and April, South Korea saw a new wave of infections among privileged offspring returning home, many from universities in the U.S. and Europe that had closed their campuses. Some of the students appeared as aloof as they were careless. One student who had a fever reportedly swallowed 20 acetaminophen pills to evade detection by airport temperature scans; another broke quarantine multiple times to go to Starbucks in Seoul. Anger exploded when a 19-year-old from Seoul’s wealthy Gangnam district tested positive for the coronavirus after returning from college in Boston. It was reported that she and her mother had vacationed on the southern island of Jeju for five days before her test, visiting resorts, restaurants and cafes without wearing masks even though she had begun to feel ill. One of their stops was a pharmacy. Officials in Jeju said they would sue the pair for about $100,000 in damages. A petition to the South Korean president asking that they be jailed or fined gathered nearly 200,000 signatures. Kim Jungyoung, a sociology professor at South Korea’s Kyung Hee University, said public anxiety found a target in the students, who are seen as having been quick to leave Korea but are flocking back now that the situation looks better at home, taking advantage of the country’s free or low-cost healthcare. “The wealthy class has the transnational advantage of being able choose to study abroad,” he said. “Now that they’re in a tough spot and coming back, to some people they seem like selfish opportunists.” In Nigeria — Africa’s largest economy but also one of its most unequal, where two in five people survive on $1 a day or less — some of the first COVID-19 patients were political figures, including the president’s chief of staff, Abba Kyari. Some were believed to have been infected while traveling in Europe or Egypt, drawing snickers from working-class Nigerians fed up with official corruption and the perks enjoyed by a moneyed class famous for its passports and plane tickets. “A lot of Nigerians were very happy, saying, ‘Maybe all of our leaders will get sick and we’ll get a new government,’” said Kingsley Ndoh, an assistant professor of global health at the University of Washington. “It was seen as a ‘big man’s disease,’ so there was this low risk perception. And then community spread started taking root.” Last month, after Kyari died of the illness, Nigeria’s health minister said the virus was no longer just “something for big men and women who came from abroad.” But the message was undermined when hundreds violated the country’s social distancing policies to attend Kyari’s funeral — many not wearing masks. Bengali reported from Singapore, Linthicum from Mexico City and Kim from Seoul. Special correspondent Parth M.N. in Mumbai, India, contributed to this report. 
May 6, 2 020	When news of the Asian giant hornet’s arrival in the United States first broke, the public was understandably worried: First the coronavirus, now “murder hornets”? What’s next, three days of darkness? But bug experts from Washington, where the hornet was discovered in the U.S., to California agree that the 2-inch hornet is probably not worth all the buzz it has generated — at least not yet. “It’s not an existential threat; it’s something that can be managed. You just have to know that they’re there and take the necessary steps,” said Doug Yanega, senior museum scientist at UC Riverside’s Entomology Research Museum. He helped Washington scientists identify the hornets when they were first found. “It’s like letting a virus spread — you don’t want to let your guard down.” The Washington State Department of Agriculture has confirmed only two Asian giant hornets, both spotted late last year in Blaine, in the crook of the northwest corner of the U.S. There are also two unconfirmed reports of hornet sightings about eight miles down the road in Custer, according to Washington State University. And just across the border — and the skinny Strait of Georgia — in British Columbia, Canada, a colony of the Asian giant hornets was found and eradicated in September. But so far that’s it, and scientists hope it stays that way. “We’re still trying to determine the extent of the infestation,” said Tim Lawrence, associate professor and Island County extension director at Washington State University. “We don’t want it here.” The main concern about the Asian giant hornet is its potential to harm honeybee populations. The queen hornet usually emerges in April to begin feeding and building up her nest of worker hornets. By late summer or early fall, her worker hornets begin foraging for food, swarming beehives, cutting off bees’ heads and sucking out the hive’s larvae and pupae to bring back to their burgeoning nest. “What the hornet does is it feeds on — it preys on — honeybees,” said Dessie Underwood, an entomologist and the chair of Cal State Long Beach’s Department of Biological Sciences. “Just like a lion feeds on a gazelle — you don’t call it a murderous lion. Everyone has to eat something.” The hornets are unlikely to attack humans — though if they do, they pack a painful punch. But an Asian giant hornet’s sting isn’t likely to kill humans. In Japan, said Susan Cobey, a bee breeder at the Washington State University, about 50 people die every year from hornet stings, and that number is probably attributable to allergies. In the United States, an average of 62 people die each year from hornet, wasp or bee stings, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Early genetic testing shows that the Canadian colony originated in Japan, and at least one of the Washington hornets came from South Korea, said Karla Salp, public engagement specialist with Washington’s agriculture department. Several scientists said they believed the hornets likely hitched a ride on cargo brought to an American port from Asia. European honeybees, which have long lived in North America, are not equipped to defend themselves against the Asian giant hornet. In Japan, where the hornet typically lives, Asian honeybees have evolved a defense mechanism, Cobey said. The bees make a massive ball around the hornet scouts and smother them to death with the heat of their beating wings. Honeybees in the United States already face existential threats of increased pesticides, loss of habitat and a changing environment, she added. A newly introduced hornet could endanger the bee population and have a domino effect on the American food supply. Fruits, vegetables and even plant-grown animal feed could suffer without enough pollinating bees. “The crunch is kind of now,” Cobey said. “If we can catch these queens before they establish big nests, that’s the goal.” Anyone who thinks they may have spotted an Asian giant hornet can report it to their state’s agriculture department. People can also help by not killing innocent bumblebees, Lawrence said. “If we get through May and June and July and nobody has spotted any of these wasps, then we’re probably free and clear. The jury is still out,” said Yanega, the UC Riverside entomologist. “There is a reason for concern, but it’s not the level of threat that people think there is.” As for whether Californians could expect to see them, this particular hornet comes from a region in Japan with warm, wet summers and cold dry winters, Long Beach State’s Underwood said. Not exactly a California climate. 
May 6, 2020	The baseball gods have a sense of humor, their latest example of mischief broadcast nationally Monday night. With a new deal to televise Korean league games, ESPN trumpeted the return of baseball, the anchor of the preceding "SportsCenter" program introducing the opening day contest between the Samsung Lions and the NC Dinos by declaring, "Live sports is back." Well, almost.  Rain was falling in the city of Daegu, the resulting delay prompting an interview with former Korea Baseball Organization MVP and current major leaguer Eric Thames to be clumsily stretched to nearly 20 minutes. The game, in which the Dinos prevailed 4-0, didn't represent a step toward normality as much as it did the desperation that has swept over the United States. Originally scheduled to start at 1 a.m. on the East Coast, the game could have cured the most severe case of insomnia. Talk about a non-habit-forming sleep aid. The absence of a crowd didn't help. More critical was how the American audience knew nearly nothing about the contestants. Combat sports can overcome such a lack of familiarity. The possibility that a fellow human being could be injured or killed can be enough to persuade a neutral observer to become emotionally engaged. Baseball doesn't have that luxury. Remove the reservoir of thoughts and feelings developed over multiple generations and what remains is a slow-paced game in which spectators have no rooting interests or story lines to follow. This was entirely expected, but, as the cliche goes, desperate times call for desperate measures. Desperate for viewers when the country is shut down because of the coronavirus outbreak, ESPN gambled that enough sports fans are desperate for live competition that they will drastically change their sleep schedules and form a niche audience. Three of the six games that will be televised every week start at 2:30 a.m. Pacific Daylight Time. The network's ongoing documentary series on Michael Jordan and the Chicago Bulls has feasted on this hunger. The shows include previously unseen footage but otherwise don't break ground. The series has nonetheless received fawning reviews from journalists, who sound as if they are auditioning for roles as ESPN publicists. If the sports industrial complex has a vested interest in making "The Last Dance" appear as if it's a transcendent event, their customers do too. It helps them maintain sanity in a period of extreme uncertainty. The collective anxiety is based in the very nature of the virus, as well as apprehension over the reliability of information. There are varying opinions over how to best navigate this pandemic. Some are politically based, but some aren't. Major League Baseball couldn't properly handle a sign-stealing scandal. What makes anyone think Commissioner Rob Manfred can navigate a season around a pandemic? Maybe some of the speculative stories about baseball returning are based in reality. Maybe spring training can start next month and the season a month after that. Whatever the case, skepticism over motives and a convoluted informational landscape promise to make the road particularly complicated. Opening day feels distant. Until then, the country will have to settle for this, the retelling of a well-known basketball story and baseball from a second-rate league that can serve as lullabies for adults. Caption: PHOTO: HANWHA EAGLES players and coaches huddle on the mound, left, during a game at Incheon with cheerleaders but no fans. PHOTOGRAPHER: Chung Sung-Jun Getty Images PHOTO:HANWHA EAGLES players and coaches huddle on the mound, left, during a game at Incheon with cheerleaders but no fans. PHOTOGRAPHER: Chung Sung-Jun Getty Images 
May 6, 2020	Former U.S. major league player Kim Hyun-soo sent the ball cracking over the left-field fence, marking the first home run of the long-awaited season of South Korea's beloved baseball league. But instead of basking in thunderous applause and hollers from adoring fans, Kim loped across home plate to a smattering of claps from a few dozen reporters and league employees. After scoring two runs for his Seoul-based LG Twins, Kim approached a teammate who waited with his arms up, but caught himself at the last second, narrowly avoiding a high-five -- banned by the league as a coronavirus precaution. He bumped elbows with another teammate. Most of the stadium's 25,553 seats -- a tough get in a normal year for a game between the Twins and archrival Doosan Bears -- were empty.  Baseball returned to South Korea under drizzly and overcast skies Tuesday, a rare professional sporting league to resume games while much of the world remains under lockdown with no end in sight to the COVID-19 pandemic. The five-game opening day showed South Korea testing the waters for a cautious return to normality on a day the country reported just three new cases of the coronavirus, a sign that the virus' community spread has largely been halted. With ESPN reaching an eleventh-hour deal to broadcast Korea Baseball Organization games, a host of U.S. fans starved for live sports were turning to the Korean league, with its distinct culture and avid fandom. Taiwan's Chinese Professional Baseball League, which started up April 11, has also gained a following among Americans watching online. "Major League Baseball teams [in the U.S.] are more corporate, a little more sterile, not as passionate. The KBO feels like a college football game," said Dan Kurtz, a longtime fan behind the site MyKBO.net. Kurtz said he was being inundated with messages from sports-deprived Americans in the lead-up to the season. "The KBO is going to fill that void, and that's awesome." The 144-game season, originally set to begin in late March, was pushed back a few times before getting underway with a number of precautions. A 44-page manual distributed to the league's 10 teams outlined detailed protocols -- including bans on high-fives and spitting, and the minimizing of player contact with the general public. All games will initially be conducted without spectators; the league has said it will consider phasing in a limited number of fans at a later date. On the field in Seoul's Jamsil Baseball Stadium on Tuesday, umpires and base coaches wore masks and gloves. The mascot for the home-team Twins -- twin robot boys named Lucky and Star -- also wore masks, as did the team's cheerleaders and a drum squad that did its best to make up for the absence of fans. When they fell silent, an uncanny hush blanketed the stadium, interrupted only by the whiz of nearby traffic and the satisfying thwack of hits. The quiet was especially odd in a stadium typically filled with songs and chants customized to each hitter and situation and boisterously belted out by fervent fans throughout the game. "Without them, it's a totally different animal," said Twins pitcher Tyler Wilson, formerly of the Baltimore Orioles, who has been playing in South Korea since 2018. "Their energy and their passion and how into it they are, from the first pitch to the end, is what makes the games so special." Wilson, who didn't play in Tuesday's opening game, said that, during this year's preseason games, it was so quiet he could hear the broadcasters' commentary, conversations in the field and in the dugout, and even the sound of his own spikes going into the dirt. Precautions began long before opening day. Former Angels catcher Hank Conger, starting his first season as a battery coach with the Busan-based Lotte Giants, said players had been dining with clear plastic barriers between them in the lunchroom and wearing masks on the bus. Former teammates in the U.S. were eyeing the situation in Korea enviously, he said. "For us to finally start is surreal," he said. "Everybody sees my Instagram and sees us getting ready for the season, and they're saying, 'I can't believe you guys are playing.' " At the Giants' game against the KT Wiz in Suwon -- the teams are named after corporate sponsors rather than home cities -- in lieu of a first pitch, a young fan encased in a clear plastic bubble shaped like a baseball walked from the mound to the home plate. In Incheon, where the Hanwha Eagles played the SK Wyverns, banners with photos of fans in masks filled the bleachers to give the impression of crowds. Kim Tae-hyoung, the manager of the defending champions, the Doosan Bears, told reporters he wasn't quite sure how the coronavirus-related measures and delays would affect his team, but at the end of the day, he just wanted to win. "This is a first for me too," he said. A reporter asked if he had remarks for viewers from the U.S. watching KBO games for the first time. "Do I have to say that in English?" he said, to laughs. "Give us a lot of love please." Outside the closed stadium gates, 25-year-old Kim Gwang-ho was among a handful of fans who showed up wearing team hats and jerseys. The longtime Twins fan watched the game on his cellphone while listening to what sounds he could make out over the stadium walls -- and he was hoping for a selfie with a player after the game. "I hope this corona situation ends so everyone can come and cheer them on, in time for fall baseball," he said. "I hope they win the Korean series this year." After pulling ahead with Kim Hyun-soo's early home run, the Twins beat the Bears 8-2. By the end of the nearly three-hour game, gray skies had given way to a picture-perfect sunny day. Kurtz of MyKBO.net, who is a Bears fan, said all of Korean baseball and its fans scored a win Tuesday with the international attention being paid to a league normally overshadowed by U.S. Major League Baseball. He said he hoped the country's overlooked sports would receive some of the acclaim its music and movies had been getting of late. "Prior to today, it was very niche.... 'Parasite' won," he said, referring to the South Korean Oscar-winning film, "so KBO, let's do this next." Caption: PHOTO: SOUTH KOREA'S Hanwha Eagles are ready to face the SK Wyverns for Tuesday's opening game at the spectator-free SK Happy Dream Park baseball stadium in Incheon. The league has banned high-fives and spitting. PHOTOGRAPHER:Chung Sung-Jun Getty Images 
May 5, 2020	Former U.S. major league player Kim Hyun-soo sent the ball cracking over the left-field fence, marking the first home run of the long-awaited season of South Korea’s beloved baseball league. But instead of basking in thunderous applause and hollers from adoring fans, Kim loped across home plate to a smattering of claps from a few dozen reporters and league employees. After scoring two runs for his Seoul-based LG Twins, Kim approached a teammate who waited with his arms up, but caught himself at the last second, narrowly avoiding a high-five — banned by the league as a coronavirus precaution. He bumped elbows with another teammate. Most of the stadium’s 25,553 seats — a tough get in a normal year for a game between the Twins and archrival Doosan Bears — were empty. Baseball returned to South Korea under drizzly and overcast skies Tuesday, a rare professional sporting league to resume games while much of the world remains under lockdown with no end in sight to the COVID-19 pandemic. The five-game opening day showed South Korea testing the waters for a cautious return to normalcy on a day the country reported just three new cases of the coronavirus, a sign that the virus’ community spread has largely been halted. With ESPN reaching an eleventh-hour deal to broadcast Korea Baseball Organization games, a host of U.S. fans starved for live sports were turning to the Korean league, with its distinct culture and avid fandom. Taiwan’s Chinese Professional Baseball League, which started up April 11, has also gained a following among Americans watching online. “Major League Baseball teams [in the U.S.] are more corporate, a little more sterile, not as passionate. The KBO feels like a college football game,” said Dan Kurtz, a longtime fan behind the site MyKBO.net. Kurtz said he was being inundated with messages from sports-deprived Americans in the lead-up to the season. “The KBO is going to fill that void, and that’s awesome.” The 144-game season, originally set to begin in late March, was pushed back a few times before getting underway with a number of precautions. A 44-page manual distributed to the league’s 10 teams outlined detailed protocols — including bans on high-fives and spitting, and the minimizing of player contact with the general public. All games will initially be conducted without spectators; the league has said it will consider phasing in a limited number of fans at a later date. On the field in Seoul’s Jamsil Baseball Stadium on Tuesday, umpires and base coaches wore masks and gloves. The mascot for the home-team Twins — twin robot boys named Lucky and Star — also wore masks, as did the team’s cheerleaders and a drum squad that did its best to make up for the absence of fans. When they fell silent, an uncanny hush blanketed the stadium, interrupted only by the whiz of nearby traffic and the satisfying thwack of hits.  Masked mascots (LG Twins) pic.twitter.com/tRbD7YanTM — Victoria Kim (@vicjkim) May 5, 2020 The quiet was especially odd in a stadium typically filled with songs and chants customized to each hitter and situation and boisterously belted out by fervent fans throughout the game. “Without them, it’s a totally different animal,” said Twins pitcher Tyler Wilson, formerly of the Baltimore Orioles, who has been playing in South Korea since 2018. “Their energy and their passion and how into it they are, from the first pitch to the end, is what makes the games so special.” Wilson, who didn’t play in Tuesday’s opening game, said that, during this year’s pre-season games, it was so quiet he could hear the broadcasters’ commentary, conversations in the field and in the dugout, and even the sound of his own spikes going into the dirt. Newsletter Get our free Coronavirus Today newsletter Sign up for the latest news, best stories and what they mean for you, plus answers to your questions. Sign Me Up You may occasionally receive promotional content from the Los Angeles Times. Precautions began long before opening day. Former Angels catcher Hank Conger, starting his first season as a battery coach with the Busan-based Lotte Giants, said players had been dining with plexiglass barriers between them in the lunchroom and wearing masks on the bus. Former teammates in the U.S. were eyeing the situation in Korea enviously, he said. “For us to finally start is surreal,” he said. “Everybody sees my Instagram and sees us getting ready for the season, and they’re saying, ‘I can’t believe you guys are playing.’” At the Giants’ game against the KT Wiz in Suwon — the teams are named after corporate sponsors rather than home cities — in lieu of a first pitch, a young fan encased in a clear plastic bubble shaped like a baseball walked from the mound to the home plate. In Incheon, where the Hanhwa Eagles played the SK Wyverns, banners with photos of fans in masks filled the bleachers to give the impression of crowds. Kim Tae-hyoung, the manager of the defending champions, the Doosan Bears, told reporters he wasn’t quite sure how the coronavirus-related measures and delays would affect his team, but at the end of the day, he just wanted to win. “This is a first for me too,” he said. A reporter asked if he had remarks for viewers from the U.S. watching KBO games for the first time. “Do I have to say that in English?” he said, to laughs. “Give us a lot of love please.” Outside the closed stadium gates, 25-year-old Kim Gwang-ho was among a handful of fans who showed up wearing team hats and jerseys. The longtime Twins fan watched the game on his cellphone while listening to what sounds he could make out over the stadium walls — and he was hoping for a selfie with a player after the game. “I hope this corona situation ends so everyone can come and cheer them on, in time for fall baseball,” he said. “I hope they win the Korean series this year.” After pulling ahead with Kim Hyun-soo’s early home run, the Twins beat the Bears 8-2. By the end of the nearly three-hour game, gray skies had given way to a picture-perfect sunny day. Kurtz of MyKBO.net, who is a Bears fan, said all of Korean baseball and its fans scored a win Tuesday with the international attention being paid to a league normally overshadowed by U.S. Major League Baseball. He said he hoped the country’s overlooked sports would receive some of the acclaim its music and movies had been getting of late. “Prior to today, it was very niche.... ‘Parasite’ won,” he said, referring to the South Korean Oscar-winning film, “so KBO, let’s do this next.”
May 5, 2020	Like workers in other sectors, many people in the television and film industry in California have been devastated by the coronavirus shutdowns. Tens of thousands of crew members -- who often live project to project -- can no longer earn a paycheck. Gov. Gavin Newsom allowing some businesses in the state to reopen this week was welcome news. In the meantime, because Netflix shows and films are made around the globe, we're starting to learn how to get production going again despite the crisis. Filming typically takes place in intimate, high-touch environments, with scores of artists and craftspeople working closely together on tight deadlines. While we will need to change this process -- in some cases dramatically -- to ensure the safety of cast and crew during this pandemic, the closed nature of sets also offers some advantages. Not least that they provide a relatively controlled environment, where we can track who comes and goes. We've seen this with Netflix productions that are filming today in South Korea, Japan and Iceland, and we'll learn more once we start shooting again in Sweden this month and Norway in July. While it's still in the early days, here's what we've learned so far. For one thing, circumstances vary significantly country by country, and even city by city. So directors and showrunners need to work with local health authorities to adopt safeguards that take into account the situation on the ground. There is no one size fits all.  For example, in South Korea, we worked quickly to develop safety protocols so that series such as our new drama "Move to Heaven," and the popular romantic series "Love Alarm" could continue filming. Testing there is only available for people with symptoms. So all cast and crew have their temperatures checked regularly, and if anyone were to show signs of infection they would be tested immediately and production paused. In Iceland, on the other hand, testing is more widely available, whether you have symptoms or not. So the entire cast and crew of our "Katla," a science-fiction series, volunteered to get tested to start filming again. The tests came back negative, but everyone still has their temperature taken first thing in the morning. The team has also developed strict protocols with local doctors should anyone develop symptoms. In Sweden, testing is much more scarce. So the cast and some members of the costume and makeup team for the romantic comedy series "Love and Anarchy," which will resume production this month, volunteered to self-quarantine for 14 days beforehand -- and then throughout the planned 11-day shoot. Equally important are protocols to maintain high standards of hygiene on set, including readily available hand sanitizer, masks and gloves as well as social distancing for the crew. With "Katla," security personnel monitor the number of people on set at any one time, and the crew's access is controlled by the use of colored tags on their credentials. Ride sharing is prohibited so everyone drives separately to work each day. On sets, the usual buffets have been replaced with boxed meals. There is one makeup artist, who uses single-use, disposable applicators for all makeup. Every two or three hours a production assistant announces a break so people on set can wash their hands, and alcohol is used to wipe down doorknobs, loading areas and the craft table. At the end of every day, props are cleaned and wardrobes steam-cleaned. As our casts and crews return to work, it's important that we all focus on what can be achieved in the short term, even if we can't solve every problem. That means rejiggering productions, locations and set schedules to postpone shooting crowd or action scenes and intimate moments, as well as scenes that require international travel. Some shows will need to rewrite scripts or look to add visual effects to what previously would have been shot live. For others, that may be impossible. But if we can get some production going again, safely and smartly, we can learn how best to film under these restricted conditions. The business of bringing stories to life onscreen is built on partnership and trust. We will only make progress if everyone who returns to the set, whether they are in front of or behind the camera, feels safe doing so. Without this basic trust, the creative process breaks down. For example, the "Love and Anarchy" crew members were passionate about completing the series and decided collectively to get back to work quickly, even though they are provided for financially by government support. None of this is easy, and many questions remain unanswered. But we are cautiously optimistic that we can adapt to this restricted reality. So are filmmakers in Australia, Tyler Perry in Atlanta and others across the industry. There are thousands more crew members anxious to return to work, and millions of people relying on the entertainment they produce. As we've seen during this period of isolation, stories can help connect people even when they are apart. The adage is as old as our business, but it has never been more true: The show must -- and will -- go on.  Credit: Ted Sarandos is chief content officer at Netflix.
May 4, 2020	Like workers in other sectors, many people in the television and film industry in California have been devastated by the coronavirus shutdowns. Tens of thousands of crew members — who often live project to project — can no longer earn a paycheck. Gov. Gavin Newsom’s call to begin reopening businesses in coming weeks was welcome news. In the meantime, because Netflix shows and films are made around the globe, we’re starting to learn how to get production going again despite the crisis. Filming typically takes place in intimate, high-touch environments, with scores of artists and craftspeople working closely together on tight deadlines. While we will need to change this process — in some cases dramatically — to ensure the safety of cast and crew during this pandemic, the closed nature of sets also offers some advantages. Not least that they provide a relatively controlled environment, where we can track who comes and goes. We’ve seen this with Netflix productions that are filming today in South Korea, Japan and Iceland, and we’ll learn more once we start shooting again in Sweden this month and Norway in July. While it’s still in the early days, here’s what we’ve learned so far. For one thing, circumstances vary significantly country by country, and even city by city. So, directors and showrunners need to work with local health authorities to adopt safeguards that take account of the situation on the ground. There is no one size fits all. For example, in South Korea, where we worked quickly to develop safety protocols so that series such as our new drama “Move to Heaven,” and the popular romantic series “Love Alarm” could continue filming. Testing there is only available for people with symptoms. So all cast and crew have their temperatures checked regularly, and if anyone were to show signs of infection they would be tested immediately and production paused. In Iceland, on the other hand, testing is more widely available, whether you have symptoms or not. So, the entire cast and crew of our “Katla,” a science-fiction series, volunteered to get tested to start filming again. The tests came back negative, but everyone still has their temperature taken first thing in the morning. The team has also developed strict protocols with local doctors should anyone develop symptoms. In Sweden, testing is much more scarce. So the cast and some members of the costume and makeup team for the romantic comedy series “Love and Anarchy,” which will resume production this month, volunteered to self-quarantine for 14 days beforehand — and then throughout the planned 11-day shoot. Equally important are protocols to maintain high standards of hygiene on set, including readily available hand sanitizer, masks and gloves as well as social distancing for the crew. With “Katla,” security personnel monitor the number of people on set at any one time, and the crew’s access is controlled by the use of colored tags on their credentials. Ride sharing is prohibited so everyone drives separately to work each day. On sets, the usual buffets have been replaced with boxed meals. There is one makeup artist, who uses single-use, disposable applicators for all makeup. Every two or three hours a production assistant announces a break so people on set can wash their hands, and alcohol is used to wipe down doorknobs, loading areas and the craft table. At the end of every day, props are cleaned and wardrobes steam-cleaned. As our casts and crews return to work, it’s important that we all focus on what can be achieved in the short term, even if we can’t solve every problem. That means rejiggering productions, locations and set schedules to postpone shooting crowd or action scenes and intimate moments, as well as scenes that require international travel. Some shows will need to rewrite scripts or look to add visual effects to what previously would have been shot live. For others, that may be impossible. But if we can get some production going again, safely and smartly, we can learn how best to film under these restricted conditions. The business of bringing stories to life onscreen is built on partnership and trust. We will only make progress if everyone who returns to the set, whether they are in front of or behind the camera, feels safe doing so. Without this basic trust, the creative process breaks down. For example, the “Love and Anarchy” crew members were passionate about completing the series and decided collectively to get back to work quickly, even though they are provided for financially by government support. None of this is easy, and many questions remain unanswered. But we are cautiously optimistic that we can adapt to this restricted reality. So are filmmakers in Australia, Tyler Perry in Atlanta and others across the industry. There are thousands more crew members anxious to return to work, and millions of people relying on the entertainment they produce. As we’ve seen during this period of isolation, stories can help connect people even when they are apart. The adage is as old as our business, but it has never been more true: The show must — and will — go on. Ted Sarandos is chief content officer at Netflix.
May 3, 2020	Los Angeles movie studio Millennium Films was just days away from starting production on its Megan Fox horror movie "Till Death" in Sofia, Bulgaria, before fears of the coronavirus shut everything down. Millennium President Jeffrey Greenstein doesn't know when the film will get up and running at the company's Nu Boyana Film Studios in Sofia. But he knows that when it happens, film sets will feel very different from the pre-COVID-19 era. Health and safety rules will be stricter. Social-distancing standards could limit how workers interact with actors, filmmakers and department heads. Crew members may even have to wear protective masks on set.  "There's a lot of uncertainty," Greenstein said. "But the thing we need to all be thinking about is being as responsible as possible." Studio executives, independent producers, unions, government agencies and insurance specialists have begun to map out a return to what had been, until recently, a new golden age of film production. Entertainment companies are desperate to roll the cameras again once they get the green light from public health officials. The stakes are high for the major studios, including Walt Disney and Warner Bros., which need to feed their nascent streaming platforms with more shows and films. Over the last few weeks, the major studios have held meetings internally and with production service professionals to assess what a return to film and TV sets might look like. Shoots may return sooner in countries less hard-hit by the virus, such as Iceland, or those that have less restrictive shutdowns and no post-travel quarantines, such as Sweden or Denmark, where some producers have already laid out guidelines for filming. Big movies that would normally have 300 people on set at once are finding ways of reducing that number to fewer than 75 by having people work in staggered groups and doing more work remotely, according to one studio executive not authorized to comment publicly. Production may resume with smaller-scale movies and shows, such as sitcoms, that can be made with smaller crews, tightly controlled sets and minimal travel. Stars accustomed to in-person wardrobe departments may have to dress themselves. Makeup artists and hair dressers, who would normally touch up actors between takes, probably will have to observe shoots from iPads. Sanitation crews will be brought on to disinfect sets and equipment throughout the day. Companies also are considering having crews effectively quarantine on studio property or in hotels near sets during production. Studios don't know when public health guidelines will allow them to resume production, nor do they know what types of social-distancing restrictions governments will require. But Tom Rothman, chair of Sony Pictures motion picture group, said he's confident companies will be able to address health and safety concerns. "I don't really imagine you're going to be doing giant scenes with thousands of extras right off the bat," he said. "But if there's reliable testing, and people can come to work and be given a decent amount of social distance, I believe protocols will evolve to create workplaces where crews, who are hungry to get back to work, will feel safe." -- June for Georgia? Executives are anticipating productions could start up gradually around September in some places, with planning crews beginning set construction as soon as June in places like Georgia, which is one of the busiest filmmaking hubs outside of California. Locally, FilmLA, the nonprofit group that handles film permits for the city and county of Los Angeles, said it is expecting a "first planning meeting" with public health officials in early May to discuss how to safely resume filming. A key consideration will be to address concerns in neighborhoods that film crews might spread disease. "The film industry has always been a massive piece of the economy of this region, so figuring out a safe way to bring filming back is going to be critical to recovery," said FilmLA President Paul Audley. Hollywood unions are playing an important role in the discussions. The Directors Guild of America is working with other guilds and unions and employers to put together a "comprehensive guide to help us all return safely to work," DGA President Thomas Schlamme said recently. The DGA has named "Contagion" film director Steven Soderbergh to lead a committee, consulting with "top epidemiologists in the field," to examine issues filmmakers face and to make recommendations to the union's board. DGA National Executive Director Russell Hollander said, "It is paramount that any return to set, whenever it may be, prioritizes the safety of industry workers. We are examining the complex issues involved through a methodical, science-based approach, which includes consultation with top epidemiologists. Our work is still in its early stages, and while there are still so many unanswered questions to contend with, we know that a big part of it will be looking at testing." Even amid the pandemic, states and countries continue to vie for productions by showing they are gearing up for safe filming. Netflix said it was already shooting in countries such as Iceland and South Korea, where even though some restrictions on gathering in large numbers exist, widespread testing and quicker response to outbreaks have contained the virus spread. Several proposals for filming are circulating around Hollywood, including some from the European Institute for Health and Safety in Film Industry that outline protocols for testing, distancing on sets and protective equipment for makeup artists and other crew members. The institute requires contactless fever testing for all crew members and catering by takeout, among other measures. Some filmmakers anticipate they will have to double up roles. A director, for example, might have to double as a cinematographer, for example, to reduce the number of people on set. Over the years, crews have increased in size, often using multiple cameras to increase efficiency. But John Lindley, elected in March to lead the International Cinematographers Guild, said he doesn't think staffs need to shrink. Cinematographers can work remotely or camera operators can work at least six feet from the cast, Lindley said. "I'm not convinced we have to give up job categories to get this done," he said. A crucial issue, he said, is to have a unified approach. "What is happening at the moment is a lot of smart people with good intentions are striking out on their own," Lindley said. "To really succeed in figuring out how to work safely, we are going to need all the different guilds and unions and employers and insurance companies to come together." Some producers are weighing whether to clean filming kits overnight or quarantine crews near film sets. Budgets are likely to swell to account for increased cleaning and insurance costs and to factor in shutdowns. "It's going to be an interesting test of creative thinking and ingenuity," said John Sloss, founder of Cinetic Media, a New York-based management, advisory and sales firm for the film industry. "I don't think there's a standard way in which this is all going to progress." Frank Patterson, president of moviemaking hub Pinewood Atlanta Studios, said he and his staff have spent the last six weeks devising new health and safety improvements with their studio customers. The sprawling 18-stage facility, home of blockbuster productions from Marvel, Sony and Warner Bros., has taken a major hit from the coronavirus shutdown. Typically, up to 6,000 people work on the lot daily. A gradual change to normalcy will require improvements to studio security, facilities and professional behavior, he said. Pinewood, for example, is planning to ban unnecessary visitors and set up health screening stations at entrances. The studio also plans to introduce "microbial reduction" systems at production offices, install advanced hand-washing areas and provide mobile sanitation stations for crews. -- Closed sets During shooting, crew members will be kept more separate than normal. There will have to be more closed sets with limited staff. "It may slow down production, but it will make it safer," said Patterson. "How we organize crews and how we organize those work routines will be really important to keeping all workers healthy and safe." Tyler Perry's Atlanta-based studio has proposed sequestering smaller crews on the former army base, a location for Walt Disney's "Black Panther," as well as rapid coronavirus testing and cutting film shoots for a TV series to under three weeks. A huge question for producers is how they will get their productions insured should someone get sick from COVID-19 on set, shutting down production and potentially raising the threat of lawsuits. "Assume everyone will adopt the best practices, but unless you have cast insurance, you can't go into production," said Brad Krevoy, chief executive of L.A.-based Motion Picture Corporation of America, which makes Christmas movies for Netflix and the Hallmark Channel. Many hope the federal government will create a backstop for insurers, as happened after 9/11, so they can once again protect producers from liabilities that come from filming. To get insurers on board, who now won't cover losses linked to the pandemic, producers are considering separating actors and crew with glass or crews working in shifts. Still, Krevoy is planning to deliver his batch of Christmas films on time despite the disruption and is looking to Canada as the place he will be able to restart shooting. "To be a producer you have to be born an optimist," said Krevoy. "We will deliver for Christmas." Caption: PHOTO: FILM AND TV sets, like this 2017 "Marvel's Runaways" shoot, tend to be filled with people. PHOTOGRAPHER:Al Seib Los Angeles Times PHOTO:MAKEUP ARTISTS touch up "Insecure" actresses Amanda Seales, left, and Issa Rae on set. PHOTOGRAPHER:Jay L. Clendenin Los Angeles Times
May 3, 2020	A middle-aged woman arrived at a tent set up by St. John's Well Child and Family Center for coronavirus testing April 13, her mother in tow. When both tested positive, clinic staff began to ask more questions. Can you give us the names of people you have been in close contact with? We need to make sure your family and friends and co-workers are safe, staffers explained. It turned out the women shared their two-bedroom apartment near Figueroa and 50th Street in South Los Angeles with two other families -- 14 household members total. Within the next two days, clinic staff were able to contact and persuade other household members to come in for testing, said Jim Mangia, chief executive of the nonprofit, which operates 18 health centers and school-based clinics in Los Angeles and Compton. One other housemate tested positive.  With California and neighboring regions working to relax social distancing restrictions and allowing parts of life to return to normal, health authorities are racing to stop the next wave of infections before it starts. To avoid an explosion of new cases, Gov. Gavin Newsom has stressed the state's ability to trace the trail of people exposed to the novel coronavirus in order to isolate and treat them. Many have pinned their hopes for a return to normal on a regime of digital exposure notification powered by Google and Apple smartphones. The two rival companies are working with public health authorities and university researchers to build groundwork into mobile devices for apps that would notify people if they were recently in proximity to someone who was infected. They plan to release the system in mid-May. Newsom has praised the rare joint effort, and President Trump has called the technology "an amazing thing" and "very accurate." But all the attention on the Google-Apple platform has some public health professionals nervous. The job of contact tracing, they say, defies the notion of a sleek tech fix, requiring labor-intensive work by trained individuals. Those who've used it successfully to keep other diseases in check worry that an untested constellation of apps is already being treated as a panacea despite the United States broadly facing an absence of other necessary elements in any successful response: widespread, freely available testing and the hiring and training of tens of thousands of human contact tracers who can explain, cajole and make nuanced judgments. The story of the 14 housemates helps illustrate why. The mother who accompanied her daughter to the clinic that day was an undocumented immigrant, putting her in a category of patients who are often wary of having their personal information entered into databases. But as a longtime patient of St. John's, she was comfortable with staff interviewing her, Mangia said. Relationships are key, he said, especially in low-income black and Latino communities that are most vulnerable to the coronavirus, such as those in South L.A. "I've been doing this for 25 years. I find it hard to believe an undocumented patient would be comfortable with an app that alerts you to someone next to you that has been exposed to COVID," Mangia said. "That's a pretty big stretch." With many patients who don't speak English or have phones with fast internet connections, St. John's has had limited success in its ability to get them to use new apps for telehealth visits or appointment scheduling, he said. "We're finding if we use WhatsApp or FaceTime or just a plain old telephone call, it's much, much more effective," he said. But interviews take time and can tell you only as much as the interviewee knows. The speed of the virus' exponential spread has kindled a demand for new methods to automate and scale contact tracing. With a near-total duopoly in smartphone operating systems, Google and Apple, in theory, have the power to create a vastly comprehensive technology -- one that could tell you whether you need to worry about that stranger who stood too close to you at the bus stop. Relying on the short-area Bluetooth radios inside every smartphone, it would be immune to the whims of patients, able to capture interactions they forgot about and encounters with strangers. "You're never going to remember the people on Subway car 5 on the 5 p.m. train," said Ranu Dhillon, an epidemic-response specialist and instructor at Harvard Medical School. For every person that discovers they have been exposed through the app and reports that to a public health department, that's one more transmission chain that might not have otherwise been discovered, Dhillon said. But relying on an app is technocratic folly, said Allyson Pollock, a professor and director at the Newcastle University Center for Excellence in Regulatory Science. "It's very superficial. It appeals to the middle classes -- to the prosperous -- but it's actually no good if you think you can control an epidemic with it," she said. The bedrock of infectious disease containment, interview-based contact tracing is the tried-and-true strategy health departments must invest in and the public should put its faith in, experts said. Scores of health investigators trained to interview patients, call people they interacted with, knock on doors and flag down strangers in search of those who might have been exposed have been crucial in containing sexually transmitted diseases, measles and tuberculosis, as well as the outbreaks of SARS in 2003 and swine flu in 2009. Massachusetts was the first state to invest in an ambitious coronavirus contact tracing program, budgeting $44 million to hire an army of 1,000 contact tracers. Gov. Andrew Cuomo said April 22 that New York would partner with New Jersey and Connecticut to launch a similar program. On the same day, Newsom said California was revving up to train as many as 10,000 people. However, the country overall is woefully unprepared to deploy the estimated 100,000 to 300,000 contact tracers needed to tackle the coronavirus. An NPR survey of all 50 states found that the United States has just 7,602 workers doing contact tracing, with plans to bolster that number to 36,587. Overconfidence in tech solutions could detract from these needed efforts and provide a false sense of security to justify reopening local and national economies well before it is safe to do so, three experts in technology, law and policy, and epidemiology wrote in a paper for the Brookings Institution. The authors also warned that the apps could be exploited to sow chaos and disinformation and identify infected individuals without their consent. Apple and Google say the architecture they adopted puts privacy first. To keep users anonymous from one another, and anyone else attempting to keep tabs on them, the data broadcast and collected via Bluetooth will be encrypted, and the phones' identifiers will change every 15 minutes or so. Explicit user consent will be required before the tool starts collecting data on one's operating system. An individual diagnosed with COVID-19 would enter that information into a health agency app and consent to submitting a record of other phones that have been nearby, which would be stored on a remote server for 14 days. Any user whose phone appears on that list will receive a notification with information from health agencies about how to self-isolate and monitor for symptoms. With these safeguards, the plan has mostly won cautious approval from privacy advocates, including experts at the American Civil Liberties Union, despite widespread concerns about tech giants' hold over people's personal data. Still, the privacy concerns could keep enough people from opting into the system to prevent it from reaching the critical mass required to generate meaningful results. Nearly 60% of respondents to a recent Washington Post-University of Maryland poll said they would not participate in digital contact tracing, because of either privacy concerns or technological hurdles. With such low participation, the likelihood of an infectious contact being flagged by any app would be extremely low, said Farzad Mostashari, a national coordinator for health information technology at the Health and Human Services Department during the Obama administration. When two people come into proximity, the chance that both have the app would be "like rolling a double six," he said. The companies have not said how many users would need to opt in for the technology to work effectively. But an Oxford University study found that governments need 60% of the population to use a Bluetooth-based app to stop the spread of the coronavirus. In countries that have successfully used high-tech tools to suppress coronavirus outbreaks, they've generally been paired with widespread, old-school contact tracing methods, and sometimes with notable curtailment of personal privacy and punishments for defying public health edicts. In South Korea, for instance, cellphones ping with alerts whenever new cases are discovered nearby. Health authorities regularly publish the exact times and routes of infected persons' movements. People ordered into self-quarantine must download an app that alerts officials if they leave isolation; fines for violations could reach $2,500. There are signs of more countries taking this route. France has urged Apple and Google to weaken privacy restrictions, to no avail, and the United Kingdom's National Health Service has said it will create its own centralized system. Meanwhile, the limited nature of the data the apps generate will make it impossible for public health departments to centralize information and understand transmission chains and where exactly outbreaks are occurring, or to create a list of a patient's contacts for follow-up. Users who receive notifications may find it difficult to understand their real level of risk. The result could be a blizzard of false positives -- reports of exposure even when the possibility of transmission was very low, said Carl Bergstrom, a professor of biology at the University of Washington who coauthored the Brookings article. It's the context that lets trained contact tracers zero in on the meaningful interactions, Bergstrom said. "Humans talk you through your day," he said. "Who did you have conversations with? Did you say hi to your neighbor? Where was she standing? You work through that stuff. It allows humans to make nuanced judgments about what is considered an exposure." An Apple representative said in an email that exposure notification technology is only one element of response to COVID-19, though Apple and Google have heard from public health authorities that it can be a useful instrument. The representative said the companies acknowledged that learning the most effective methods of managing the virus is a constantly evolving process. The companies originally called the system a "contact tracing" tool, but have since rebranded it as "exposure notification." It's not that technology can't be helpful here, Mostashari said. Tools that directly assist with manual contact tracing efforts, such as training contact tracers, streamlining questions they should be asking and improving public health departments' ability to follow up with patients daily, might be helpful, he said. San Francisco, which is training librarians, city workers and medical students to do contact tracing, has partnered with Dimagi, a company developing open-source software for underserved communities, to digitize the workflow supporting contact tracing and monitoring those with COVID-19. But until the technology has proved its merit, Bergstrom said, there is every reason to be skeptical. "Maybe some tech solution will pass epidemiological muster, but right now, I don't see what that is," he said. "What we're cautioning is, let's not put all our hopes on this. Let's be transparent about what it can do." Caption: PHOTO: A RETURN to normality could hinge on California's ability to trace the trail of people exposed to the novel coronavirus in order to isolate and treat them. Above, medical professionals track data in Newington, Conn. PHOTOGRAPHER:Kassi Jackson Hartford Courant PHOTO:A SAN BERNARDINO County healthcare worker takes a sample at a drive-through coronavirus testing site at the fairgrounds in Victorville. Some see promise in digital exposure notification powered by smartphones. PHOTOGRAPHER:Irfan Khan Los Angeles Times 
May 2, 2020	By his second day in the hospital with COVID-19, Charles Pignal's mild cough and 102-degree fever had disappeared. Bored and "bouncing off the walls" of his room in the isolation ward at Singapore's National Center for Infectious Diseases, he felt like he could go out and play a set of tennis. The 42-year-old footwear executive told his mother on the phone, "I'll be out of here in a couple of days." But Pignal would test positive for the novel coronavirus for five more weeks, despite developing no further symptoms. He wasn't released until the 40th day after he first fell ill, when he finally tested negative two days in a row.  Cases like his are coming under increasing scrutiny as medical researchers worldwide puzzle over why the coronavirus -- which typically lasts about two to three weeks in the body -- appears to endure longer in some patients, even relatively young, healthy ones. With studies showing that asymptomatic patients can transmit the SARS-CoV-2 virus, understanding how the virus leaves the body is among the most urgent mysteries facing researchers as governments in the United States and across the world begin to reopen their economies. It marks a perilous time in the evolution of a virus that has killed more than 238,000 people. As restrictions on daily life begin to ease, people who don't know they are carrying the virus could unwittingly infect others. Patients who have recovered could have the virus in their systems weeks or months later. Although studies show that the average recovery time from COVID-19 is two weeks, and nearly all patients are virus-free within a month, "less than 1% to 2%, for reasons that we do not know, continue to shed virus after that," said Hsu Li Yang, a physician specializing in infectious diseases at the Saw Swee Hock School of Public Health at the National University of Singapore. In recent weeks, China and South Korea have reported that some patients who had recovered from COVID-19 tested positive again in follow-up visits. In extreme cases, patients in the Chinese city of Wuhan, where the outbreak began late last year, reportedly tested positive 70 days after recovery. Doctors in both countries said they didn't believe the patients had been reinfected, a worrisome possibility because of its implications for building widespread immunity to a disease for which there is no vaccine. They also had no evidence that the patients had infected others. South Korean doctors have played down the results, saying their standard genetic tests are designed to detect even small quantities of the virus and don't always distinguish between dead fragments of the virus and particles that are still infectious. Patients who were diagnosed as recovered could still have had fragments of SARS-CoV-2 in their systems. "Many of the so-called relapsed cases in South Korea probably reflect this phenomenon," Hsu said. Studies indicate that COVID-19 patients are most infectious at the start of the illness, when their viral load is highest, but researchers don't yet know whether people who shed the virus for several weeks remain contagious until the end. One study from Hong Kong found the virus' nucleic acid in the saliva of a patient whose symptoms had appeared 25 days earlier. A Southern California man who was infected aboard the Diamond Princess cruise ship took 29 days to test negative despite showing almost no symptoms. "If these people can continue to transmit the virus, that in part could fuel this pandemic," said Lokesh Kumar Sharma, an instructor at the Yale School of Medicine. In a study last month of 16 patients from Beijing who had mild infections, half of the patients continued to shed the virus even after their fevers, coughs and other symptoms went away. The study's authors, including Sharma, said the results were a reminder that recovered patients needed to be treated "as carefully as symptomatic patients." That poses a challenge for health systems dealing with growing epidemics. In Singapore, coronavirus infections have swelled from 1,000 at the start of April to more than 17,000 because of a giant outbreak among low-wage foreign workers. Authorities in the city-state are racing to expand temporary isolation facilities at hotels and convention centers for patients with mild symptoms so that hospital beds can be reserved for serious cases. As of Wednesday, at least 200 patients remained in hospitals or isolation facilities more than a month after admission. Pignal, a Frenchman who first developed symptoms in early March while flying from London to his home in Singapore, asked a doctor around his 15th day in the hospital whether he was still infectious even though he felt perfectly healthy. "He said, 'We don't know, but there's no evidence that what you're shedding is contagious,' " Pignal said. Yet daily nasal swabs continued to show the virus in his system. A negative test on Day 23 was nullified by a positive result the next day. He passed the time by reading and posting videos to his Instagram account, where he normally reviews books but suddenly found himself discussing his illness and confinement with thousands of new followers. "I feel absolutely great," he said in one post. "It's just that the virus is still positive, right here in my nose. It's not going anywhere.... I could be here another day, another week, another two weeks -- nobody knows. So that's really quite distressing." Then, told that beds in the isolation ward were scarce and that he was considered low risk, Pignal was moved to a hotel, where he shared a room with another infected person. But no doctors or nurses were there, tests were administered only every four days, and Pignal began to grow distressed as he entered his second month of confinement. "Frankly," he said in a post on Day 27, "I'm starting to get a little bit scared." His fiancee put together a lip-sync video featuring friends and family to cheer him up. He plowed through "The Brothers Karamazov." On April 11, Day 39, he was told he had tested negative and was administered a second test to confirm the result. The next morning brought relief: negative again. He was virus-free and was sent home. Three weeks later, he remains healthy. Caption: PHOTO: A HEALTHCARE WORKER collects a nasal swab from a migrant worker for coronavirus testing in Singapore. Authorities there are expanding temporary isolation facilities for patients with mild symptoms. PHOTOGRAPHER:Roslan Rahman AFP/Getty Images 
May 1, 2020	A middle-aged woman arrived at a tent set up by St. John’s Well Child and Family Center for coronavirus testing on April 13, her mother in tow. When both tested positive, clinic staff began to ask more questions. Can you give us the names of people you have been in close contact with? We need to make sure your family and friends and co-workers are safe, staffers explained. It turned out the women shared their two-bedroom apartment near Figueroa and 50th Street in South Los Angeles with two other families —14 household members total. Within the next two days, clinic staff were able to contact and persuade other household members to come in for testing, said Jim Mangia, chief executive of the nonprofit, which operates 18 health centers and school-based clinics in Los Angeles and Compton. One other housemate tested positive. With California and neighboring regions working to relax social distancing restrictions and allowing parts of life to return to normal, health authorities are racing to stop the next wave of infections before it starts. To avoid an explosion of new cases, Gov. Gavin Newsom has stressed the state’s ability to trace the trail of people exposed to the novel coronavirus in order to isolate and treat them. Many have pinned their hopes for a return to normal on a regime of digital contact tracing powered by Google and Apple smartphones. The two rival companies are working with public health authorities and university researchers to build groundwork into mobile devices for apps that would notify people if they were recently in proximity to someone who was infected. They plan to release the system in mid-May. Newsom has praised the rare joint effort, and President Trump has called the technology “an amazing thing” and “very accurate.” But all the attention on the Google-Apple platform has some public health professionals nervous. The job of contact tracing, they say, defies the notion of a sleek tech fix, requiring labor-intensive work by trained individuals. Those who’ve used it successfully to keep other diseases in check worry that an untested constellation of apps is already being treated as a panacea despite the United States broadly facing an absence of other necessary elements in any successful response: widespread, freely available testing and the hiring and training of tens of thousands of human contact tracers who can explain, cajole and make nuanced judgments. The story of the 14 housemates helps illustrate why. The mother who accompanied her daughter to the clinic that day was an undocumented immigrant, putting her in a category of patients who are often wary of having their personal information entered into databases. But as a longtime patient of St. John’s, she was comfortable with staff interviewing her, Mangia said. Relationships are key, he said, especially in low-income black and Latino communities that are most vulnerable to the coronavirus, such as those in South L.A. “I’ve been doing this for 25 years. I find it hard to believe an undocumented patient would be comfortable with an app that alerts you to someone next to you that has been exposed to COVID,” Mangia said. “That’s a pretty big stretch.” With many patients who don’t speak English or have phones with fast internet connections, St. John’s has had limited success in its ability to get them to use new apps for telehealth visits or appointment scheduling, he said. “We’re finding if we use WhatsApp or FaceTime or just a plain old telephone call, it’s much, much more effective,” he said. But interviews take time and can tell you only as much as the interviewee knows. The speed of the virus’ exponential spread has kindled a demand for new methods to automate and scale contact tracing. With a near-total duopoly in smartphone operating systems, Google and Apple, in theory, have the power to create a vastly comprehensive technology — one that could tell you whether you need to worry about that stranger who stood too close to you at the bus stop. Relying on the short-area Bluetooth radios inside every smartphone, it would be immune to the whims of patients, able to capture interactions they forgot about and encounters with strangers. “You’re never going to remember the people on Subway car 5 on the 5 p.m. train,” said Ranu Dhillon, an epidemic-response specialist and instructor at Harvard Medical School. For every person that discovers they have been exposed through the app and reports that to a public health department, that’s one more transmission chain that might not have otherwise been discovered, Dhillon said. But relying on an app is technocratic folly, said Allyson Pollock, a professor and director at the Newcastle University Centre for Excellence in Regulatory Science. “It’s very superficial. It appeals to the middle classes — to the prosperous — but it’s actually no good if you think you can control an epidemic with it,” she said. The bedrock of infectious disease containment, interview-based contact tracing is the tried-and-true strategy health departments must invest in and the public should put its faith in, experts said. Scores of health investigators trained to interview patients, call people they interacted with, knock on doors and flag down strangers in search of those who might have been exposed have been crucial in containing sexually transmitted diseases, measles and tuberculosis, as well as the outbreaks of SARS in 2003 and swine flu in 2009. Massachusetts was the first state to invest in an ambitious coronavirus contact tracing program, budgeting $44 million to hire an army of 1,000 contact tracers. Gov. Andrew Cuomo said April 22 that New York would partner with New Jersey and Connecticut to launch a similar program. On the same day, Gov. Newsom said California was revving up to train as many as 10,000 people. However, the country overall is woefully unprepared to deploy the estimated 100,000 to 300,000 contact tracers needed to tackle the coronavirus. An NPR survey of all 50 states found that the United States has just 7,602 workers doing contact tracing, with plans to bolster that number to 36,587. Overconfidence in tech solutions could detract from these needed efforts and provide a false sense of security to justify reopening local and national economies well before it is safe to do so, three experts in technology, law and policy, and epidemiology wrote in a paper for the Brookings Institution. The authors also warned that the apps could be exploited to sow chaos and disinformation and identify infected individuals without their consent. Apple and Google say the architecture they adopted puts privacy first. To keep users anonymous from each other, and anyone else attempting to keep tabs on them, the data broadcast and collected via Bluetooth will be encrypted, and the phones’ identifiers will change every 15 minutes or so. Explicit user consent will be required before the tool starts collecting data on one’s operating system. An individual diagnosed with COVID-19 would enter that information into a health agency app and consent to submitting a record of other phones it has been close to, which would be stored on a remote server for 14 days. Any user whose phone appears on that list will receive a notification with information from health agencies about how to self-isolate and monitor for symptoms. With these safeguards, the plan has mostly won cautious approval from privacy advocates, including experts at the American Civil Liberties Union, despite widespread concerns about tech giants’ hold over people’s personal data. Still, the looming specter of privacy concerns could keep enough people from opting into the system to prevent it from reaching the critical mass required to generate meaningful results. Nearly 60% of respondents to a recent Washington Post-University of Maryland poll said they would not participate in digital contact tracing, because of either privacy concerns or technological hurdles. With such low participation, the likelihood of an infectious contact being flagged by any app would be extremely low, said Farzad Mostashari, a former national coordinator for health information technology at the Health and Human Services Department during the Obama administration. When two people come into proximity, the chance that both have the app would be “like rolling a double six,” he said. The companies have not said how many users would need to opt in for the contact tracing technology to work effectively. But an Oxford University study found that governments need 60% of the population to use a Bluetooth-based app to stop the spread of the coronavirus. In countries that have successfully used high-tech tools to suppress coronavirus outbreaks, they’ve generally been paired with widespread, old-school contact tracing methods, and sometimes with notable curtailment of personal privacy and punishments for defying public health edicts. In South Korea, for instance, cellphones ping with alerts whenever new cases are discovered nearby. Health authorities regularly publish the exact times and routes of infected persons’ movements. People ordered into self-quarantine must download an app that alerts officials if they leave isolation; fines for violations could reach $2,500. There are signs of more countries taking this route. France has urged Apple and Google to weaken privacy restrictions, to no avail, and the United Kingdom’s National Health Service has said it will create its own centralized system. Meanwhile, the limited nature of the data the apps generate will make it impossible for public health departments to centralize information and understand transmission chains and where exactly outbreaks are occurring, or to create a list of a patient’s contacts for follow-up. Users who receive notifications may find it difficult to understand their real level of risk. The result could be a blizzard of false positives — reports of exposure even when the possibility of transmission was very low, said Carl Bergstrom, a professor of biology at the University of Washington who coauthored the Brookings article. It’s the context that lets trained contact tracers zero in on the meaningful interactions, Bergstrom said. “Humans talk you through your day,” he said. “Who did you have conversations with? Did you say hi to your neighbor? Where was she standing? You work through that stuff. It allows humans to make nuanced judgments about what is considered an exposure.” An Apple spokesperson said in an email that exposure notification technology is only one element of response to COVID-19, though Apple and Google have heard from public health authorities that it can be a useful instrument. The spokesperson said the companies acknowledged that learning the most effective methods of managing the virus is a constantly evolving process. The companies originally called the system a “contact tracing” tool, but have since rebranded it as “exposure notification.” It’s not that technology can’t be helpful here, Mostashari said. Tools that directly assist with manual contact tracing efforts, such as training contact tracers, streamlining questions they should be asking and improving public health departments’ ability to follow up with patients daily, might be helpful, he said. San Francisco, which is training librarians, city workers and medical students to do contact tracing, has partnered with Dimagi, a company developing open-source software for underserved communities, to digitize the workflow supporting contact tracing and monitoring those with COVID-19. But until the technology has proved its merit, Bergstrom said, there is every reason to be skeptical. “Maybe some tech solution will pass epidemiological muster, but right now, I don’t see what that is,” he said. “What we’re cautioning is, let’s not put all our hopes on this. Let’s be transparent about what it can do.”
May 1, 2020	Einar Tomasson's phone and emails had been virtually silent for weeks -- until April 22. It had been nearly two months since the World Health Organization declared the novel coronavirus outbreak a pandemic, and Iceland's film commissioner had, like Hollywood and the rest of the world, been waiting out the quiet days of uncertainty as all film and television production halted. But then a day earlier, during Netflix's first-quarter earnings call, content chief Ted Sarandos mentioned that the streaming giant was in production in Iceland and South Korea. "We're taking some of those key learnings about how we run those productions today and applying that to our plans to start our productions around the world," he said.  All of a sudden, Tomasson was fielding queries from producers and studios in Los Angeles, New York and Europe. "They're trying to figure out which markets to enter first," Tomasson said from Kopavogur. "They're trying to map different locations to know which are safe and secure and where they can enter first with potential projects." With Hollywood in involuntary hibernation, awaiting the all-clear from public health officials, entertainment companies are frantic to turn the lights on; Sarandos' comments offered a spark for an industry in the dark. Iceland, with its sparsely populated but spacious North Atlantic geography, advanced filming infrastructure, production incentives and experienced crews, had long been an attractive shooting location. In recent years, its dramatic landscape of volcanoes, geysers, lava fields and massive glaciers has served as the memorable backdrop for "Game of Thrones," "Prometheus" and "Thor: The Dark World." Now Iceland, with its wide-open spaces and vigilant testing, is enjoying another wave of interest from filmmakers, at a time when the ability to contain the spread of the coronavirus has become as important as tax incentives, infrastructure and facilities. Iceland, which has not been on total lockdown but has mandated social distancing of two meters (about 61/2 feet) and gatherings no larger than 20 people, is known for its aggressive testing. According to Bloomberg, as of April 21 it had tested 12% of its population of 364,134 (comparable to Riverside). Iceland's health authorities report that as of Wednesday, the country had 1,797 confirmed cases and 10 deaths. Lori Balton, a Los Angeles-based location scout who has been to Iceland multiple times and brought the Darren Aronofsky film "Noah" there, said that while she remains cautious, the country appears to tick all the right boxes when it comes to both infrastructure and health measures. "There is pressure coming from all areas to get production back up again," Balton said. For her, Iceland offers a potentially attractive option. "Now is a great time to shoot there because there are absolutely no tourists. So if you were out in the country, it would probably be one of the safest places on the planet to be working." Film commissions and production companies worldwide have begun touting their advantages as government restrictions start to ease up. Many are sending out emails describing health measures and listing filming conditions and options. "Israel, due to the very early lockdown, is considered to be one of the 3 safest countries in Europe today," says an email from MV Productions, an Israeli service. The Slovak Film Commission also sent an email to location scouts: "Slovakia is considered as one of the safest countries with low-risk level during the pandemic." But in Iceland, according to Tomasson, a big thaw for foreign filmmakers is on the way. On May 4, gathering limits in the country will increase from 20 to 50 -- potentially going up to 100 in June. Tomasson and members of Iceland's film industry have presented the government with a host of proposals intended to capitalize on the country's small population and expansive geography. On the table: Foreign crews could take charter flights into the country and be put up at a designated hotel for testing. If the results are negative, crews will be allowed to go onto remote locations, where they will remain in lockdown for the duration of the shoot. Masks and gloves would be deployed on set, as would medical staff. Crews could be tested at the end of shoots before returning home. Leifur Dagfinnsson, chief executive and owner of Truenorth, a production house that has worked on such films as "Star Wars: The Force Awakens," as well as the first joint Netflix production, "The Valhalla Murders," says he has been advising the government about positioning Iceland as a first stop post-coronavirus destination. "I think the health authorities have dealt with this pandemic quite well," he said. "My discussions with the government basically suggest what I call controlled tourism," where tourism infrastructure from hotels to transport, now at a virtual standstill, would be deployed for filming. Another proposal is to temporarily increase the tax rebate from 25% to 35%. "That would have an immediate impact in getting more business and productions to Iceland," Dagfinnsson said. He noted that "the Icelandic krona has been devalued 15%," making it cheaper to film there. Iceland's high profile as a film destination began almost two decades ago as a move to diversify the economy beyond fishing and farming. At the time, two big-name films had shot in the country, 2001's "Lara Croft: Tomb Raider" and the 2002 James Bond flick "Die Another Day." Iceland's rebate program was just 12%. Tomasson was a project manager for the Invest in Iceland Agency, which managed the rebate program. Tomasson, a former business and marketing executive, became film commissioner in 2004 and took a proactive approach. He asked for a bigger budget that would enable him to travel to Los Angeles and meet with studios and producers. "I said, 'I need to make people more aware of why I need to go out there,' " he recalled. On his first trip, in 2004, he went to a location trade show and met with one independent producer and an executive from Miramax. "I was just learning," he said. He and his team soon realized that cultivating location managers and scouts was key. "We figured out through our conversations that those were the people who were kind of the first creatives on the ground," said Hlynur Gudjonsson, trade commissioner, Consulate General of Iceland in New York. They began bringing location scouts on trips to Iceland. Tomasson also traveled frequently to various trade shows and symposiums to explain the benefits and advantages of Iceland. The industry received a dramatic boost when Clint Eastwood filmed his 2006 film "Flags of Our Fathers" in Iceland. "It was a big production that had, you know, up to 1,000 people on location," Tomasson said. "And there was shooting here for almost a month. It showed that we can do big-scale movies." The circumstances of Eastwood landing in Iceland, however, were rather serendipitous. Eastwood's location manager, Kokayi Ampah, was on the Big Island of Hawaii in April 2005 scouting the black sand beaches with little luck. The main deterrents were nesting turtles and lush flora and fauna. "We were going to shoot battle scenes with tanks that would tear it up," he said. When, on a break to fill up his car, he mentioned to the gas attendant that he was looking for black sand beaches. The attendant recommended he check out Iceland. "I don't know how he knew about Iceland, but when I got back to the hotel, I looked it up on my computer," recalled Ampah. Two weeks later he was touring the country's beaches with the producer, art director and visual effects coordinator, and by summer they were shooting. Much has changed since then. In 2009 the country's tax rebate increased to 20%, rising to 25% in 2017. Several large-scale, professional productions houses have sprouted up like Truenorth as well as a number of post-productions outfits including visual effects firm RVX in Reykjavik. Since 2001, international filming has dramatically increased from two productions to 18 in 2014. Last year there were 11. While filming his 2012 film "Prometheus," director Ridley Scott told Icenews, "It is possible to find similar landscapes elsewhere in the world. But here it is so rough and 'Jurassic-like' and that proved decisive. Iceland is a massively beautiful country." Gudjonsson says he and his colleagues continue to adapt. The past six years they realized that their efforts should focus on television. "We began to understand that it would become a bigger part of the business, which it has." Indeed, Netflix's current production is "Katla," a supernatural volcano drama by the Icelandic director Baltasar Kormakur. A Netflix spokesperson confirmed the show is a mostly Icelandic crew but declined to comment further on the project or the company's filming in Iceland. Many in Hollywood and beyond view this production as a possible northern light forward to rolling back into production. Iceland and its film industry have weathered a number of knocks, including the collapse of its economy in 2008. Tomasson and others are betting they will successfully withstand the coronavirus and emerge stronger than ever. After all, not too long ago, the country was hardly on Hollywood's radar. Recalling his first meetings with industry executives, Tomasson said, "We basically were like knocking on the door and saying, 'Hi, we're from Iceland. Can we tell you what we have to offer?' Now it's more like, 'Hi, we're in town in a couple of weeks. Can we meet and discuss a couple of projects?' " Caption: PHOTO: ICELAND'S rugged geography shows up in the 2013 film "The Secret Life of Walter Mitty." Spacious and sparsely populated, the country is enjoying a new wave of interest from filmmakers ready to begin production. PHOTOGRAPHER:Wilson Webb 20th Century Fox
Apr 30, 2020	Despite the enthusiasm of people desperate to get back to work, California officials still have a lot to do before they can meet the technological benchmarks that Gov. Gavin Newsom set to reopen the economy and lift restrictions on daily life. Much of the four-stage plan Newsom released this week relies on vast changes in the state’s ability to both test and track new cases of coronavirus infection. To this point, California, a global center of high-tech innovation and capital, has lagged behind other states in building up those most basic elements of isolating the virus. State officials said they were testing more than 20,000 people a day — a third of the minimal daily tests needed to reopen. Newsom said a Minnesota healthcare company, OptumServe, would open 86 new testing sites by Monday, mainly in inland and poorer urban communities that have had much less testing than more affluent areas. But he has declined requests from The Times to release details about the sites, including their locations. One expected site in Humboldt County probably won’t be operational for weeks, according to health authorities there. And full-scale testing will probably be easier to accomplish than the second key benchmark: having widespread contact tracing in place to follow the chains of infection and isolate them. This will require an army of trained volunteers to find out where an infected person caught the virus and to whom they might have passed it. In a state of 40 million, this would be a massive undertaking, relying on residents’ willingness to cooperate with the new intrusion into their privacy — an already controversial notion, as Google, Apple and other tech companies found as they waded in with tracing apps. Kimon Drakopoulos, professor of data science and operations at USC, said quick adaptation of cellphone contact tracing programs that have been used in South Korea and other countries would be critical to reopening society. “I would say it would be an order of magnitude safer,” he said. The other key elements of the plan: hospitals must have the capacity for a surge of new cases, and the supply of personal protective equipment needs to ramp up drastically to supply tens of millions of masks a month, not just for healthcare workers but also for teachers, students and workers. With all that hypothetically in place, California’s strategy to get to Stage 2 is essentially like stepping into a pool with the water up to your knees before taking a plunge. Schools, day-care centers, retail businesses, offices, factories and certain public places open first, with modified hygiene and social distancing measures. This is going to mean major changes in the way merchants do business. Restaurants are probably going to have to reduce the number of tables, and retailers may need to limit how many people go into the store at one time or offer curbside pickup for nonessential items. Barbershops may need to keep every other chair empty. Bonnie Subnick, who owns a beauty salon in Huntington Beach, said that she will do whatever it takes to reopen but that the social distancing requirements will bring changes. “It’ll be a totally different world for us going back,” she said. “I think between that and wearing gloves and masks it’s just going to be not as personable.” When this will happen is not clear. Newsom has talked about “weeks, not months.” He said the new school year could start as early as July but has given no definitive timeline other than that. Once the initial reopening occurs, public health officials then need time to assess whether the measures are working. If coronavirus cases rebound and public health officials cannot trace and isolate outbreaks, the state gets out of the pool and returns to Stage 1, with the current stay-at-home order. If officials can keep the virus from running rampant, the state moves to Stage 3, opening up hair and nail salons, gyms, movie theaters, in-house church services, weddings and sporting events without live audiences. Big in-person events such as crowded Dodgers games, concerts and conventions come last, in Stage 4, once effective treatment for the virus and/or a vaccine is developed. Dr. Robert Kim-Farley, a medical epidemiologist and infectious-disease expert at the UCLA Fielding School of Public Health, said he expects Stage 2 to occur in mid-June through July, after a significant decline in cases. Kim-Farley expects Stage 3 to occur around August or September, and Stage 4 may not come until the middle or latter part of 2021. Loosening of the rules may come earlier or later, depending on the number of coronavirus cases, he said. But just getting to stages 2 and 3 is what many business owners and employees are eager for. Alex Maslansky, co-owner of Stories Books & Cafe in Echo Park for 12 years, said he has “really only a couple of weeks” left before being forced to permanently close. His desperately needed loan from the Paycheck Protection Program, or PPP, has not arrived. “I’m done counting on anymore outside help,” Maslansky said. “If we don’t get those PPP funds, it’s over.” Newsletter Get our free Coronavirus Today newsletter Sign up for the latest news, best stories and what they mean for you, plus answers to your questions. Sign Me Up You may occasionally receive promotional content from the Los Angeles Times. The bookstore continued to receive and fill online orders since it closed in mid-March. On Monday, the cafe reopened for to-go orders as a way to generate more revenue. Maslansky, 40, believes his business has survived this long only because of the generosity of patrons. “The support from everyone has been extremely touching and incredibly helpful,” he said. “Even with that, it’s just not enough.” Subnick, 54, expects demand will be high when she reopens her salon in Huntington Beach after more than a month off from styling her clients’ hair. Two days before the salon’s reopening, Subnick said, her cleaning crew will go in to disinfect the entire area. Stylists will also be asked to clean out their stations and to sanitize their equipment. Capes and smocks will immediately be placed in the salon’s washer and dryer after every client. The salon has already spent about $700 on disposable masks, hand sanitizer, disinfectant and a plastic shield that will be installed at the front desk, Subnick said. Subnick said she’s determined to hold on to her dream business, refusing to even consider closing for good. More coverage on coronavirus in California  “I’ll die before that happens,” she said. “I finally got to this point. I’m just hanging on by a thread, but I’ll be the last man standing.” Another big question is whether some parts of California will reopen before others. Some rural areas have seen relatively few cases and are clamoring for Newsom to allow them to ease restrictions. Other harder-hit areas, such as Los Angeles County and the San Francisco Bay Area, are urging more caution. And some counties are pushing to move forward on their own timelines under plans at odds with Newsom’s order. Modoc County, one of California’s least populated, with fewer than 9,000 residents in the northeast corner of the state, plans to allow all businesses, schools and churches to reopen starting Friday, as long as people inside them can stay six feet from one another, according to a statement signed by county officials. Restaurants and bars would be allowed to host diners, but only at half of capacity. Modoc County is one of four California counties to not report a single case of coronavirus infection. Chabria reported from Sacramento, Mozingo and Campa from Southern California, and Lin from San Francisco. Times staff writer Priscella Vega contributed to this report. 
Apr 30, 2020	By his second day in the hospital with COVID-19, Charles Pignal’s mild cough and 102-degree fever had disappeared. Bored and “bouncing off the walls” of his room in the isolation ward at Singapore’s National Center for Infectious Diseases, he felt like he could go out and play a set of tennis. The 42-year-old footwear executive told his mother on the phone, “I’ll be out of here in a couple of days.” But Pignal would test positive for the coronavirus for five more weeks, despite developing no further symptoms. He wasn’t released until the 40th day after he first fell ill, when he finally tested negative two days in a row. Cases like his are coming under increasing scrutiny as medical researchers worldwide puzzle over why the coronavirus — which typically lasts about two to three weeks in the body — appears to endure longer in some patients, even relatively young, healthy ones. With studies showing that asymptomatic patients can transmit the SARS-CoV-2 virus, understanding how the virus leaves the body is among the most urgent mysteries facing researchers as governments in the United States and across the world begin to reopen their economies. It marks a perilous time in the evolution of a virus that has killed more than 210,000 people. As social distancing eases, people who don’t know they are carrying the virus could unwittingly infect others. Patients who have recovered could have the virus in their systems weeks or months later. Although studies show that the average recovery time from COVID-19 is two weeks, and nearly all patients are virus-free within a month, “less than 1% to 2%, for reasons that we do not know, continue to shed virus after that,” said Hsu Li Yang, an infectious diseases physician at the Saw Swee Hock School of Public Health at the National University of Singapore. In recent weeks, China and South Korea have reported that some patients who had recovered from COVID-19 tested positive again in follow-up visits. In extreme cases, patients in the Chinese city of Wuhan, where the outbreak began late last year, reportedly tested positive 70 days after recovery. Doctors in both countries said they didn’t believe the patients had been reinfected, a worrisome possibility because of its implications for building widespread immunity to a disease for which there is no vaccine. They also had no evidence that the patients had infected others. South Korean doctors have played down the results, saying that their standard genetic tests are designed to detect even small quantities of the virus and don’t always distinguish between dead fragments of the virus and particles that are still infectious. Patients who were diagnosed as recovered could still have had fragments of SARS-CoV-2 in their system. “Many of the so-called relapsed cases in South Korea probably reflect this phenomenon,” Hsu said. Studies indicate that COVID-19 patients are most infectious at the start of the illness, when their viral load is highest, but researchers don’t yet know whether people who shed the virus for several weeks remain contagious until the end. One study from Hong Kong found the virus’ nucleic acid in the saliva of a patient whose symptoms appeared 25 days earlier. A Southern California man who was infected aboard the Diamond Princess cruise ship took 29 days to test negative despite showing almost no symptoms. “If these people can continue to transmit the virus, that in part could fuel this pandemic,” said Lokesh Kumar Sharma, an instructor at the Yale School of Medicine. In a study Sharma co-authored last month of 16 patients from Beijing who had mild infections, half the patients continued to shed the virus even after their fevers, coughs and other symptoms went away. The study’s authors said the results were a reminder that recovered patients needed to be treated “as carefully as symptomatic patients.” That poses a challenge for health systems dealing with growing epidemics. In Singapore, COVID-19 infections have swelled from 1,000 at the start of April to more than 15,000 due to a giant outbreak among low-wage foreign workers. Authorities in the city-state are racing to expand temporary isolation facilities at hotels and convention centers for patients with mild symptoms so that hospital beds can be reserved for more serious cases. As of Wednesday, at least 200 patients remained in hospitals or isolation facilities more than a month after admission. Pignal, a Frenchman who first developed symptoms while flying from London to his home in Singapore in early March, asked a doctor around his 15th day in the hospital whether he was still infectious even though he felt perfectly healthy. “He said we don’t know, but there’s no evidence that what you’re shedding is contagious,” Pignal said. Yet the daily nasal swabs continued to show the virus was in his system. A negative test on Day 23 was nullified by a positive result the next day. He passed the time by reading and posting videos to his Instagram account, where he normally reviews books but suddenly found himself discussing his illness and confinement with thousands of new followers.  So the bad news is I was diagnosed with coronavirus yesterday....The good news is more time to read more books and binge on the new Narcos. I’m hugely grateful for the amazing care I’ve been receiving. This morning, I’m feeling a bit better and will be posting my next review tomorrow. Stay tuned. #coronavirus A post shared by Book Reviews & Recommendations (@charleslangip) onMar 4, 2020 at 5:09pm PST  “I feel absolutely great,” he said in one post. “It’s just that the virus is still positive, right here in my nose. It’s not going anywhere .... I could be here another day, another week another two weeks, nobody knows. So that’s really quite distressing.” Then, told that beds in the isolation ward were scarce and he was considered low risk, Pignal was moved to a hotel where he shared a room with another infected person. But there were no doctors or nurses there, tests were administered only every four days, and Pignal began to grow distressed as he entered his second month of confinement. The spartan decor and security guards roaming the grounds added to his sense of isolation. “Frankly,” he said in a post on Day 27, “I’m starting to get a little bit scared.” His fiancee put together a lip-sync video featuring friends and family to cheer him up. He plowed through “The Brothers Karamazov.” On April 11, Day 39, he was told he had tested negative and administered a second test to confirm the result. The next morning brought relief: negative again. He was virus-free and sent home. Three weeks later, he remains healthy. 
Apr 30, 2020	Einar Tómasson’s phone and emails had been virtually silent for weeks — until last Wednesday. It had been nearly two months since the World Health Organization declared the novel coronavirus outbreak a global pandemic, and Iceland’s film commissioner had, like Hollywood and the rest of the world, been waiting out the quiet days of uncertainty as all film and television production halted. But then, a day earlier, during Netflix’s first-quarter earnings call, content chief Ted Sarandos mentioned that the streaming giant was currently in production in Iceland and South Korea. “We’re taking some of those key learnings about how we run those productions today and applying that to our plans to start our productions around the world,” he said. All of a sudden, Tómasson was fielding queries from producers and studios in Los Angeles, New York and Europe. “They’re trying to figure out which markets to enter first,” Tómasson said in an interview from Kópavogur. “They’re trying to map different locations to know which are safe and secure and where they can enter first with potential projects.” With Hollywood in involuntary hibernation, awaiting the all-clear from public health officials, entertainment companies are frantic to turn the lights on; Sarandos’ comments offered a spark for an industry in the dark. Iceland, with its sparsely populated but spacious North Atlantic geography, advanced filming infrastructure, production incentives and experienced crews, had long been an attractive shooting location. In recent years, its dramatic landscape of volcanoes, geysers, lava fields and massive glaciers served as the memorable backdrop for “Game of Thrones,” “Prometheus” and “Thor: The Dark World.” Now Iceland, with its wide-open spaces and vigilant testing, is enjoying another wave of interest from filmmakers, at a time when the ability to contain the spread of the coronavirus has become as important as tax incentives, infrastructure and facilities. Iceland, which has not been on total lockdown but has mandated social distancing of two meters and gatherings no larger than 20 people, is known for its aggressive testing. According to Bloomberg, as of April 21, it had tested 12% of its population of 364,134 (comparable to the city of Riverside). Iceland’s health authorities report that as of Wednesday, the country had 1,797 confirmed cases and 10 deaths. Lori Balton, a Los Angeles-based location scout who has been to Iceland multiple times and brought the Darren Aronofsky film “Noah” there, said while she remains cautious, the country appears to tick all the right boxes when it comes to both infrastructure and health measures. “There is pressure coming from all areas to get production back up again,” Balton said. For her, Iceland offers a potentially attractive option. “Now is a great time to shoot there because there are absolutely no tourists. So if you were out in the country, it would probably be one of the safest places on the planet to be working.” Film commissions and production companies worldwide have begun touting their advantages as government restrictions start to ease up. Many are sending out emails describing health measures and listing filming conditions and options. “Israel, due to the very early lockdown, is considered to be one of the 3 safest countries in Europe today,” says an email from MV Productions, an Israeli service. The Slovak Film Commission also sent an email to location scouts: “Slovakia is considered as one of the safest countries with low-risk level during the pandemic.” But in Iceland, according to Tómasson, a big thaw for foreign filmmakers is on the way. On May 4, gathering limits in the country will increase from 20 to 50 — potentially going up to 100 in June. Tómasson and members of Iceland’s film industry have presented the government with a host of proposals intended to capitalize on the country’s small population and expansive geography. On the table: Foreign crews could take charter flights into the country and be put up at a designated hotel for testing. If the results are negative, crews will be allowed to go onto remote locations, where they will remain in lockdown for the duration of the shoot. Masks and gloves would be deployed on set, as would medical staff. Crews could be tested at the end of shoots before returning home. Leifur Dagfinnsson, chief executive and owner of Truenorth, a production house that has worked on such films as “Star Wars: The Force Awakens,” as well as the first joint Netflix production, “The Valhalla Murders,” says he has been advising the government about positioning Iceland as a first stop post-coronavirus destination. “I think the health authorities have dealt with this pandemic quite well,” he said. “My discussions with the government basically suggest what I call controlled tourism,” where tourism infrastructure from hotels to transport, now at a virtual standstill, would be deployed for filming. Another proposal is to temporarily increase the tax rebate from 25% to 35%. “That would have an immediate impact in getting more business and productions to Iceland,” Dagfinnsson said. He noted that “the Icelandic krona has been devalued 15%,” making it cheaper to film there. Iceland’s high profile as a film destination began almost two decades ago as a move to diversify the economy beyond fishing and farming. At the time, two big-name films had shot in the country, 2001’s “Lara Croft: Tomb Raider” and the 2002 James Bond flick “Die Another Day.” Iceland’s rebate program was just 12%. Tómasson was a project manager for the Invest in Iceland Agency, which managed the rebate program. Tómasson, a former business and marketing executive, became film commissioner in 2004 and took a proactive approach. He asked for a bigger budget that would enable him to travel to Los Angeles and meet with studios and producers. “I said, ‘I need to make people more aware of why I need to go out there,’” he recalled. On his first trip, in 2004, he went to a location trade show and met with one independent producer and an executive from Miramax. “I was just learning,” he said. He and his team soon realized that cultivating location managers and scouts was key. “We figured out through our conversations that those were the people who were kind of the first creatives on the ground,” said Hlynur Gudjonsson, trade commissioner, Consulate General of Iceland in New York. They began bringing location scouts on trips to Iceland. Tómasson also traveled frequently to various trade shows and symposiums to explain the benefits and advantages of Iceland. The industry received a dramatic boost when Clint Eastwood filmed his 2006 film “Flags of Our Fathers” in Iceland. “It was a big production that had, you know, up to 1,000 people on location,” Tómasson said. “And there was shooting here for almost a month. It showed that we can do big-scale movies.” The circumstances of Eastwood landing in Iceland, however, were rather serendipitous. Eastwood’s location manager, Kokayi Ampah, was on the Big Island of Hawaii in April 2005 scouting the black sand beaches with little luck. The main deterrents were nesting turtles and lush flora and fauna. “We were going to shoot battle scenes with tanks that would tear it up,” he said. When, on a break to fill up his car, he mentioned to the gas attendant that he was looking for black sand beaches. The attendant recommended he check out Iceland. “I don’t know how he knew about Iceland, but when I got back to the hotel, I looked it up on my computer,” recalled Ampah. Two weeks later he was touring the country’s beaches with the producer, art director and visual effects coordinator, and by summer they were shooting. Much has changed since then. In 2009 the country’s tax rebate increased to 20%, rising to 25% in 2017. Several large-scale, professional productions houses have sprouted up like Truenorth, as well as a number of post-productions outfits including visual effects firm RVX in Reykjavik. Since 2001, international filming has dramatically increased from two productions to 18 in 2014. Last year there were 11. While filming his 2012 film “Prometheus,” director Ridley Scott told Icenews, “It is possible to find similar landscapes elsewhere in the world. But here it is so rough and ‘Jurassic-like’ and that proved decisive. Iceland is a massively beautiful country.” Gudjonsson says he and his colleagues continue to adapt. The past six years they realized that their efforts should focus on television. “We began to understand that it would become a bigger part of the business, which it has.” Indeed, Netflix’s current production is “Katla,” a supernatural volcano drama by the Icelandic director Baltasar Kormákur. A Netflix spokesperson confirmed the show is a mostly Icelandic crew but declined to comment further on the project or the company’s filming in Iceland. Many in Hollywood and beyond view this production as a possible northern light forward to rolling back into production. Iceland and its film industry have weathered a number of knocks, including the collapse of its economy in 2008. Tómasson and others are betting they will successfully withstand the coronavirus and emerge stronger than ever. After all, not too long ago, the country was hardly on Hollywood’s radar. Recalling his first meetings with industry executives, Tómasson said, “We basically were like knocking on the door and saying, ‘Hi, we’re from Iceland. Can we tell you what we have to offer?’ Now it’s more like, ‘Hi, we’re in town in a couple of weeks. Can we meet and discuss a couple of projects?’” 
Apr 29, 2020	Among the many ways that the coronavirus crisis has exposed America's decline as a world leader, one that has gotten insufficient attention is the federal government's decline as a supporter of scientific research. One can look at the consequences in several different ways. One certainly is the collapse of the American healthcare infrastructure in the face of a challenge that could more easily have been met with even minimally competent federal technological leadership. Another is the government's ceding responsibility for basic research to private enterprise, which doesn't like to do much of it. Then there's the politicization of science, which undermines institutional research and drains government programs of talented researchers.  The topic of America's scientific preparedness has been receiving an airing lately against the backdrop of the pandemic. Conservative economist Alex Tabarrok calls "the failure to spend on actually fighting the virus with science ... mind boggling" and "a stunning example of our inability to build." (He frets that we spend too much on defense and "welfare," meaning Social Security, Medicare and Medicaid and not enough on "innovation.") Venture financier Marc Andreessen points to a "smug" absence of desire to invest in education, housing and other public goods. Kevin Drum of Mother Jones, who pointed us to Tabarrok's analysis, aptly observes that the culprit in America's pathetically slow rollout of COVID-19 testing hasn't been a lack of scientific research and development, but infrastructure and technology spending: "It is disgraceful that we've been so slow to roll this out, but it's not really related to R&D." He's right about that, but the nation's approach to the "D" of R&D isn't entirely unrelated to its approach to the "R." The record shows that the U.S. government has been increasingly indifferent, even hostile, to spending on basic scientific research, the seed corn of the possible development of treatments and a cure for COVID-19. The trend dates back decades. But certainly it has picked up steam under President Trump, who has systematically stripped federal agencies of their scientific authority and, during the current crisis, seems to have paid little mind to the scientific advice he's been given. Trump's anti-immigrant policies also threaten to choke off one of the traditional advantages of U.S. science, which is its receptiveness to students and scientists from abroad. As we've reported, since at least 2000, scientists have become increasingly concerned about "a growing U.S. innovation deficit," as a 2015 report by MIT put it. The report listed four landmark scientific breakthroughs of the prior year: the first spacecraft landing on a comet; the discovery of the Higgs boson, a new fundamental particle; the development of the world's fastest supercomputer; and new research in plant biology pointing to new ways to meet global food needs. Then came the punchline: None was a U.S.-led achievement. The first two were the products of European-led consortia, and credit for the second two belonged to the Chinese -- "reflecting that nation's emergence as a science and technology power." The report attributed the absence of U.S. leadership in these innovations "in part to declining public investment in research." In a follow-up report a year later, researchers from a dozen top research institutions examined tangible results from basic science, including an Ebola vaccine and a practical demonstration of the principle underlying quantum computing and ultra-secure quantum communications. One field in which basic research was shortchanged, the MIT report noted, was the fight against infectious disease. Writing in 2015, the authors focused on Ebola, the most dangerous viral disease of the time, but their conclusions could apply almost as well to COVID-19. The problem, the authors suggested, was an overreliance on "privately funded research in pharmaceutical and biotechnology companies. The private sector was successful at devising "drugs, tests and procedures needed to combat the diseases of the developed world," but "existing priorities and incentives are not sufficient to prepare for diseases that emerge by jumping from animals to humans in impoverished parts of the developing world." Creating drugs and tests for known diseases is applied research. But "if we are to be prepared for the next viral epidemic, we need to invest in the basic research to characterize and understand all known viruses with the potential to be highly infectious," the MIT report warned. Its words reverberate today. Because private commercial companies seldom invest in research they can't reliably link to their core businesses, it falls to the public sector to fund basic research -- for the same reason that government made the initial investments in basic infrastructure such as interstate highways, Hoover Dam and the internet. Since about 1986, however, U.S. government investment in R&D has stagnated at around $100 billion a year, according to the nonprofit Information Technology and Innovation Foundation (with a brief spike to $126 billion in 2009, due to the post-crash stimulus). Business R&D, however, increased from $70 billion in 1980 to $300 billion in 2016, an increase of 329%. It's also true that, while America's funding of basic research has remained stagnant in dollars and declined in relation to the burgeoning growth in its economy, the absolute numbers remain impressive. The $100 billion a year spent by U.S. government agencies is more than that of any other country's public sector, according to UNESCO. China's outlay of roughly $80 billion from the public sector and $300 billion from business adds up to about 2% of its gross domestic product spent on R&D of all forms, compared with 2.7% in the U.S. Yet if we measure a country's commitment to R&D in relation to the size of its economy, the U.S. lands behind much smaller countries, including Germany (2.9%), Japan (3.4%), Israel (4.2%) and South Korea (4.3%). In the U.S., basic research has long been hampered by political narrow-mindedness and ideological roadblocks. In subsequent years, Republicans in Congress have tried to stifle research into climate change, presumably at the behest of their patrons in the fossil fuel industry. President George W. Bush blocked research into embryonic stem cells, a bow to Christian conservatives who saw it as a violation of religious principles. (Bush's action prompted California votes to create a $3-billion state stem cell program in 2004.) Could a more robust approach to funding basic science have placed the U.S. in the lead in the fight against COVID-19? All that one can say is that allowing spending to stagnate didn't help. And in this crisis, we need all the help we can get. -- Keep up to date with Michael Hiltzik. Follow @hiltzikm on Twitter, see his Facebook page or email michael.hiltzik@latimes.com. 
Apr 28, 2020	Among the many ways that the coronavirus crisis has exposed America’s decline as a world leader, one that has gotten insufficient attention is the federal government’s decline as a supporter of scientific research. One can look at the consequences in several different ways. One certainly is the collapse of the American healthcare infrastructure in the face of a challenge that could more easily have been met with even minimally competent federal technological leadership. Another is the government’s ceding responsibility for basic research to private enterprise, which doesn’t like to do much of it. Then there’s the politicization of science, which undermines institutional research and drains government programs of talented researchers. Increasingly, as U.S. science investment stagnates, some of these breakthroughs—both in fundamental research and in practical applications—are occurring outside the United States. MIT, “The Future Postponed” The topic of America’s scientific preparedness has been receiving an airing lately against the backdrop of the pandemic. Conservative economist Alex Tabarrok calls “the failure to spend on actually fighting the virus with science...mind boggling” and “a stunning example of our inability to build.” (He frets that we spend too much on defense and “welfare,” meaning Social Security, Medicare and Medicaid and not enough on “innovation.”) Venture financier Marc Andreessen points to a “smug” absence of desire to invest in education, housing and other public goods. It’s fair to say that higher spending on basic research wouldn’t necessarily have produced a more effective response to the coronavirus, since the virus is novel and many of its aspects still confound medical researchers. Private enterprise, moreover, has been energized to research and, if warranted, manufacture treatments or a vaccine for the disease. If that happens, the power of American pharmaceutical manufacturing may show itself. Kevin Drum of Mother Jones, who pointed us to Tabarrok’s analysis, aptly observes that the culprit in America’s pathetically slow rollout of COVID-19 testing hasn’t been a lack of scientific research and development, but infrastructure and technology spending: “It is disgraceful that we’ve been so slow to roll this out, but it’s not really related to R&D.” He’s right about that, but the nation’s approach to the “D” of R&D isn’t entirely unrelated to its approach to the “R.” The record shows that the U.S. government has been increasingly indifferent, even hostile, to spending on basic scientific research, the seed corn of the possible development of treatments and a cure for COVID-19. The trend dates back decades. But certainly it has picked up steam under President Trump, who has systematically stripped federal agencies of their scientific authority and, during the current crisis, seems to have paid little mind to the scientific advice he’s given. Trump’s anti-immigrant policies also threaten to choke off one of the traditional advantages of U.S. science, which is its receptiveness to students and scientists from abroad. In just the last few days, according to Politico, the Trump administration cut off funding for a project supported by National Institutes of Health studying how coronaviruses jump from bats to humans, as the virus responsible for the current pandemic apparently did. The project involved collaboration with a scientific instituted in Wuhan, China, the city where the pandemic originated. As we’ve reported, since at least 2000, scientists have become increasingly concerned about “a growing U.S. innovation deficit,” as a 2015 report by MIT put it. The report listed four landmark scientific breakthroughs of the prior year: the first spacecraft landing on a comet; the discovery of the Higgs boson, a new fundamental particle; the development of the world’s fastest supercomputer; and new research in plant biology pointing to new ways to meet global food needs. Then came the punchline: None was a U.S.-led achievement. The first two were the products of European-led consortia, and credit for the second two belonged to the Chinese — “reflecting that nation’s emergence as a science and technology power.” The report attributed the absence of U.S. leadership in these innovations “in part to declining public investment in research.” In a follow-up report a year later, researchers from a dozen top research institutions examined tangible results from basic science, including an Ebola vaccine and a practical demonstration of the principle underlying quantum computing and ultra-secure quantum communications. “Increasingly, as U.S. science investment stagnates, some of these breakthroughs — both in fundamental research and in practical applications — are occurring outside the United States,” the researchers reported. One field in which basic research was shortchanged, the MIT report noted, was the fight against infectious disease. Writing in 2015, the authors focused on Ebola, the most dangerous viral disease of the time, but their conclusions could apply almost as well to COVID-19. The problem, the authors suggested, was an overreliance on “privately funded research in pharmaceutical and biotechnology companies. The private sector was successful at devising “drugs, tests, and procedures needed to combat the diseases of the developed world,” but “existing priorities and incentives are not sufficient to prepare for diseases that emerge by jumping from animals to humans in impoverished parts of the developing world.” Creating drugs and tests for known diseases is applied research. But “if we are to be prepared for the next viral epidemic, we need to invest in the basic research to characterize and understand all known viruses with the potential to be highly infectious,” the MIT report warned. Its words reverberate today. Because private commercial companies seldom invest in research they can’t reliably link to their core businesses, it falls to the public sector to fund basic research — for the same reason that government made the initial investments in basic infrastructure such as interstate highways, Hoover Dam and the internet. Since about 1986, however, U.S. government investment in R&D has stagnated at around $100 billion a year, according to the nonprofit Information Technology and Innovation Foundation (with a brief spike to $126 billion in 2009, due to the post-crash stimulus). Business R&D, however increased from $70 billion in 1980 to $300 billion in 2016, an increase of 340%. It’s fair to say that higher spending on basic research wouldn’t necessarily have produced a more effective response to the coronavirus pandemic, since the virus is novel and many aspects of the infection it produces in humans still confounds medical researchers. Private enterprise, moreover, has been energized to research and, if warranted, manufacture treatments or a vaccine for the disease. It’s also true that, while America’s funding of basic research has remained stagnant in dollars and declined in relation to the burgeoning growth in its economy, the absolute numbers remain impressive. The $100 billion a year spent by U.S. government agencies is more than that of any other country’s public sector, according to UNESCO. China’s outlay of roughly $80 billion from the public sector and $300 billion from business adds up to about 2% of its gross domestic product spent on R&D of all forms, compared to 2.7% in the U.S. Yet if we measure a country’s commitment to R&D in relation to the size of its economy, the U.S. lands behind much smaller countries, including Germany (2.9%), Japan (3.4%), Israel (4.2%) and South Korea (4.3%). In the U.S., basic research has long been hampered by political narrow-mindedness and ideological roadblocks. The U.S. abandoned its plan to build the world’s most powerful atom-smasher, thus maintaining a lead first established at UC Berkeley with Ernest Lawrence’s invention of the cyclotron, when Congress pulled the plug in 1993 after spending $2 billion. Nobel physicist Steven Weinberg, a leader of the superconducting super collider project, recalled one telling encounter with a congressman who opposed the SSC. “He said that he wasn’t against spending on science, but that we had to set priorities. I explained that the SSC was going to help us learn the laws of nature, and I asked if that didn’t deserve a high priority. I remember every word of his answer. It was ‘No.’” The quest for the biggest, best atom-smasher was won by the Large Hadron Collider, which was built by a European team and achieved the breakthrough discovery of the Higgs boson. In subsequent years, Republicans in Congress have tried to stifle research into climate change, presumably at the behest of their patrons in the fossil fuel industry. George W. Bush blocked research into embryonic stem cells, a bow to Christian conservatives who saw it as a violation of religious principles. (Bush’s action prompted California votes to create a $3-billion state stem cell program in 2004.) Could a more robust approach to funding basic science have placed the U.S. in the lead in the fight against COVID-19? All that one can say is that allowing spending to stagnate didn’t help. And in this crisis, we need all the help we can get.
Apr 28, 2020	Los Angeles movie studio Millennium Films was just days away from starting production on its Megan Fox horror movie “Till Death” in Sofia, Bulgaria, before fears of the coronavirus shut everything down. Millennium President Jeffrey Greenstein doesn’t know when the film will get up and running at the company’s Nu Boyana Film Studios. But he knows that when it happens, film sets will feel very different from the pre-COVID-19 era. Health and safety rules will be stricter. Social distancing standards could limit how workers interact with actors, filmmakers and department heads. Crew members may even have to wear protective masks on set. “There’s a lot of uncertainty,” Greenstein said. “But the thing we need to all be thinking about is being as responsible as possible.” Studio executives, independent producers, unions, government agencies and insurance specialists have begun to map out a return to what had been, until recently, a new golden age of film production. Entertainment companies are desperate to roll the cameras again once they get the green light from public health officials. The stakes are high for the major studios, including Walt Disney and Warner Bros., which need to feed their nascent streaming platforms with more shows and films. Over the last few weeks, the major studios have held meetings internally and with production service professionals to assess what a return to film and TV sets might look like. Shoots may return sooner in countries less hard-hit by the virus, such as Iceland, or that have less restrictive shutdowns and no post-travel quarantines such as Sweden or Denmark, where some producers have already laid out guidelines for filming. “If there’s reliable testing, and people can come to work and be given a decent amount of social distance, I believe protocols will evolve to create workplaces where crews, who are hungry to get back to work, will feel safe.” Tom Rothman, Sony Pictures’ motion picture group chairman Big movies that would normally have 300 people on set at once are finding ways of reducing that number to fewer than 75 by having people work in staggered groups and doing more work remotely, according to one studio executive not authorized to comment publicly. Production may resume with smaller-scale movies and shows, such as sitcoms, that can be made with smaller crews, tightly controlled sets and minimal travel. Stars accustomed to in-person wardrobe departments may have to dress themselves. Makeup artists and hair dressers, who would normally touch up actors between takes, will probably have to observe shoots from iPads. Sanitation crews will be brought on to disinfect sets and equipment throughout the day. Companies are also considering having crews effectively quarantine on studio property or in hotels near sets during production. Studios don’t know when public health guidelines will allow them to resume production, nor do they know what types of social distancing restrictions governments will require. But Tom Rothman, chair of Sony Pictures Motion Picture Group, said he’s confident companies will be able to address health and safety concerns. “I don’t really imagine you’re going to be doing giant scenes with thousands of extras right off the bat,” he said. “But if there’s reliable testing, and people can come to work and be given a decent amount of social distance, I believe protocols will evolve to create workplaces where crews, who are hungry to get back to work, will feel safe.” Executives are anticipating productions could start up gradually around September in some places, with planning crews beginning set construction as soon as June in places like Georgia, which is one of the busiest filmmaking hubs outside of California. Locally, FilmLA, the nonprofit group that handles film permits for the city and county of Los Angeles, said it is expecting a “first planning meeting” with public health officials in early May to discuss how to safely resume filming. A key consideration will be to address concerns in neighborhoods that film crews might spread disease. “The film industry has always been a massive piece of the economy of this region, so figuring out a safe way to bring filming back is going to be critical to recovery,” said FilmLA President Paul Audley. Hollywood unions are playing an important role in the discussions. The Directors Guild of America is working with other guilds and unions and employers to put together a “comprehensive guide to help us all return safely to work,” DGA President Thomas Schlamme said recently. The DGA has named “Contagion” film director Steven Soderbergh to lead a committee, consulting with “top epidemiologists in the field,” to examine issues filmmakers face and to make recommendations to the union’s board. DGA National Executive Director Russell Hollander said “it is paramount that any return to set, whenever it may be, prioritizes the safety of industry workers. We are examining the complex issues involved through a methodical, science-based approach which includes consultation with top epidemiologists. Our work is still in its early stages, and while there are still so many unanswered questions to contend with, we know that a big part of it will be looking at testing.” Even amid the pandemic, states and countries continue to vie for productions by showing they are gearing up for safe filming. Netflix said it was already shooting in countries such as Iceland and South Korea, where even though some restrictions on gathering in large numbers exist, widespread testing and quicker responses to outbreaks has contained the virus spread. Several proposals for filming are circulating around Hollywood, including some from the European Institute for Health and Safety in Film Industry that outline protocols for testing, distancing on sets and protective equipment for makeup artists and other crew members. The institute requires contact-less fever testing for all crew members and catering by takeout, among other measures. Some filmmakers anticipate they will have to double up roles. A director, for example, might have to double as a cinematographer, for example, to reduce the number of people on set. Over the years, crews have increased in size, often using multiple cameras to increase efficiency. But John Lindley, elected in March to lead the International Cinematographers Guild, said he doesn’t think staffs need to shrink. Cinematographers can work remotely or camera operators can work at least six feet from the cast, Lindley said. “I’m not convinced we have to give up job categories to get this done,” he said. A crucial issue, he said, is to have a unified approach. “What is happening at the moment is a lot of smart people with good intentions are striking out on their own,” Lindley said. “To really succeed in figuring out how to work safely, we are going to need all the different guilds and unions and employers and insurance companies, to come together.” Some producers are weighing whether to clean filming kits overnight or quarantine crews near film sets. Budgets are likely to swell to account for increased cleaning costs, insurance costs and to factor in shutdowns. “It’s going to be an interesting test of creative thinking and ingenuity,” said John Sloss, founder of Cinetic Media, a New York-based management, advisory and sales firm for the film industry. “I don’t think there’s a standard way in which this is all going to progress.” Frank Patterson, president of moviemaking hub Pinewood Atlanta Studios, said he and his staff have spent the last six weeks devising new health and safety improvements with their studio customers. The sprawling 18-stage facility, home of blockbuster productions from Marvel, Sony and Warner Bros, has taken a major hit from the coronavirus shutdown. Typically, up to 6,000 people work on the lot daily. A gradual change to normalcy will require improvements to studio security, facilities and profession behavior, he said. Pinewood, for example, is planning to ban unnecessary visitors and set up health screening stations at entrances. The studio also plans to introduce “microbial reduction” systems at production offices, install advanced hand-washing areas and provide mobile sanitation stations for crews. During shooting, crew members will be kept more separate than normal. There will have to be more closed sets with limited staff. “It may slow down production, but it will make it safer,” said Patterson. “How we organize crews and how we organize those work routines will be really important to keeping all workers healthy and safe.” Tyler Perry‘s Atlanta-based studio has proposed sequestering smaller crews on the former army base, a location for Walt Disney’s “Black Panther,” as well as rapid coronavirus testing and cutting film shoots for a TV series to under 3 weeks. A huge question for producers is how they will get their productions insured should someone get sick from COVID-19 on set, shutting down production and potentially raising the threat of lawsuits. “Assume everyone will adopt the best practices but unless you have cast insurance, you can’t go into production.” Brad Krevoy, chief executive of Motion Picture Corporation of America “Assume everyone will adopt the best practices, but unless you have cast insurance, you can’t go into production,” said Brad Krevoy, chief executive of L.A.-based Motion Picture Corporation of America, which makes Christmas movies for Netflix and the Hallmark Channel. Many hope the federal government will create a backstop for insurers as happened after 9/11 so they can once again protect producers from liabilities that come from filming. To get insurers on board, who now won’t cover losses linked to the pandemic, producers are considering separating actors and crew with glass or crews working in shifts. Still, Krevoy is planning to deliver his batch of Christmas films on time despite the disruption and is looking to Canada as the place he will be able to restart shooting. “To be a producer you have to be born an optimist,” said Krevoy. “We will deliver for Christmas.”
Apr 26, 2020	It is a big promise from Silicon Valley to a nation looking for ways to be freed from home confinement: Smartphones could discreetly detect those who may have COVID-19 and nudge them to quarantine, blunting renewed outbreaks as Americans start to once again venture out. But as tech firms lay the foundation for a potentially massive digital contact-tracing infrastructure, Washington is grappling with whether such technology can work without becoming a hulking, invasive surveillance system. It is a vexing problem that could leave Americans exposed to another vast intrusion in their everyday lives by governments or big tech companies. Apple and Google, which are leading the efforts to develop tracking apps, have pledged that participation would be voluntary and include guardrails to protect confidentiality. But the inability of Congress to pass meaningful data-privacy rules — and the poor track record of many tech firms in protecting privacy — heightens the risk, lawmakers and outside experts say. “If information about who has COVID-19 gets into the wrong hands, it could lead to things that are harmful,” said Rep. Anna G. Eshoo (D-Menlo Park). She is among several lawmakers calling on the Trump administration to place strict limits on what contact-tracing data can be collected and shared. The White House has so far issued none, even as it consults behind closed doors with tech firms on the development of a tracing infrastructure. “Without a national privacy law, this is a black hole,” Eshoo said. The technology, which Google and Apple plan to launch in mid-May, enables people to have their phone track the Bluetooth signals emitted by the phones of every other person with whom they come in close contact. If a person tests positive for COVID-19, the disease caused by the coronavirus, an app provided by their public health department would send an alert to all other users of the app with whom the infected person had contact over the previous two weeks. Identities would not be revealed, just the day of the contact, how long it lasted, and the strength of the Bluetooth signal. Privacy experts voice two big fears: Such a system would only be useful if it’s widely used. It’s unclear if tracing technology can be effective at all if the entire system is anonymous, voluntary and inhibits the creation of large surveillance databases. So once a system is launched, there will inevitably be pressure to require some people to use it. And if the system is widely used — and especially if it’s connected to a database — there will be a huge risk that data would live on well beyond the pandemic, giving governments and corporations easy access to information about people’s movements and healthcare needs that eclipses what they now have. “What I am afraid of is some folks in the tech community will use this huge public need as a way to be invasive with private data and create a beachfront in the health sector,” said Sen. Mark R. Warner (D-Va.), a technology entrepreneur himself. “It is not like the big platforms are coming at this with clean hands.” Before the pandemic hit, Warner was already investigating collaborations tech firms were forging with big healthcare and fitness companies. Access to healthcare data could enable tech companies to build profiles of people’s ailments and needs, exposing them to targeted marketing campaigns, and also to potential discrimination by employers, insurance companies, landlords or others. Existing healthcare privacy rules don’t protect Americans from many of those intrusions, and even those regulations are being eased to give medical professionals flexibility as they deal with the deluge of COVID-19 patients. The potential for tech companies to aggressively move into this area has many privacy analysts unnerved. “These companies have been lobbying all along to get the government to look the other way while they grab our healthcare information to more effectively monetize it,” said Jeffrey Chester, executive director of the Center for Digital Democracy, a group that advocates for digital privacy. “We have to get a handle on this pandemic, but we also have to look at the motivations here.” On the other side of the debate are people like Stewart Baker, who served as assistant secretary of Homeland Security in the George W. Bush administration and, earlier, as general counsel of the National Security Agency. “If you asked Americans in February 2020, are they prepared to have the governor of their state tell them to go home, stay home and lose their jobs, everyone would have said no. Yet here we are,” Baker said. Baker is urging tech companies to embrace the type of monitoring system deployed in Singapore, where the government is collecting large amounts of Bluetooth-generated data on the movements of citizens and their social contacts and notifying anyone with a contact who later turns out to be infected. “It is a trivial intrusion on our liberty as citizens when you compare it to all the other things during this pandemic where we have said, ‘This is necessary, we will do it,’” he said. Lawmakers who have taken the lead in investigating the exploitation and abuse of user data by big tech firms worry that the point of view Baker expresses is gaining currency in the White House, as officials meet behind closed doors to develop a strategy for contact tracing. They warn of implications that could last far beyond the pandemic. When the idea of contact-tracing apps first emerged, there were optimistic predictions that America could lean on its tech pioneers to help safely reopen the economy without the privacy intrusions embedded in tracking apps in China, Taiwan and South Korea. That optimism, however, is fast fading. Even countries such as France and Germany, which adhere to strict privacy laws, are drafting plans for data-collection systems that step around those rules so public health bureaucracies can identify who went where, when they went there and — most importantly — who they may have come in contact with along the way. Some prominent computer scientists involved in building contact-tracing tools in Europe are alarmed by the direction that governments there are headed. The group, called the DP-3T Project, had been pushing a privacy-oriented approach similar to what Apple and Google have discussed — alert systems that keep the data collected anonymous and largely confined to the phones of users who opt in. By contrast, the contact-tracing tools some European leaders are now pursuing “can easily be turned into an instrument of surveillance with considerable human rights implications,” the group warned in a recent white paper. The apps that American technology firms are developing are voluntary in theory, but companies could make their use a condition of employment, said Ashkan Soltani, a security researcher and former chief technologist for the Federal Trade Commission during the Obama administration. “They alert the employer whether you have been in contact with someone who has been infected,” Soltani said. But, he said, the technology is full of gaps and could potentially label employees at risk when it should not. A Bluetooth signal might be unaware that an infected individual who appeared to be in close proximity to an employee was on the other side of a wall, for example. Nor would the technology be able to register that a person identified as being at risk was wearing protective gear when they had a brush with contagion while shopping. Newsletter Get our Essential Politics newsletter The latest news, analysis and insights from our bureau chiefs in Sacramento and D.C. Sign Me Up You may occasionally receive promotional content from the Los Angeles Times. In some nations that are already aggressively relying on digital tracking, the technologies are far more intrusive. Taiwan is collecting personal insurance and passport travel records, as it tracks down who might be infected and orders them to quarantine. Countries that use such systems are also digitally tagging people with different color codings, which determine whether they are permitted to move freely in public. Officials at Apple and Google say their infrastructure is designed to avoid such intrusion. Yet Washington is full of questions about whether it can be effective if the companies abide by that pledge — and also whether these companies with a dismal record on privacy can be trusted to be in the driver’s seat at all. Google and Apple, at least, are acutely aware of the optics. On Friday, the companies distributed a FAQ to consumers stressing that the data accumulated by them will be anonymous, impossible to monetize and will stop being collected after the pandemic. The assurances have yet to assuage lawmakers such as Republican Sen. Josh Hawley of Missouri, a fierce critic of technology firms, who sent a letter to the CEOs of both companies last week. “Americans are right to be skeptical of this project,” he wrote. “Too often, Americans have been burned by companies who calculated that the profits they could gain by reversing privacy pledges would outweigh any later financial penalty.” Hawley challenged the executives to hold themselves personally liable financially if the firms break their privacy pledge. So far, the executives have not made that commitment. 
Apr 26, 2020	The COVID-19 pandemic has claimed more than 202,000 lives and thrown the global economy into chaos. It’s making the world more dangerous, too. In the Middle East, Iranian gunboats have harassed U.S. warships in the Persian Gulf, and Iranian-backed militias have attacked U.S. bases in Iraq. In Asia, China has continued its drive to take control of the South China Sea, sinking a Vietnamese fishing boat and sending an oil survey ship into Malaysian waters. North Korea, which hates to be overlooked, has fired off missiles and remained strangely silent about rumors that its leader, Kim Jong Un, was dead or dying. Even Russia, with its own surge of coronavirus cases, has resumed buzzing U.S. and NATO aircraft over the Baltic and Mediterranean seas. “You’re definitely seeing a time when these countries see an opening to do things that we would normally combat instantly — both rhetorically and perhaps militarily — when we’re off-balance,” said John McLaughlin, a former acting director of the CIA. “I’m sure they all consider us not only distracted, but militarily less adroit right now than we normally would be,” he said in a recent podcast. Not surprisingly, Trump administration officials insist they’re not distracted, although the nation’s medical and economic catastrophes have understandably taken most of their attention. President Trump responded to Iran’s recent actions with a bellicose tweet, saying he had instructed the Navy “to shoot down and destroy any and all Iranian gunboats if they harass our ships at sea.” Pentagon officials said a tweet is not an order, and they have not changed their rules of engagement, which allow U.S. ships to fire in self-defense. The Navy said it sent three warships into the South China Sea to reinforce freedom of navigation, a long-standing Pentagon mission in the resource-rich, strategically crucial region. But only one country has an aircraft carrier operating in the western Pacific now, and it’s China. The two U.S. carriers in the region were confined to port after crew members were stricken with COVID-19: the Theodore Roosevelt in Guam and the Ronald Reagan in Japan. With the contagion spreading on land and sea, the economy in free fall and unrelenting chaos in the White House, why would anyone be distracted? The long-term effects of the pandemic look even more alarming: a global depression that could persist for years, more failed states and unremitting big-power competition. China has been trying to win friends and escape blame for the novel coronavirus’ origin by doling out aid and medical supplies in an effort so heavy-handed it has created a backlash in some countries. But don’t take any comfort in that. America’s shambolic response to the crisis has put a huge dent in our global image as a competent cutting-edge nation. The United States and China “are two extremes, neither of which can be a model for Europe,” German Foreign Minister Heiko Maas told local reporters, an extraordinary statement from a U.S. ally that American democracy looks no better than Chinese authoritarianism. Now add one more problem: a global leadership vacuum. Unlike during most major international crises of the postwar world, this time the U.S. president has gone missing. “This is the first post-American crisis of our time. There’s no U.S. leadership,” Thomas C. Wright, a foreign policy scholar at the Brookings Institution, told me. “The administration isn’t engaging with its allies except to worry about whether China is making gains.” Normally the Group of 7 big industrial democracies would coordinate solutions to the pandemic and efforts to speed an economic recovery. But under this year’s G-7 chairman, one Donald J. Trump, that’s not happening. The president has held two video meetings with his G-7 colleagues — but he’s been the odd man out, asking the others to join him in calling COVID-19 the “Wuhan virus” and saying he would halt U.S. funding for the World Health Organization. They declined. If our battle with COVID-19 lasts much longer, our economy will likely recover more slowly than those of South Korea, Japan or Germany, all of which have managed the pandemic more successfully. And in a global recession compounded by mounting disorder, everybody loses. “The longer the pandemic goes on, the more the world will change,” Wright warned. “The real risk is that a long crisis will eviscerate international cooperation … and leave a more anarchic world.” How bad can it get? Foreign policy scholars compare this moment to two critical periods in the last century. After World War II ended in 1945, the United States, the only major power with its economy intact, led a massive recovery effort, producing decades of relative peace and prosperity not only for itself and its European allies, but for its defeated enemies, Germany and Japan. After World War I ended in 1918, with an influenza pandemic similar to the coronavirus, no joint recovery effort was launched. Nations went their own way, embracing nationalist politics and protectionist economics, and the next global cataclysm soon followed. This moment, alas, looks more like 1918, a time when the United States withdrew from the world and international disorder increased. And we know how well that turned out. 
Apr 26, 2020	Offering a rare and surprising bright spot in the COVID-19 pandemic, Vietnam began easing its nationwide lockdown Thursday following an aggressive containment campaign that has meant few infections and no deaths in an Asian nation initially believed to be at great risk from the coronavirus. The communist-ruled country has sealed its borders, quarantined masses of people, used soldiers and police to track down potential infections and fined social media users for spreading misinformation. After deploying the full arsenal of a single-party state, the sprawling nation of 95 million people went eight days without recording a new infection until Friday, when two students tested positive upon returning from Japan. But despite their effectiveness, Vietnam's measures are not easily replicable. Its intolerance of dissent and ability to mobilize an entire security and political apparatus -- steps more common in China -- meant its campaign met little of the pushback seen in Western liberal democracies.  And experts caution that the fight isn't over. Starting Thursday, Vietnam allowed residents across the country to resume small gatherings and restarted buses, taxis and regular domestic flights for the first time in three weeks. But with much of Southeast Asia still under lockdown, people must continue wearing masks in public, gatherings of more than 20 remain off-limits, schools will stay closed for several more weeks and international flights are still grounded, officials said. "Many parts of the world are still infected, so the risk is not over for us," Prime Minister Nguyen Xuan Phuc said. Since the government imposed a partial nationwide lockdown April 1, Vietnam saw only a modest increase in coronavirus cases to 270, with all but 45 recovered and no fatalities. The numbers are stunningly low considering that Vietnam -- which shares a border with China -- was among the first countries where the virus spread and lacks the resources of governments more celebrated for their containment strategies, such as South Korea's widespread testing and Taiwan's aggressive digital surveillance. Its results stand out even more as other Southeast Asian countries struggle. Wealthy Singapore, once regarded as a model, has seen infections skyrocket among migrant workers living in overcrowded dormitories. Indonesia, the largest country in the region, initially ignored the threat and now has the most COVID-19 deaths in Asia after China. "It's pretty amazing," said Huong Le Thu, a senior analyst at the Australian Strategic Policy Institute. "I'm cautious of calling Vietnam a success story. It's too early to be out of the woods. But the measures have been quite effective so far." Experts credit Vietnam's early, decisive steps: swiftly banning nearly all travel from China, suspending schools in mid-January even before recording any infections, quarantining tens of thousands of people and employing the extensive Communist Party apparatus to communicate distancing measures and trace the contacts of COVID-19 patients. The response was made possible by a Leninist one-party system that is often criticized for maintaining secrecy, silencing dissent and trampling on individual rights -- but that has proved adept at tackling health crises since it was the first nation to stamp out the SARS epidemic nearly two decades ago. "Only a few countries can control and mobilize resources on this scale," said Le Hong Hiep, a Vietnam analyst at the ISEAS-Yusof Ishak Institute in Singapore. "In Vietnam they can do it, and partly because of a political system that's designed to respond to such situations. It's not always good, but in a crisis it helps." The sweeping measures often led to large numbers of people being isolated over just a handful of infections. In February, when a group of Vietnamese workers tested positive for the virus after returning from Wuhan, the Chinese city that was the source of the outbreak, authorities locked down their entire community of 10,000 people for three weeks -- the first mass quarantine outside China. Last month, more than 300 medical staff, police, soldiers and civilians were deployed to track down the contacts of a British pilot believed to be the origin of a coronavirus cluster at a bar in Ho Chi Minh City. Authorities sealed off several businesses and quarantined thousands of people in their apartments. In recent weeks, as imported infections surged across Asia, Vietnam placed tens of thousands of incoming travelers -- whether they showed COVID-19 symptoms or not -- in quarantine at army barracks, university dorms and other public facilities. As precautionary steps, they were aggressive, perhaps overly so. But they kept pressure off Vietnam's hospitals and allowed contact tracers to focus on a relatively small number of clusters. "What we know now is this virus spreads from pre-symptomatic people, and if you're only monitoring people when they get symptoms it's too late," said Todd Pollack, a Harvard Medical School infectious disease specialist who leads a health initiative in the Vietnamese capital, Hanoi. American officials have been struck by Vietnam's low infection rate. Experts from the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention in Vietnam -- who have provided assistance in testing, data analysis and contact tracing -- say they "don't have any indication that those numbers are false," Dr. John MacArthur, the center's director in Thailand, said on a conference call with reporters this month. Last week, state media reported that tests of more than 1,000 shoppers in Hanoi markets and more than 19,000 travelers at airports and train stations in Ho Chi Minh City found no infections, bolstering the belief that the outbreak has been contained. Its success has allowed Vietnam to begin playing the role of benefactor -- a subtle challenge to its sometime rival China -- donating hundreds of thousands of masks to Europe and its Southeast Asian neighbors. This month Hanoi expedited the shipment to the U.S. of nearly half a million protective medical suits manufactured at a DuPont factory in Vietnam, earning a thank-you tweet from President Trump. Analysts say Vietnam's turbulent relationship with China influenced its response to the outbreak. Days after China reported the first death from the virus Jan. 11 -- and before any cases had surfaced in Vietnam -- the Health Ministry held a high-level meeting with U.S. and World Health Organization officials to lay out a containment plan. At the core of Vietnam's concern was the suspicion "that the scale of the outbreak was much higher than what is officially reported by China," Le said. That skepticism turned out to be well founded as China was accused of suppressing initial reports about how fast the virus was spreading. Last week, the U.S. cybersecurity company FireEye reported that hackers linked to the Vietnamese government had attempted to break into the email accounts of Chinese emergency management officials and authorities in Wuhan beginning in January -- ostensibly to learn more about the outbreak. "Vietnam understands China better than some other countries," Le said. "Because of the similar political systems, they know how China works, and they know the risks and downsides of such systems. They know there may be problems in China's data. So in dealing with China, Vietnam is very cautious." Caption: PHOTO: PEOPLE IN HANOI walk by a poster that reads "Fighting COVID-19." Vietnam sealed its borders and quarantined masses of people, measures hard to replicate. PHOTOGRAPHER:Hau Dinh Associated Press 
Apr 26, 2020	The COVID-19 pandemic has claimed more than 202,000 lives and thrown the global economy into chaos. It's making the world more dangerous, too. In the Middle East, Iranian gunboats have harassed U.S. warships in the Persian Gulf, and Iranian-backed militias have attacked U.S. bases in Iraq.  In Asia, China has continued its drive to take control of the South China Sea, sinking a Vietnamese fishing boat and sending an oil survey ship into Malaysian waters. North Korea, which hates to be overlooked, has fired off missiles and remained strangely silent about rumors that its leader, Kim Jong Un, was dead or dying. Even Russia, with its own surge of coronavirus cases, has resumed buzzing U.S. and NATO aircraft over the Baltic and Mediterranean seas. "You're definitely seeing a time when these countries see an opening to do things that we would normally combat instantly -- both rhetorically and perhaps militarily -- when we're off-balance," said John McLaughlin, a former acting director of the CIA. "I'm sure they all consider us not only distracted, but militarily less adroit right now than we normally would be," he said in a recent podcast. Not surprisingly, Trump administration officials insist they're not distracted, although the nation's medical and economic catastrophes have understandably taken most of their attention. President Trump responded to Iran's recent actions with a bellicose tweet, saying he had instructed the Navy "to shoot down and destroy any and all Iranian gunboats if they harass our ships at sea." Pentagon officials said a tweet is not an order, and they have not changed their rules of engagement, which allow U.S. ships to fire in self-defense. The Navy said it sent three warships into the South China Sea to reinforce freedom of navigation, a long-standing Pentagon mission in the resource-rich, strategically crucial region. But only one country has an aircraft carrier operating in the western Pacific now, and it's China. The two U.S. carriers in the region were confined to port after crew members were stricken with COVID-19: the Theodore Roosevelt in Guam and the Ronald Reagan in Japan. With the contagion spreading on land and sea, the economy in free fall and unrelenting chaos in the White House, why would anyone be distracted? The long-term effects of the pandemic look even more alarming: a global depression that could persist for years, more failed states and unremitting big-power competition. China has been trying to win friends and escape blame for the novel coronavirus' origin by doling out aid and medical supplies in an effort so heavy-handed it has created a backlash in some countries. But don't take any comfort in that. America's shambolic response to the crisis has put a huge dent in our global image as a competent, cutting-edge nation. The United States and China "are two extremes, neither of which can be a model for Europe," German Foreign Minister Heiko Maas told local reporters, an extraordinary statement from a U.S. ally that American democracy looks no better than Chinese authoritarianism. Now add one more problem: a global leadership vacuum. Unlike during most major international crises of the postwar world, this time the U.S. president has gone missing. "This is the first post-American crisis of our time. There's no U.S. leadership," Thomas C. Wright, a foreign policy scholar at the Brookings Institution, told me. "The administration isn't engaging with its allies except to worry about whether China is making gains." Normally the Group of 7 big industrial democracies would coordinate solutions to the pandemic and efforts to speed an economic recovery. But under this year's G-7 chairman, one Donald J. Trump, that's not happening. The president has held two video meetings with his G-7 colleagues -- but he's been the odd man out, asking the others to join him in calling COVID-19 the "Wuhan virus" and saying he would halt U.S. funding for the World Health Organization. They declined. If our battle with COVID-19 lasts much longer, our economy will likely recover more slowly than those of South Korea, Japan or Germany, all of which have managed the pandemic more successfully. And in a global recession compounded by mounting disorder, everybody loses. "The longer the pandemic goes on, the more the world will change," Wright warned. "The real risk is that a long crisis will eviscerate international cooperation ... and leave a more anarchic world." How bad can it get? Foreign policy scholars compare this moment to two critical periods in the last century. After World War II ended in 1945, the United States, the only major power with its economy intact, led a massive recovery effort, producing decades of relative peace and prosperity not only for itself and its European allies, but for its defeated enemies, Germany and Japan. After World War I ended in 1918, with an influenza pandemic similar to the coronavirus, no joint recovery effort was launched. Nations went their own way, embracing nationalist politics and protectionist economics, and the next global cataclysm soon followed. This moment, alas, looks more like 1918, a time when the United States withdrew from the world and international disorder increased. And we know how well that turned out. -- McManus' column runs on Sunday and Wednesday. Caption: PHOTO: NORTH KOREA has launched several missiles in recent weeks, the subject of a TV broadcast in Seoul. The weapons tests are contributing to the global instability and economic chaos triggered by the COVID-19 crisis. PHOTOGRAPHER:Jung Yeon-je AFP/Getty Images
Apr 26, 2020	It is a big promise from Silicon Valley to a nation looking for ways to be freed from home confinement: Smartphones could discreetly detect those who may have COVID-19 and nudge them to quarantine, blunting renewed outbreaks as Americans start to once again venture out. But as tech firms lay the foundation for a potentially massive digital contact-tracing infrastructure, Washington is grappling with whether such technology can work without becoming a hulking, invasive surveillance system. It is a vexing problem that could leave Americans exposed to another vast intrusion in their everyday lives by governments or big tech companies.  Apple and Google, which are leading the efforts to develop tracking apps, have pledged that participation would be voluntary and include guardrails to protect confidentiality. But the inability of Congress to pass meaningful data-privacy rules -- and the poor track record of many tech firms in protecting privacy -- heightens the risk, lawmakers and outside experts say. "If information about who has COVID-19 gets into the wrong hands, it could lead to things that are harmful," said Rep. Anna G. Eshoo (D-Menlo Park). She is among several lawmakers calling on the Trump administration to place strict limits on what contact-tracing data can be collected and shared. The White House has so far issued none, even as it consults behind closed doors with tech firms on the development of a tracing infrastructure. "Without a national privacy law, this is a black hole," Eshoo said. The technology, which Google and Apple plan to launch in mid-May, enables people to have their phone track the Bluetooth signals emitted by the phones of every other person with whom they come in close contact. If a person tests positive for COVID-19, the disease caused by the coronavirus, an app provided by their public health department would send an alert to all other users of the app with whom the infected person had contact over the previous two weeks. Identities would not be revealed, just the day of the contact, how long it lasted, and the strength of the Bluetooth signal. Privacy experts voice two big fears: Such a system would only be useful if it's widely used. It's unclear if tracing technology can be effective at all if the entire system is anonymous and voluntary and inhibits the creation of large surveillance databases. So once a system is launched, there will inevitably be pressure to require some people to use it. And if the system is widely used -- and especially if it's connected to a database -- there will be a huge risk that data would live on well beyond the pandemic, giving governments and corporations easy access to information about people's movements and healthcare needs that eclipses what they now have. "What I am afraid of is some folks in the tech community will use this huge public need as a way to be invasive with private data and create a beachfront in the health sector," said Sen. Mark R. Warner (D-Va.), a technology entrepreneur himself. "It is not like the big platforms are coming at this with clean hands." Before the pandemic hit, Warner was already investigating collaborations tech firms were forging with big healthcare and fitness companies. Access to healthcare data could enable tech companies to build profiles of people's ailments and needs, exposing them to targeted marketing campaigns, and also to potential discrimination by employers, insurance companies, landlords or others. Existing healthcare privacy rules don't protect Americans from many of those intrusions, and even those regulations are being eased to give medical professionals flexibility as they deal with the deluge of COVID-19 patients. The potential for tech companies to aggressively move into this area has many privacy analysts unnerved. "These companies have been lobbying all along to get the government to look the other way while they grab our healthcare information to more effectively monetize it," said Jeffrey Chester, executive director of the Center for Digital Democracy, a group that advocates for digital privacy. "We have to get a handle on this pandemic, but we also have to look at the motivations here." On the other side of the debate are people like Stewart Baker, who served as assistant secretary of Homeland Security in the George W. Bush administration and, earlier, as general counsel of the National Security Agency. "If you asked Americans in February 2020, are they prepared to have the governor of their state tell them to go home, stay home and lose their jobs, everyone would have said no. Yet here we are," Baker said. Baker is urging tech companies to embrace the type of monitoring system deployed in Singapore, where the government is collecting large amounts of Bluetooth-generated data on the movements of citizens and their social contacts and notifying anyone with a contact who later turns out to be infected. "It is a trivial intrusion on our liberty as citizens when you compare it to all the other things during this pandemic where we have said, 'This is necessary, we will do it,' " he said. Lawmakers who have taken the lead in investigating the exploitation and abuse of user data by big tech firms worry that the point of view Baker expresses is gaining currency in the White House, as officials meet behind closed doors to develop a strategy for contact-tracing. They warn of implications that could last far beyond the pandemic. When the idea of contact-tracing apps first emerged, there were optimistic predictions that America could lean on its tech pioneers to help safely reopen the economy without the privacy intrusions embedded in tracking apps in China, Taiwan and South Korea. That optimism, however, is fast fading. Even countries such as France and Germany, which adhere to strict privacy laws, are drafting plans for data-collection systems that step around those rules so public health bureaucracies can identify who went where, when they went there and -- most importantly -- whom they may have come in contact with along the way. Some prominent computer scientists involved in building contact-tracing tools in Europe are alarmed by the direction that governments there are headed. The group, called the DP-3T project, had been pushing a privacy-oriented approach similar to what Apple and Google have discussed -- alert systems that keep the data collected anonymous and largely confined to the phones of users who opt in. By contrast, the contact-tracing tools some European leaders are now pursuing "can easily be turned into an instrument of surveillance with considerable human rights implications," the group warned in a recent white paper. The apps that American technology firms are developing are voluntary in theory, but companies could make their use a condition of employment, said Ashkan Soltani, a security researcher and former chief technologist for the Federal Trade Commission during the Obama administration. "They alert the employer whether you have been in contact with someone who has been infected," Soltani said. But, he said, the technology is full of gaps and could potentially label employees at risk when it should not. A Bluetooth signal might be unaware that an infected individual who appeared to be in close proximity to an employee was on the other side of a wall, for example. Nor would the technology be able to register that a person identified as being at risk was wearing protective gear when he had a brush with contagion while shopping. In some nations that are already aggressively relying on digital tracking, the technologies are far more intrusive. Taiwan is collecting personal insurance and passport travel records, as it tracks down who might be infected and orders them to quarantine. Countries that use such systems are also digitally tagging people with different color codings, which determine whether they are permitted to move freely in public. Officials at Apple and Google say their infrastructure is designed to avoid such intrusion. Yet Washington is full of questions about whether it can be effective if the companies abide by that pledge -- and also whether these companies with a dismal record on privacy can be trusted to be in the driver's seat at all. Google and Apple, at least, are acutely aware of the optics. On Friday, the companies distributed a FAQ to consumers stressing that the data accumulated by them will be anonymous, impossible to monetize and will stop being collected after the pandemic. The assurances have yet to assuage lawmakers such as Republican Sen. Josh Hawley of Missouri, a fierce critic of technology firms, who sent a letter to the CEOs of both companies last week. "Americans are right to be skeptical of this project," he wrote. "Too often, Americans have been burned by companies who calculated that the profits they could gain by reversing privacy pledges would outweigh any later financial penalty." Hawley challenged the executives to hold themselves personally liable financially if the firms break their privacy pledge. So far, the executives have not made that commitment. Caption: PHOTO: A COVID-19 monitoring system in Singapore collects data on the movements of citizens and their social contacts. Some see it as a model for the United States. PHOTOGRAPHER:Catherine Lai AFP/Getty Images
Apr 25, 2020	When pro soccer returns to Denmark, ending its COVID-19 hiatus as early as next month, games will be played in empty stadiums, but the FC Midtjylland team has devised a way to get fans involved. The club will erect massive video boards outside its MCH Arena, facing a parking lot where more than 2,000 designated spots will serve as a sporting version of the old-fashioned drive-in movie. Fans will watch the game together -- or, at least, in close proximity -- chanting and singing from their cars. Images of this unorthodox crowd will be shown inside the venue so players won't feel so alone.  If that sounds odd, the U.S. should take note. When American sports return, and spectators are eventually allowed back in, there could be big changes. "People enjoy being in a stadium, I get that," said Karin Michels, chair of epidemiology at UCLA's Fielding School of Public Health. "It's possible, but the experience will be different." The new normal at ballparks could involve more than cheering through face masks. It could mean having your temperature checked as you enter and sitting with empty seats on either side. That hot dog from the concession stand? It might come hermetically sealed. The further we remain from a reliable treatment or vaccine for coronavirus, the more extreme things could get, experts say. Imagine teams of ushers wearing masks and gloves, constantly wiping down railings. Or security guards threatening to eject anyone who violates social-distancing rules. "What happens when someone coughs?" asked Gil Fried, chair of sports management at the University of New Haven in Connecticut. "There are not going to be any clear solutions." :: Professional baseball has returned to Taiwan, with a handful of teams playing before empty stands. South Koreans recently held their first spring training games. Sports leagues throughout North America and Europe are hoping to resume by summer, though it could be months longer before fans are allowed to attend. When asked what that experience might look like, public health experts envision a set of basic precautions. The need for social distancing will preclude any sort of tailgating in the parking lot, they say. With seats at most stadiums fewer than two feet wide, it will take empty spots -- lots of them -- to give each fan or group of ticket holders adequate clearance in all directions. Capacity might be limited to half or one-third of normal, experts estimate. "A building is going to deliver what it's asked to deliver," said an official at a major U.S. arena who was not authorized to speak publicly. "Until we know what the health department is going to mandate, it's hard to predict." Sports might also take a cue from policies that essential businesses have adopted over the last month or so, with hand sanitizers readily available and customers required to wear face coverings. "My wife just bought masks that have the Golden State Warriors logo on them," said Dan Rascher, a sports management professor at the University of San Francisco. "Teams could hand those out at the door." There are other lessons to be learned. Like some grocery stores, where workers wipe down carts as customers enter, arenas could employ large staffs to clean railings, counters and other touch points. Those strips of colored tape on the floor at the checkout stand could be used for restrooms and condiment stations, keeping lines adequately spaced. And contact-free food delivery offered by restaurants might translate to concessions. "There could be apps for fans to order on their phones," Rascher said. "They could bring the food to your seats." But making arenas safer represents only part of the challenge. They will also have to look safer to consumers timid about venturing into a public space. "The average fan of Major League Baseball is in their late 50s," said Fried, who has written extensively about risk management at sports venues . That number, which appears in a 2017 study of Nielsen viewership data commissioned by Sports Business Journal, verges on one of the CDC's highest-risk groups for COVID-19. Addressing "the psychological side, the phobias we have" will be key for venue operators, Fried said. And that could prove difficult. :: The COVID-19 pandemic has been so difficult to contain, in part, because the virus can be spread by people exhibiting no symptoms. So temperature checks won't be foolproof. "Someone could be in the stadium not knowing they are infected," UCLA's Michels said. "You don't want to be near them." Still, scanning each forehead that passes through the entrance could serve as a visual reassurance. Same goes for ushers in quasi-hospital garb, those carefully sealed hot dogs and plenty of elbow room in the stands. Individual behavior is another matter. When some beaches in Florida reopened last week, news coverage showed crowds forming along the water's edge, clusters of people disregarding official pleas for social distancing. What happens if spectators disregard basic health guidelines at arenas, purposely or by accident? "People may get really engaged in the game," Michels said. "They may forget." That means no high-fives or chest bumps, not even when your team scores in the final seconds. Showing reminders every 15 minutes on the video board might not suffice; venues might have to police in a whole new way. Can security guards remove ticket holders who insist on standing too close in the restroom line? What happens if customers complain that someone in Section D is coughing incessantly? "Are we automatically going to jump on them and say they have the virus?" Fried says. Experts worry about another potential complication: beer. Sports and drinking -- occasionally to excess -- have always gone hand-in-hand. In 2011, researchers took breath samples from 362 people as they left 16 pro football and baseball games, finding that 40% had measurable blood-alcohol concentration levels and 8% registered above the legal limit. For some, the reopening of stadiums could serve as a test of personal discipline. "On the whole, people are responsible," Michels said. "But fans must understand that if they don't play by the rules, it will be back to watching on television." :: Spectators aren't the only ones frightened by COVID-19. As a recognized scholar in his field, Fried has dealt with venue owners and sports organizations across the country. "I've done emergency action plans for a number of stadiums," he said. "We've looked at earthquakes, hurricanes, tornadoes, weapons of mass destruction ... never anything like this." The prospect of welcoming thousands of customers into their buildings during a pandemic has venues worried that "people are going to be second-guessing every decision they make," Fried said. The last global virus of this scale dates to the 1918 Spanish flu, so there aren't many established guidelines to follow. Sports management and public health experts pin their hopes on fresh ideas, invention driven by the necessity facing an industry that desperately wants to generate revenue again. "It's imperative for the teams to be innovative and come up with solutions that will bring people back," Rascher said. "Sometimes sports haven't caught up with other industries, but they do understand their fans." Safety will be critical. So will finding ways to enhance the game-day experience under trying circumstances. Two years ago, when the forecast called for gusty winds and subzero temperatures during the opening ceremony of the 2018 Winter Olympics in South Korea, organizers had to adjust. They handed everyone arriving at the Olympic Stadium what amounted to a survival kit, including blankets and foot warmers. All those people bundled up in scarves and thick gloves also received noisemakers to compensate for otherwise muffled cheers and clapping. More recently, with baseball back on the field in Taiwan, the Rakuten Monkeys filled the stands with cardboard cutouts of spectators and animatronic, wig-wearing drummers. The Chinatrust Brothers pumped chants into their empty ballpark. If the NBA, NHL and Major League Baseball resume play in coming months -- and fans show up with their mouths and hands covered for health reasons -- might American teams try a similar gambit? The new normal, Fried suggests, could extend beyond rules and regulations. "Look at TV shows that have laugh tracks," he said. "Maybe they'll do the same thing at games." Caption: PHOTO: SOCCER TEAMS Atalanta and Valencia CF compete in an empty stadium in Valencia, Spain, last month because of the coronavirus outbreak. PHOTOGRAPHER:Getty Images PHOTO:(D1) AN EMPTY FEELING | Games with no fans such as this one in the Chinese baseball league could be a new normal. A1 PHOTOGRAPHER:Steven Lee AFP via Getty Images 
Apr 24, 2020	When pro soccer returns to Denmark, ending its COVID-19 hiatus as early as next month, games will be played in empty stadiums, but the FC Midtjylland team has devised a way to get fans involved. The club will erect massive video boards outside its MCH Arena, facing a parking lot where more than 2,000 designated spots will serve as a sporting version of the old-fashioned drive-in movie. Fans will watch the game together — or, at least, in close proximity — chanting and singing from their cars. Images of this unorthodox crowd will be shown inside the venue so players won’t feel so alone. If that sounds odd, the U.S. should take note. When American sports return, and spectators are eventually allowed back in, there could be big changes. “People enjoy being in a stadium, I get that,” said Karin Michels, chair of epidemiology at UCLA’s Fielding School of Public Health. “It’s possible, but the experience will be different.” The new normal at ballparks could involve more than cheering through face masks. It could mean having your temperature checked as you enter and sitting with empty seats on either side. That hot dog from the concession stand? It might come hermetically sealed. The further we remain from a reliable treatment or vaccine for COVID-19, the more extreme things could get, experts say. Imagine teams of ushers wearing masks and gloves, constantly wiping down railings. Or security guards threatening to eject anyone who violates social-distancing rules. “What happens when someone coughs?” asked Gil Fried, chair of sports management at the University of New Haven in Connecticut. “There are not going to be any clear solutions.” :: Professional baseball has returned to Taiwan, with a handful of teams playing before empty stands. South Koreans recently held their first spring training games. Sports leagues throughout North America and Europe are hoping to resume by summer, though it could be months longer before fans are allowed to attend. When asked what that experience might look like, public health experts envision a set of basic precautions. The need for social distancing will preclude any sort of tailgating in the parking lot, they say. With seats at most stadiums less than two feet wide, it will take empty spots — lots of them — to give each fan or group of ticket holders adequate clearance in all directions. Capacity might be limited to half or one-third of normal, experts estimate. “A building is going to deliver what it’s asked to deliver,” said an official at a major U.S. arena who was not authorized to speak publicly. “Until we know what the health department is going to mandate, it’s hard to predict.” Sports might also take a cue from policies that essential businesses have adopted over the last month or so, with hand sanitizers readily available and customers required to wear face coverings. “My wife just bought masks that have the Golden State Warriors logo on them,” said Dan Rascher, a sports management professor at the University of San Francisco. “Teams could hand those out at the door.” There are other lessons to be learned. Like some grocery stores, where workers wipe down carts as customers enter, arenas could employ large staffs to clean railings, counters and other touch points. Those strips of colored tape on the floor at the checkout stand could be used for restrooms and condiment stations, keeping lines adequately spaced. And contact-free food delivery offered by restaurants might translate to concessions. “There could be apps for fans to order on their phones,” Rascher said. “They could bring the food to your seats.” But making arenas safer represents only part of the challenge. They will also have to look safer to consumers timid about venturing into a public space. “The average fan of Major League Baseball is in their late 50s,” said Fried, who has written extensively about risk management at sports venues . That number, which appears in a 2017 study of Nielsen viewership data commissioned by Sports Business Journal, verges on one of the CDC’s highest-risk groups for coronavirus. Addressing “the psychological side, the phobias we have” will be key for venue operators, Fried said. And that could prove difficult. :: The coronavirus pandemic has been so difficult to contain, in part, because the virus can be spread by people exhibiting no symptoms. So temperature checks won’t be foolproof. “Someone could be in the stadium not knowing they are infected,” Michels said. “You don’t want to be near them.” Still, scanning each forehead that passes through the entrance could serve as a visual reassurance. Same goes for ushers in quasi-hospital garb, those carefully sealed hot dogs and plenty of elbow room in the stands. Individual behavior is another matter. When some beaches in Florida reopened last week, news coverage showed crowds forming along the water’s edge, clusters of people disregarding official pleas for social distancing. What happens if spectators disregard basic health guidelines at arenas, purposely or by accident? “People may get really engaged in the game,” Michels said. “They may forget.” That means no high-fives or chest bumps, not even when your team scores in the final seconds. Showing reminders every 15 minutes on the videoboard might not suffice; venues might have to police in a whole new way. Can security guards remove ticket holders who insist on standing too close in the restroom line? What happens if customers complain that someone in Section D is coughing incessantly? “Are we automatically going to jump on them and say they have the virus?” Fried says. Experts worry about another potential complication: Beer. Sports and drinking — occasionally to excess — have always gone hand-in-hand. In 2011, researchers took breath samples from 362 people as they left 16 pro football and baseball games, finding that 40% had measurable blood-alcohol concentration levels and 8% registered above the legal limit. For some, the reopening of stadiums could serve as a test of personal discipline. “On the whole, people are responsible,” Michels said. “But fans must understand that if they don’t play by the rules, it will be back to watching on television.” :: Spectators aren’t the only ones frightened by COVID-19. As a recognized scholar in his field, Fried has dealt with venue owners and sports organizations across the country. “I’ve done emergency action plans for a number of stadiums,” he said. “We’ve looked at earthquakes, hurricanes, tornadoes, weapons of mass destruction … never anything like this.” The prospect of welcoming thousands of customers into their buildings during a pandemic has venues worried that “people are going to be second-guessing every decision they make,” Fried said. The last global virus of this scale dates to the 1918 Spanish flu, so there aren’t many established guidelines to follow. Sports management and public health experts pin their hopes on fresh ideas, invention driven by the necessity facing an industry that desperately wants to generate revenue again. “It’s imperative for the teams to be innovative and come up with solutions that will bring people back,” Rascher said. “Sometimes sports haven’t caught up with other industries, but they do understand their fans.” Safety — and the appearance of safety — will be critical. So will finding ways to enhance the game-day experience under odd and trying circumstances. Two years ago, when the forecast called for gusty winds and subzero temperatures during the opening ceremony of the 2018 Winter Olympics in South Korea, organizers had to adjust. They handed everyone arriving at the Olympic Stadium what amounted to a survival kit, including blankets and foot warmers. All those people bundled up in scarves and thick gloves also received noisemakers to compensate for otherwise muffled cheers and clapping. More recently, with baseball back on the field in Taiwan, the Rakuten Monkeys filled the stands with cardboard cutouts of spectators and animatronic, wig-wearing drummers. The Chinatrust Brothers pumped chants into their empty ballpark. If the NBA, NHL and Major League Baseball resume play in coming months — and fans show up with their mouths and hands covered for health reasons — might American teams try a similar gambit? The new normal, Fried suggests, could extend beyond rules and regulations. “Look at TV shows that have laugh tracks,” he said. “Maybe they’ll do the same thing at games.”
Apr 23, 2020	A Disneyland fan since he was 5 years old, Ryan Temple visited the park up to twice a month before it closed because of the coronavirus outbreak, often wearing his favorite Mickey Mouse letterman jacket. But now the 22-year-old Phoenix resident says he would be cautious about returning to the Anaheim theme park once it reopens — whenever that may be. “I’m honestly not sure when I could feel safe enough to return to Disney,” he said. “The most obvious answer is once a vaccine is out, but that is almost certainly over a year away.” Since the COVID-19 pandemic forced Disneyland and other theme parks to close in mid-March, park enthusiasts such as Temple have been asking themselves the same question: When will my favorite theme park reopen and under what circumstances? After all, the amusement park experience is infamous for packing bodies tightly together in snaking lines and cramped ride vehicles. Parks increasingly use fingerprint readers at entrance gates and interactive touchscreen technology for ticketing, maps and restaurant ordering. And what about roller coaster grab bars and those turnstiles everyone pushes through to enter and exit? The quick answer is that no one knows for sure, but industry experts have already been discussing what new procedures will be added to protect guests and workers from spreading the virus once that happens. Swiss banking giant UBS told clients Monday that Walt Disney Co. is likely to wait until Jan. 1 to open its theme parks and predicted the Burbank media company will see only about 50% of 2019 attendance. “Moreover, we now believe the lingering effects of the outbreak — including crowd avoidance, new health precautions, etc. — will dramatically reduce the profitability of these businesses even after they are reopened until a vaccine is widely available,” the report said about Disney’s parks. Stay-at-home orders by state and local governments will dictate when parks can consider reopening. Disney said its parks will remain closed until further notice. Universal Studios Hollywood and Universal Orlando Resort announced plans to stay closed until at least May 31. Theme park operators have been tight-lipped about what the future holds for their parks, but they have clearly been discussing plans for opening day. Annual passholders for Universal Orlando Resort said they received a survey last week asking how likely they are to return to the park under various restrictions, such as requiring guests to wear masks or limiting park attendance to 50% of normal.  [Image Thread] Universal Orlando Survey on possible precautions for when they reopen from their extended closure due to #COVID19 Cc: @NewsGuyGreg @GabrielleRusson @AshleyLCarter1 @insideuniversal @AliciaStella @KLStorey @jrtoastyman pic.twitter.com/D2zjRI1nBi — AllCentralFlorida (@AllCentralFla) April 18, 2020 In an interview with Barron’s, Disney Executive Chairman Bob Iger said his parks would require “more scrutiny, more restrictions” so customers would feel safe to return. He suggested the idea of taking the temperature of each visitor before allowing entrance. “Just as we now do bag checks for everybody that goes into our parks, it could be that at some point we add a component of that that takes people’s temperatures, as a for-instance,” Iger said. On several online Disney discussion forums, theme park fans say they have uncovered a plan, presumably leaked by a Disney employee, for allowing guests to return to the Walt Disney World Resort in Florida. The plan, titled the Secure Circuit protocol, would reopen the park with limited capacity, no parades, no castle shows, no firework displays and health checks performed at every security checkpoint. In addition, the protocol would require guests to sign a form, clearing Disney of any liability for potential exposure to the novel coronavirus. More on coronavirus’ economic impact  Disneyland representatives declined to discuss whether the Secure Circuit protocol is legitimate or any plans being developed to reopen the parks. The process of taking temperatures of entering visitors (using non-contact thermometers) has already been adopted in theme parks in Asia that closed only briefly. At Janfunsun Fancy World in Taiwan, people who have a temperature of 99.5 degrees or higher are denied entry. At Everland Resort in South Korea, workers take visitors’ temperatures and encourage them to wear masks. The resort’s attraction queues include markings on the ground to show how far apart each person must stand to maintain social distancing. Rides and stores are disinfected hourly. Hand sanitizer dispensers are set up around the park. Theme park insiders have been so focused on reopening after the crisis subsides that a webinar on strategies for reopening theme parks and other attractions drew nearly 500 industry workers this month. The April 15 webinar was hosted by Gateway Ticketing Systems, a Pennsylvania company that develops ticketing systems and consults for theme parks, zoos, museums and other attractions. “Everyone is just spinning out large contingency plans,” said Randy Josselyn, a principal at Gateway Ticketing who hosted the webinar. Among the speakers on the webinar was Eddie Jones, a support specialist at Atlanta Botanical Garden, who said the garden has already devised a plan for reopening by allowing only 50 people to enter the gardens every 15 minutes. The plan would cut capacity in the gardens from the normal daily attendance of about 7,000 to about 2,500, he said. A back gate would be opened so that guests could leave without creating a bottleneck at the entrance. Industry experts say putting limits on capacity would almost certainly be a requirement so that people do not crowd together at reopened parks. Bill Coan, chief executive of Itec Entertainment, a developer of theme park attractions and shows, said he doesn’t think capacity limits will be difficult to enforce because park fans will not be rushing back once the theme parks reopen. “I don’t think those numbers are going to occur for some time,” he said of previous attendance numbers. Coan echoed other theme park experts who said parks will probably open in stages, with some attractions closed in the early stages and rules imposed on how tightly packed visitors can be in lines and in stores. But limiting capacity and hiring additional workers to take temperatures, enforcing anti-crowding rules and sanitizing rides would be expensive and could make operating theme parks unprofitable, said Martin Lewison, a business administration professor and theme park expert at Farmingdale State College in New York. Some parks might be able to get by with fewer workers if capacity is vastly reduced, and higher ticket prices might become a profit-bolstering option, but it’s difficult to know for sure because theme park operators aren’t talking. “These are the kind of practical ideas that I imagine operators are working through, deciding what is practical,” he said. Whatever procedures are adopted by theme parks, Lewison said some fans will stay away but many others will be ready to return quickly. “There is a chunk of America who says, ‘Let’s take that risk.’” he said. For Alexandria Grable, 19, who had an annual pass for the Disneyland Resort for the last three years, the closing of the resort in mid-March convinced her that the coronavirus outbreak was a serious health threat. But the Santa Clarita teen said she would return if Disneyland reopens. “I think I would go,” Grable said. “I trust Disneyland enough to know they would not put their guests in harm’s way.” Other theme park devotees are less likely to rush back even if health and social distancing restrictions are added. “Will anyone want to spin their teacup or the Roger Rabbit taxicab or Buzz Lightyear blasters, knowing how many other hands have touched them?” asked Matthew Gottula, a longtime Disneyland fan from Altadena, who said he doesn’t go anywhere without a container of hand sanitizer attached to his belt. Another Disneyland fan, Aaron Goldberg, who has written several books on Disney parks and the Disney family, said he wouldn’t return to the parks without wearing a mask and gloves. “Maybe I’m a bit more neurotic, but it’s impossible to avoid touching just about everything at Disneyland and all of the parks,” he said.
Apr 23, 2020	Offering a rare and surprising bright spot in the COVID-19 pandemic, Vietnam began easing its nationwide lockdown Thursday following an aggressive containment campaign that has meant few infections and no deaths in an Asian nation initially believed to be at great risk from the coronavirus. The communist-ruled country has sealed its borders, quarantined masses of people, used soldiers and police to track down potential infections and fined social media users for spreading misinformation. After deploying the full arsenal of a single-party state, the sprawling nation of 95 million people has now gone a full week without recording a new infection. But despite their effectiveness, Vietnam’s measures are not easily replicable. Its intolerance of dissent and ability to mobilize an entire security and political apparatus — steps more common in China — meant its campaign met little of the pushback seen in Western liberal democracies. And experts caution that the fight isn’t over. Starting Thursday, Vietnam allowed residents across the country to resume small gatherings and restarted buses, taxis and regular domestic flights for the first time in three weeks. But with much of Southeast Asia still under lockdown, people must continue wearing masks in public, gatherings of more than 20 remain off-limits, schools will stay closed for several more weeks and international flights are still grounded, officials said. “Many parts of the world are still infected, so the risk is not over for us,” Prime Minister Nguyen Xuan Phuc said this week. Since the government imposed a partial nationwide lockdown April 1, Vietnam saw only a modest increase in coronavirus cases to 268, with all but 44 recovered and no fatalities. The numbers are stunningly low considering that Vietnam — which shares a border with China — was among the first countries where the virus spread and lacks the resources of governments more celebrated for their containment strategies, such as South Korea’s widespread testing and Taiwan’s aggressive digital surveillance. Its results stand out even more as other Southeast Asian countries struggle. Wealthy Singapore, once regarded as a model, has seen infections skyrocket among migrant workers living in overcrowded dormitories. Indonesia, the largest country in the region, initially ignored the threat and now has the most COVID-19 deaths in Asia after China. “It’s pretty amazing,” said Huong Le Thu, a senior analyst at the Australian Strategic Policy Institute. “I’m cautious of calling Vietnam a success story. It’s too early to be out of the woods. But the measures have been quite effective so far.” Experts credit Vietnam’s early, decisive steps: swiftly banning nearly all travel from China, suspending schools in mid-January even before recording any infections, quarantining tens of thousands of people and employing the extensive Communist Party apparatus to communicate distancing measures and trace the contacts of COVID-19 patients. The response was made possible by a Leninist one-party system that is often criticized for maintaining secrecy, silencing dissent and trampling on individual rights — but that has proven adept at tackling health crises since it was the first nation to stamp out the SARS epidemic nearly two decades ago. “Only a few countries can control and mobilize resources on this scale,” said Le Hong Hiep, a Vietnam analyst at the ISEAS-Yusof Ishak Institute in Singapore. “In Vietnam they can do it, and partly because of a political system that’s designed to respond to such situations. It’s not always good, but in a crisis it helps.” The sweeping measures often led to large numbers of people being isolated over just a handful of infections. In February, when a group of Vietnamese workers tested positive for the virus after returning from Wuhan, the Chinese city that was the source of the outbreak, authorities locked down their entire commune of 10,000 people for three weeks — the first mass quarantine outside China. Last month, more than 300 medical staff, police, soldiers and civilians were deployed to track down the contacts of a British pilot believed to be the origin of a coronavirus cluster at a bar in Ho Chi Minh City. Authorities sealed off several businesses and quarantined thousands of people in their apartments. In recent weeks, as imported infections surged across Asia, Vietnam placed tens of thousands of incoming travelers — whether they showed COVID-19 symptoms or not — in quarantine at army barracks, university dorms and other public facilities. As precautionary steps, they were aggressive, perhaps overly so. But they kept pressure off of Vietnam’s hospitals and allowed contact tracers to focus on a relatively small number of clusters. “What we know now is this virus spreads from pre-symptomatic people, and if you’re only monitoring people when they get symptoms it’s too late,” said Todd Pollack, a Harvard Medical School infectious disease specialist who leads a health initiative in the Vietnamese capital, Hanoi. American officials have been struck by Vietnam’s low infection rate. Experts from the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention in Vietnam — who have provided assistance in testing, data analysis and contact tracing — say they “don’t have any indication that those numbers are false,” Dr. John MacArthur, the center’s director in Thailand, said on a conference call with reporters last week. This week, state media reported that tests of more than 1,000 shoppers in Hanoi markets and more than 19,000 travelers at airports and train stations in Ho Chi Minh City found no infections, bolstering the belief that the outbreak has been contained. Its success has allowed Vietnam to begin playing the role of benefactor — a subtle challenge to its sometime rival China — donating hundreds of thousands of masks to Europe and its Southeast Asian neighbors. This month Hanoi expedited the shipment to the U.S. of nearly half a million protective medical suits manufactured at a DuPont factory in Vietnam, earning a thank-you tweet from President Trump.  This morning, 450,000 protective suits landed in Dallas, Texas. This was made possible because of the partnership of two great American companies—DuPont and FedEx—and our friends in Vietnam. Thank you! @DuPont_News @FedEx pic.twitter.com/8yhG6tYnQW — Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) April 8, 2020 Analysts say Vietnam’s turbulent relationship with China influenced its response to the outbreak. Days after China reported the first death from the virus Jan. 11 — and before any cases had surfaced in Vietnam — the health ministry held a high-level meeting with U.S. and World Health Organization officials to lay out a containment plan. At the core of Vietnam’s concern was the suspicion “that the scale of the outbreak was much higher than what is officially reported by China,” Le said. That skepticism turned out to be well founded as China was accused of suppressing initial reports about how fast the virus was spreading. This week, the U.S. cybersecurity company FireEye reported that hackers linked to the Vietnamese government had attempted to break into the email accounts of Chinese emergency management officials and authorities in Wuhan beginning in January — ostensibly to learn more about the outbreak. “Vietnam understands China better than some other countries,” Le said. “Because of the similar political systems, they know how China works, and they know the risks and downsides of such systems. They know there may be problems in China’s data. So in dealing with China, Vietnam is very cautious.” 
Apr 23, 2020	A Disneyland fan since he was 5 years old, Ryan Temple visited the park up to twice a month before it closed because of the coronavirus outbreak, often wearing his favorite Mickey Mouse letterman jacket. But now the 22-year-old Phoenix resident says he would be cautious about returning to the Anaheim theme park once it reopens -- whenever that may be. "I'm honestly not sure when I could feel safe enough to return to Disney," he said. "The most obvious answer is once a vaccine is out, but that is almost certainly over a year away."  Since the COVID-19 pandemic forced Disneyland and other theme parks to close in mid-March, park enthusiasts such as Temple have been asking themselves the same question: When will my favorite theme park reopen and under what circumstances? After all, the amusement park experience is infamous for packing bodies tightly together in snaking lines and cramped ride vehicles. Parks increasingly use fingerprint readers at entrance gates and interactive touchscreen technology for ticketing, maps and restaurant ordering. And what about roller coaster grab bars and those turnstiles everyone pushes through to enter and exit? The quick answer is that no one knows for sure, but industry experts have already been discussing what new procedures will be added to protect guests and workers from spreading the virus once that happens. Swiss banking giant UBS told clients Monday that Walt Disney Co. is likely to wait until Jan. 1 to open its theme parks and predicted the Burbank media company will see only about 50% of 2019 attendance. "Moreover, we now believe the lingering effects of the outbreak -- including crowd avoidance, new health precautions, etc. -- will dramatically reduce the profitability of these businesses even after they are reopened until a vaccine is widely available," the report said about Disney's parks. Stay-at-home orders by state and local governments will dictate when parks can consider reopening. Disney said its parks will remain closed until further notice. Universal Studios Hollywood and Universal Orlando Resort announced plans to stay closed until at least May 31. Theme park operators have been tight-lipped about what the future holds for their parks, but they have clearly been discussing plans for opening day. Annual passholders for Universal Orlando Resort said they received a survey last week asking how likely they are to return to the park under various restrictions, such as requiring guests to wear masks or limiting park attendance to 50% of normal. In an interview with Barron's, Disney Executive Chairman Bob Iger said his parks would require "more scrutiny, more restrictions" so customers would feel safe to return. He suggested the idea of taking the temperature of each visitor before allowing entrance. "Just as we now do bag checks for everybody that goes into our parks, it could be that at some point we add a component of that that takes people's temperatures, as a for-instance," Iger said. On several online Disney discussion forums, theme park fans say they have uncovered a plan, presumably leaked by a Disney employee, for allowing guests to return to the Walt Disney World Resort in Florida. The plan, titled the Secure Circuit protocol, would reopen the park with limited capacity, no parades, no castle shows, no firework displays and health checks performed at every security checkpoint. In addition, the protocol would require guests to sign a form, clearing Disney of any liability for potential exposure to the novel coronavirus. Disneyland representatives declined to discuss whether the Secure Circuit protocol is legitimate or any plans being developed to reopen the parks. The process of taking temperatures of entering visitors (using non-contact thermometers) has already been adopted in theme parks in Asia that closed only briefly. At Janfunsun Fancy World in Taiwan, people who have a temperature of 99.5 degrees or higher are denied entry. At Everland Resort in South Korea, workers take visitors' temperatures and encourage them to wear masks. The resort's attraction queues include markings on the ground to show how far apart each person must stand to maintain social distancing. Rides and stores are disinfected hourly. Hand sanitizer dispensers are set up around the park. Theme park insiders have been so focused on reopening after the crisis subsides that a webinar on strategies for reopening theme parks and other attractions drew nearly 500 industry workers this month. The April 15 webinar was hosted by Gateway Ticketing Systems, a Pennsylvania company that develops ticketing systems and consults for theme parks, zoos, museums and other attractions. "Everyone is just spinning out large contingency plans," said Randy Josselyn, a principal at Gateway Ticketing who hosted the webinar. Among the speakers on the webinar was Eddie Jones, a support specialist at Atlanta Botanical Garden, who said the garden has already devised a plan for reopening by allowing only 50 people to enter the gardens every 15 minutes. The plan would cut capacity in the gardens from the normal daily attendance of about 7,000 to about 2,500, he said. A back gate would be opened so that guests could leave without creating a bottleneck at the entrance. Industry experts say putting limits on capacity would almost certainly be a requirement so that people do not crowd together at reopened parks. Bill Coan, chief executive of Itec Entertainment, a developer of theme park attractions and shows, said he doesn't think capacity limits will be difficult to enforce because park fans will not be rushing back once the theme parks reopen. "I don't think those numbers are going to occur for some time," he said of previous attendance numbers. Coan echoed other theme park experts who said parks will probably open in stages, with some attractions closed in the early stages and rules imposed on how tightly packed visitors can be in lines and in stores. But limiting capacity and hiring additional workers to take temperatures, enforcing anti-crowding rules and sanitizing rides would be expensive and could make operating theme parks unprofitable, said Martin Lewison, a business administration professor and theme park expert at Farmingdale State College in New York. Some parks might be able to get by with fewer workers if capacity is vastly reduced, and higher ticket prices might become a profit-bolstering option, but it's difficult to know for sure because theme park operators aren't talking. "These are the kind of practical ideas that I imagine operators are working through, deciding what is practical," he said. Whatever procedures are adopted by theme parks, Lewison said some fans will stay away but many others will be ready to return quickly. "There is a chunk of America who says, 'Let's take that risk.' " he said. For Alexandria Grable, 19, who had an annual pass for the Disneyland Resort for the last three years, the closing of the resort in mid-March convinced her that the coronavirus outbreak was a serious health threat. But the Santa Clarita teen said she would return if Disneyland reopens. "I think I would go," Grable said. "I trust Disneyland enough to know they would not put their guests in harm's way." Other theme park devotees are less likely to rush back even if health and social distancing restrictions are added. "Will anyone want to spin their teacup or the Roger Rabbit taxicab or Buzz Lightyear blasters, knowing how many other hands have touched them?" asked Matthew Gottula, a longtime Disneyland fan from Altadena, who said he doesn't go anywhere without a container of hand sanitizer attached to his belt. Another Disneyland fan, Aaron Goldberg, who has written several books on Disney parks and the Disney family, said he wouldn't return to the parks without wearing a mask and gloves. "Maybe I'm a bit more neurotic, but it's impossible to avoid touching just about everything at Disneyland and all of the parks," he said. Caption: PHOTO: A LARGE crowd gathers for the Star Wars: Galaxy's Edge opening at Disneyland in May. Attendance could be much sparser whenever the theme park reopens. PHOTOGRAPHER:Allen J. Schaben Los Angeles Times 
Apr 23, 2020	North Korea's enduring secrecy means that morsels of often thinly sourced information can quickly capture the attention of the world. In 1986, newspapers splashed across their front pages stories of the death of Kim Il Sung, the nation's founder. He would live eight more years. The latest rumor concerns his grandson and current North Korean leader, Kim Jong Un. A Seoul-based website reported Monday that the dictator had undergone a "cardiovascular procedure," sparking a media frenzy and widespread speculation that Kim was seriously ill -- and possibly even at death's door.  But experts who study North Korea have almost unanimously expressed skepticism of the report, which relied on anonymous sources. Both the governments of South Korea, which tracks activity north of the border closely, and China, which is North Korea's most important backer, also dismissed the report. "Only one source right now. Echo chamber," Victor Cha, Korea chair at the Center for Strategic and International Studies and a former member of the U.S. National Security Council under President George W. Bush, said in an email. "I have a sheet with about 18 different rumors of coup attempts and deaths from the late '80s through the '90s. Many more after that," added Michael Madden, an expert on North Korea's leadership at the Stimson Center. "If you do this for a certain number of years, the occasional far-out rumors are an amusing diversion." The North Korean rumor mill is a constant background noise that complicates the already difficult task of gleaning information from a nuclear-armed state that's maintained isolation for decades. The report about Kim's medical procedure this month originated from the Daily NK, a website affiliated with South Korea's Unification Ministry. The outlet, which relies on anonymous sources in North Korea, counts the Washington-based National Endowment for Democracy as one of its financial backers. South Korea's intelligence service has contacted the outlet for information on occasion, but not all the information it has published has proved accurate. A spokesman for the South Korean president's office said Tuesday that "no unusual developments have been detected inside North Korea." Madden said Seoul has taken a harder stance against death rumors involving the leadership in Pyongyang over the last decade because of attempts to manipulate the stock market with unsubstantiated news. Kim's health has always been a source of speculation. The portly 36-year-old is a heavy smoker with a penchant for excess. When he didn't appear at his grandfather's birthday ceremonies last week, some wondered whether his absence was related to the coronavirus. If nothing else, the rumor has raised questions about what would happen to North Korea if Kim died unexpectedly, which would plunge the impoverished nation and Chinese-dominated region into uncertainty at a time when the world is distracted by a pandemic. Who would replace Kim? Hereditary succession is a feature of North Korean rule, but little is known about Kim's children (he's believed to have three), who are too young to take control. The country could break with gender tradition and keep power within the immediate family by tapping Kim's sister, Kim Yo Jong, who has emerged as a trusted confidant of her brother. "Kim Yo Jong's profile has risen and her role has broadened significantly over the past couple of years," said Rachel Lee, a former North Korea analyst for the U.S. government. Kim Yo Jong could serve as a placeholder until one of her brother's children is old enough to take over. Regardless, the North Korean government has procedures in place to keep the ruling Workers' Party in power, experts said. "Military generals or party officials might jockey for power," said Duyeon Kim, a senior advisor for the International Crisis Group on Northeast Asia. "China-backed North Korean elites might look for a successor. Some forces might try to bring back and elevate [Kim's] nephew Kim Han Sol. The list goes on with so many variables." Someone outside the Kim family, such as insider Choe Ryong Hae, a military official, could assume the mantle of leader. But Lee doesn't see that happening. "Upholding a non-Kim as the leader is unthinkable in North Korea," Lee said. "Moreover, being wealthy and powerful in the North Korean leadership under Kim Jong Un does not necessarily mean you have enough power or the resources to wage a power struggle and succeed. The top echelons of the North Korean leadership know that they have everything to lose if the system went down, and I think they would unite around the next Kim for regime stability." For now, the rumors of Kim's poor health are being treated with caution by analysts, who have frequently seen such frenzied conjecture about North Korea come to nothing. Among the more outlandish and grisly rumors was the supposed execution by firing squad of singer Hyon Song Wol in front of her family and bandmates in 2013. Hyon was said to have angered Kim, a rumored love interest, for participating in a pornographic film. Hyon, singer of the North Korean hit "Excellent Horse-Like Lady," appeared on TV the following year. Caption: PHOTO: A SEOUL-BASED website said North Korean leader Kim Jong Un had undergone a "cardiovascular procedure," but experts are skeptical of the report. PHOTOGRAPHER:Korean Central News Agency 
Apr 23, 2020	Divisions are growing in the U.S. between some governors and mayors over reopening their states as COVID-19's toll on both lives and jobs grows, leaving leaders torn between dueling demands to prevent more outbreaks and to revive the economy. Leading the way to lift restrictions, with encouragement from President Trump, are six Republican governors across the South -- in Georgia, Florida, South Carolina, Tennessee, Alabama and Mississippi -- who have formed a coalition to coordinate reopenings, said Florida Gov. Ron DeSantis, who earlier opened beaches in his state. In Georgia, however, mayors have resisted Gov. Brian Kemp's call to open salons, tattoo parlors and bowling alleys this week as long as employees and customers take social distancing measures. Savannah's mayor called the plan "reckless." And on Wednesday, Trump joined the chorus against Kemp's move, a day after praising him at the White House and saying, "He knows what he's doing."  The president, who has frequently reversed positions over the weeks in his response to the coronavirus, said that he disagreed "strongly" with Kemp's reopening plans and described them as violating White House guidelines. "I think spas and beauty salons and tattoo parlors and barbershops ... is just too soon," Trump said. Still, he added, Kemp "has to do what he thinks is right." On another matter, Trump pleaded ignorance when asked about a statement Wednesday from Dr. Rick Bright, the former director of the Biomedical Advanced Research and Development Authority, that he'd been removed from his job in retaliation for complaining that "politics or cronyism" was dictating decisions on scientific research -- in particular related to an unproven drug, hydroxychloroquine, that Trump has promoted to treat COVID-19. The office that Bright headed has been tasked with developing a coronavirus vaccine. "I never heard of him," Trump said Wednesday. "If the guy says he was pushed out of a job, maybe he was, maybe he wasn't." Even as some states take steps to resume a semblance of normal life, recent polls have shown a sizable majority of Americans believes the restrictions are proper and should stay. A survey released Wednesday by the Associated Press and the NORC Center for Public Affairs Research found 61% of Americans believe restrictions in their areas are appropriate, and 26% said the limits don't go far enough. Only 12% said limits had gone too far. The president has said that he will be proved right on the nation's ability to test and reopen soon. The federal government will help states ramp up testing, Trump has said, yet he repeatedly has insisted that it is their responsibility. Health experts have warned against easing restrictions until more people can be tested to know whether they are carriers of the virus. Some governors have clashed with him over the difficulty of acquiring testing supplies, including Republican Larry Hogan of Maryland. Hogan and his Korean American wife worked directly with South Korea to import 500,000 tests for his state, and took steps to prevent federal officials from confiscating the supplies to distribute elsewhere. Several of the states opening up, including Georgia, South Carolina and Tennessee, underperform others in testing and have not seen decreases in new cases over 14 straight days, the metric that the White House this week recommended as a threshold for safe reopenings. Still, the states are faring better than in previous weeks, and cities including New York, the pandemic's epicenter, Detroit and New Orleans have made strides in containing the virus. Yet the lack of coordination at the federal level has led to the debate and patchwork of conflicting actions between states and cities. In South Carolina, furniture stores, beaches and other businesses are open. While the Charleston mayor said he would comply with state orders on store openings, he expressed concerns that the state still doesn't have access to enough testing. As Texas Gov. Greg Abbott this week eased restrictions statewide, county leaders in Houston announced new rules requiring the area's 4.7 million residents to wear masks in public for at least 30 days starting Monday. Abbott allowed the reopening of state parks, elective surgeries and curbside pickups at certain stores. In Colorado, a stay-at-home order will expire Sunday, yet the mayor of hard-hit Denver has said the city's restrictions could be extended further. Oklahoma Gov. Kevin Stitt, a Republican, announced Wednesday that salons could open by appointment on Friday, followed by gyms and restaurants on May 1. But the mayor of Oklahoma City said the city would keep evaluating closures. In New York, Democratic Gov. Andrew Cuomo announced Wednesday that the state would join New Jersey and Connecticut to partner on a contact tracing program with at least $10 million in funding from former New York Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg. Contact tracing uses technology including cellphones to notify people who may have been exposed, and has proved effective in China and other Asian nations. More than 46,000 people have died in the U.S. from COVID-19, the disease caused by the coronavirus. The number of confirmed U.S. cases is expected to hit 1 million within days. After a slow and still spotty start, the U.S. is testing more than a million people per week for the infection. Public health experts say at least triple that number should be the goal before the nation can safely start resuming activities that bring groups of more than 10 people together. Federal health officials have expressed caution about reopenings, fearing revived outbreaks. On Tuesday, the director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Robert Redfield, said in an interview with the Washington Post that the disease could "be even more difficult" next winter as it coincides with the normal flu season. "We're going to have the flu epidemic and the coronavirus epidemic at the same time," he said. Dr. Deborah Birx, the White House coronavirus task force coordinator, said the government was preparing for the "potential" of a new COVID-19 outbreak in the fall and winter. And Dr. Anthony Fauci, director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, said, "We will have coronavirus in the fall." But, he added, the country would be "much better prepared" for any outbreaks. -- Times staff writer Molly Hennessy-Fiske in Houston contributed to this report. Caption: PHOTO: SIX REPUBLICAN governors across the South, including Florida's Ron DeSantis, have eased restrictions. Above, people in Jacksonville Beach, Fla., this week. PHOTOGRAPHER:Sam Greenwood Getty Images
Apr 23, 2020	Mirai Nagasu grew up in her parents' restaurant, Sushi Kiyosuzu in Arcadia, sleeping in the storeroom and earning quarters for washing dishes when she wasn't in school or taking figure skating lessons. Her mother, Ikuko, and father, Kiyoto, didn't always attend her skating competitions because they felt obligated to keep their business open and their employees working. Mirai respected that -- and she learned much more from them than how to make an appetizing tuna roll. Like thousands of other small businesses, Sushi Kiyosuzu was staggered when the COVID-19 pandemic hit and restaurants were forced to close their dining rooms. Ikuko and Kiyoto, who immigrated to the United States from Japan, couldn't navigate the maze of government loan programs and were reluctant to tell their daughter how dire their situation was.  "They try to protect me from a lot of hardship. I think it's more like they want to stay strong and be strong for me because I think that they know I would worry for them," said Nagasu, who became the first American woman to land a triple axel jump in the Olympics while leading Team USA to a bronze medal at Pyeongchang, South Korea, in 2018, eight years after she finished fourth in the Vancouver Games. Her need to be strong for her parents kicked in when she learned they had let go all but one employee. Through a friend of a friend, she discovered a restaurant relief initiative called the Power of 10, which launched last month in Washington, D.C., and funds restaurants so they can rehire staff and cook food for healthcare workers and others affected by the pandemic. The Nagasu family's restaurant Tuesday became the first Los Angeles-area business to participate in the initiative, starting with a plan to cook 500 meals this week and soon double that number. From Boston, where she has been self-isolating after consulting doctors there about a skating-related hip injury, Nagasu recruited some of her high school friends back home to help deliver the meals. "We're excited that it's starting in L.A. with my parents' restaurant," she said, "and we hope it's an initiative that we can start to offer throughout the entire country. "That's a big goal, a huge goal, and it's a little overwhelming. But at the same time, going to the Olympics was a big goal for me, and to immerse myself in an equally big goal is something that I enjoy. To be able to focus on my parents more and to be able to help them, it's a nice change." Erik Bruner-Yang, a Washington chef and restaurateur who organized the Power of 10 project, said the initiative had raised $200,000 from individual contributions and foundations. In three weeks, 10,000 meals were delivered in the area to a hospital, a children's center, a homeless shelter in Virginia and a residence for elderly Asian immigrants, in addition to some drop-offs in low-income areas. Individuals can contribute by purchasing one to 1,000 meals at $10 each, and the money funds the food and restaurant workers' salaries. The restaurants don't have to repay the funds. Until the federal government's Paycheck Protection Program ran out of funding, Bruner-Yang said, "We were kind of hoping for a trickle-down solution. But the reality is, there are so many people that always get missed. The only way for small independent operators to move forward is to create our own social safety net and help trickle it up. The more money you can keep in your community, the longer it's going to be successful." After ensuring the Nagasus' restaurant could make enough meals and deliveries for four weeks, Bruner-Yang saw it as a perfect first California outpost. "We found an amazing partner with a great story that fits our mission to help independent small operators, especially mom-and-pop restaurants who would have a hard time navigating through this time period," he said. Bruner-Yang said the situation was "almost serendipitous" as he and Mirai Nagasu shared a similar background. "I'm an immigrant from Taiwan, and our stories are so similar of our parents doing whatever it took to make our dreams a reality. I think that our ability to connect through social media and to have this program in place supports our parents' generations. And there's so much information coming out. How are people like Mirai's parents supposed to figure out how to get through this without the support of people like us who are savvy and up to date and can help out?" The meals from Sushi Kiyosuzu are packed in individual containers that will be handled as little as possible to avoid potential spread of COVID-19. Her parents planned to start by serving chicken teriyaki and later serve salmon and vegetable rolls and other items. Meals containing raw fish weren't included because the containers might sit awhile before the recipients can eat. "I'm sure I'll be involved in choosing because every five minutes they're texting me, 'How about this idea?' " Mirai said. The meals are targeted for the area where she grew up. Clearly, she inherited her parents' sense of responsibility. "I went to elementary school, middle school and high school in Arcadia," she said, "and to be able to do something for the community, especially when I saw how much support they gave me when I went to both Olympics, is something that means a lot to me." Caption: PHOTO: KIYOTO NAGASU, left, wife Ikuko, center, and family friend Michelle Hamano pack lunches for medical workers at their sushi restaurant in Arcadia. PHOTOGRAPHER:Gabriella Angotti-Jones Los Angeles Times PHOTO:KIYOTO NAGASU, father of Olympic figure skater Mirai Nagasu, prepares lunches for medical workers at his restaurant in Arcadia. He had let go of all but one employee because of the coronavirus outbreak. PHOTOGRAPHER: Gabriella Angotti-Jones Los Angeles Times PHOTO:SUSHI KIYOSUZU meals are packed in individual containers to help avoid potential spread of virus. PHOTOGRAPHER: Gabriella Angotti-Jones Los Angeles Times PHOTO:(B6) Nagasu gives back to family, community: Former Olympic figure skater was able to help her parents' restaurant during the pandemic. PHOTOGRAPHER:
Apr 22, 2020	Divisions are growing in the U.S. between some governors and mayors over reopening their states as COVID-19’s toll on both lives and jobs grows, leaving leaders torn between dueling demands to prevent more outbreaks and to revive the economy. Leading the way to lift restrictions, with encouragement from President Trump, are six Republican governors across the South — in Georgia, Florida, South Carolina, Tennessee, Alabama and Mississippi — who have formed a coalition to coordinate reopenings, according to Florida Gov. Ron DeSantis, who earlier opened beaches in his state. In Georgia, however, mayors have resisted Gov. Brian Kemp’s call to open salons, tattoo parlors and bowling alleys this week as long as employees and customers take social distancing measures. Savannah’s mayor called the plan “reckless.” And on Wednesday, Trump joined the chorus against Kemp’s move, a day after praising him at the White House and saying, “He knows what he’s doing.” The president, who has frequently reversed positions over the weeks in his response to the coronavirus, said that he disagreed “strongly” with Kemp’s reopening plans and described them as violating White House guidelines. “I think spas and beauty salons and tattoo parlors and barber shops ... is just too soon,” Trump said. Still, he added, Kemp “has to do what he thinks is right.” Even so, he added, “It’s a beautiful thing to see” some states reopening. He underscored that Americans need to adhere to guidelines on social distancing and handwashing to prevent new infections. On another matter, Trump pleaded ignorance when asked about a statement Wednesday from Dr. Rick Bright, the former director of the Biomedical Advanced Research and Development Authority, that he’d been removed from his job in retaliation for complaining that “politics or cronyism” was dictating decisions on scientific research — in particular related to an unproven drug, hydroxychloroquine, that Trump has promoted to treat COVID-19. The office that Bright headed has been tasked with developing a coronavirus vaccine. “I never heard of him,” Trump said Wednesday. "... If the guy says he was pushed out of a job, maybe he was, maybe he wasn’t.” Even as some states take steps to resume a semblance of normal life, recent polls have shown a sizable majority of Americans believes the restrictions are proper and should stay. A survey released Wednesday by the Associated Press and the NORC Center for Public Affairs Research found 61% of Americans believe restrictions in their areas are appropriate, and 26% said the limits don’t go far enough. Only 12% said limits had gone too far. The president has said that he will be proven right on the nation’s ability to test and reopen soon. The federal government will help states ramp up testing, Trump has said, yet he repeatedly has insisted that it is their responsibility. Health experts have warned against easing restrictions until more people can be tested to know whether they are carriers of the virus. Some governors have clashed with him over the difficulty of acquiring testing supplies, including Republican Larry Hogan of Maryland. Hogan and his Korean American wife worked directly with South Korea to import 500,000 tests for his state, and took steps to prevent federal officials from confiscating the supplies to distribute elsewhere. Several of the states opening up, including Georgia, South Carolina and Tennessee, underperform others in testing and have not seen decreases in new cases over 14 straight days, the metric that the White House this week recommended as a threshold for safe reopenings. Still, the states are faring better than in previous weeks, and cities including New York, the pandemic’s epicenter, Detroit and New Orleans have made strides in containing the virus. Yet the lack of coordination at the federal level has led to the debate and patchwork of conflicting actions between states and cities. In South Carolina, furniture stores, beaches and other businesses are open. While the Charleston mayor said he would comply with state orders on store openings, he expressed concerns that the state still doesn’t have access to enough testing. As Texas Gov. Greg Abbott this week eased restrictions statewide, county leaders in Houston announced new rules requiring the area’s 4.7 million residents to wear masks in public for at least 30 days starting Monday. Abbott allowed the reopening of state parks, elective surgeries and curbside pickups at certain stores. Perhaps the loudest resistance to continued shutdowns came Wednesday from Las Vegas Mayor Carolyn Goodman, who in a CNN interview called for the immediate reopening of hotels and casinos in the city. “I’d love everything open.... We’ve had viruses for years,” said Goodman, who called the closings “total insanity.” Democratic Gov. Steve Sisolak said the state will move at a slower pace, describing its current status as “phase zero.” In Colorado, a stay-at-home order will expire on Sunday, yet the mayor of hard-hit Denver has said the city’s restrictions could be extended further. Oklahoma Gov. Kevin Stitt, a Republican, announced Wednesday that salons could open by appointment on Friday, followed by gyms and restaurants on May 1. But the mayor of Oklahoma City said the city would keep evaluating closures. Newsletter Get our free Coronavirus Today newsletter Sign up for the latest news, best stories and what they mean for you, plus answers to your questions. Sign Me Up You may occasionally receive promotional content from the Los Angeles Times. In New York, Democratic Gov. Andrew Cuomo announced Wednesday that the state would join New Jersey and Connecticut to partner on a contact tracing program with at least $10 million in funding from former New York Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg. Washington state Gov. Jay Inslee, a Democrat, also announced a tracing program. Contact tracing uses technology including mobile phones to notify people who may have been exposed, and has proven effective in China and other Asian nations. More than 46,000 people have died in the U.S. from COVID-19, the disease caused by the coronavirus. The number of confirmed U.S. cases is expected to hit 1 million within days. Studies have suggested that at least several times more people have been infected and are contagious without showing symptoms, which makes this coronavirus particularly difficult to contain. After a slow and still spotty start, the U.S. is testing more than a million people per week for the infection. Public health experts say at least triple that number should be the goal before the nation can safely start resuming activities that bring groups of more than 10 people together. Late Tuesday, new data showed that the coronavirus was in the U.S. much earlier than first believed. The Santa Clara County medical examiner released autopsy reports of two deaths, on Feb. 6 and Feb. 17, that showed they were caused by COVID-19. They are now the country’s earliest documented deaths from the disease. Previously, a man in Washington state who died Feb. 28 was thought to be the first casualty. Federal health officials have expressed caution about reopenings, fearing revived outbreaks. On Tuesday, the director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Robert Redfield, said in an interview with the Washington Post that the disease could “be even more difficult” next winter as it coincides with the normal flu season. There is “a possibility that the assault of the virus on our nation next winter will actually be even more difficult than the one we just went through,” he said. “We’re going to have the flu epidemic and the coronavirus epidemic at the same time.” Trump objected to the article, tweeting early Wednesday that the director was “totally misquoted” and that Redfield would issue a statement to that effect. Instead of a statement, Trump had Redfield join him at the White House news conference to tell reporters that the report was wrong. But the director conceded, “I’m accurately quoted.” The article in question was headlined, “CDC director warns second wave of coronavirus is likely to be even more devastating,” a description Trump disputed. Redfield also took issue with the word “devastating.” “I didn’t say this was going to be worse,” Redfield said. “I said this would be more difficult and potentially complicated because we’ll have flu and coronavirus circulate at the same time.” “You may not even have corona coming back,” Trump added. But his health advisors weren’t so confident. Dr. Deborah Birx, the White House coronavirus task force coordinator, said the government was preparing for the “potential” of a new COVID-19 outbreak in the fall and winter. And Dr. Anthony Fauci, director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, said, “We will have coronavirus in the fall.” But, he added, the country would be “much better prepared” for any outbreaks. Times staff writer Molly Hennessy-Fiske in Houston contributed to this report. 
Apr 22, 2 020	Although pandemics have long been a tragic scourge on our cities, they’ve also forced architecture and city planning to evolve. The bubonic plague, which wiped out at least a third of Europe’s population in the 14th century, helped to inspire the radical urban improvements of the Renaissance. Cities cleared squalid and cramped living quarters, expanded their borders, developed early quarantine facilities, opened larger and less cluttered public spaces and deployed professionals with specialized expertise, from surveyors to architects. Likewise, 18th century yellow fever and 19th century cholera and smallpox outbreaks helped to catalyze innovations like broad boulevards, citywide sewer systems, indoor plumbing, disease mapping and the early suburbs. In the 20th century, tuberculosis, typhoid, polio and Spanish flu breakouts prompted urban planning, slum clearance, tenement reform, waste management and, on a larger level, Modernism itself, with its airy spaces, single-use zoning (separating residential and industrial areas, for instance), cleaner surfaces (think glass and steel) and emphasis on sterility. It’s clear that the coronavirus will have — and is already having— a similarly profound effect on today’s built world. It’s shaking loose notions of what is “normal” in a field still employing many of the same techniques it did a century ago. And it’s pushing forward promising but still emerging currents, from prefabrication to telecommuting. Here is a look at six methods playing a prominent role in the age of COVID-19. If history is a guide, their temporary rise likely will become permanent, at least in some form. Modular construction As the pandemic has grown, the most pressing need in architecture has been speed: the quick creation of emergency facilities like hospitals, quarantine centers, testing sites and temporary lodgings. That demand has prompted an overwhelming response, much of it employing techniques outside the mainstream. A good example is modular construction — prefabricating standardized components in a factory, then assembling them quickly on site. It’s long been touted as a fast, flexible, less wasteful alternative to traditional building. The normal time to build a hospital is well over two years, but in February builders in Wuhan, China, the pandemic’s epicenter, used modular construction for two hospitals — the 1,000-bed Huoshenshan facility and the 1,600-bed Leishenshan Hospital — in about two weeks. The structures, created by thousands of workers and filled with advanced medical infrastructure, consist of prefabricated panels placed into steel skeletons above concrete foundations. A variation on this model is FEMA’s National Mobile Disaster Hospital, a collection of ready-to-go, portable tents and modular structures that can be trucked to disaster sites and set up in 48 to 72 hours. These units have already been dispatched to California, Washington and New York. Even more nimble and efficient modular systems are close to realization. Italian architect and MIT professor Carlo Ratti has designed intensive-care pods within a shipping container called CURA, short for Connected Units for Respiratory Ailments. The prefabricated pods, connected by inflatable corridors and fitted with biocontainment systems, can be set up by a small number of workers in just a few hours. The first CURA prototype is being installed at a hospital in Milan. U.S. company Jupe is creating the “world’s first standalone intensive care unit,” an affordable structure (the company claims its units are 1/30th the cost of a hospital room) whose interchangeable modular components can be flat-packed and deployed via trucks or cargo ships to hospitals. Jupe is building solar or battery-powered prototypes — including portable ICUs, off-grid recovery units and sleeping areas for medical professionals — at its El Paso, Texas, manufacturing facility. Modular construction offers not just speed but customization. Flexible components like movable walls can help buildings adapt to needs. A hospital, for instance, could shift or enlarge its spaces for treatment and quarantine, or open up new spaces to accommodate ICU beds. Adaptive reuse Also thrust into the spotlight is the use of existing buildings to serve newly relevant purposes. Increasingly popular before COVID-19, adaptive reuse is regarded as a sensitive, sustainable approach for our aging cities. And it’s proving to be the most efficient way to create emergency facilities. New York’s Javits Center has become a 2,900-bed hospital, the New Orleans Convention Center is a 3,000-bed facility, and Chicago’s McCormick Place is becoming a 3,000-bed complex. Sports facilities-turned-medical facilities include London’s ExCel center, Seattle’s CenturyLink Field and New York’s Billie Jean King National Tennis Center, which is serving as a hospital and a meal distribution center in Queens. Less conventional conversions are ramping up. Vanderbilt University is converting a parking lot into an overflow medical facility, and FEMA is converting a Wall Street high-rise into additional bed space. The Navy deployed the Comfort and the Mercy, supertankers converted into floating hospitals, to New York and Los Angeles, respectively. The U.S. Army Corps of Engineers is converting hotels, dormitories, sports arenas and other buildings into temporary hospitals. It’s clear that we’ll need more efficient, effective and flexible reuse plans for future crises. Perhaps cities will require them for construction approval? And open-source guides, like the one that Cambridge-based MASS Design Group is sharing to help other designers retrofit spaces for infection control, will likely play a major role in improving emergency reuse moving forward. Lightweight architecture In disaster response, lightweight fabric construction is often preferable for its speed and portability. In South Korea designers developed a system of tent-like drive-through testing centers that have been emulated worldwide. Drawing from its experience with viruses such as SARS, and inspired by the fast-food drive-thru, designers developed a kit-of-parts that has been deployed in more than 600 locations in a matter of weeks. Workers from Milan to New York’s Central Park are assembling tent structures to create field hospitals, adapting a model from wartime to this biological battle. Fabric structures from UC San Francisco to a tent village in Lima, Peru, are being employed as triage and emergency room extensions, waiting and treatment areas, and, sadly, as temporary morgues. Inflatable fabric structures can be easily transported and erected with just a compressor. In Mexico, the government of the state of Hidalgo has set up a 19,400-square-foot inflatable hospital in Pachuca, prepared to see up to 80 COVID-19 patients a day. The healthy building While trapped at home during quarantine, you may have become hyper aware of the shortcomings of your personal surroundings. Expect more people to embrace the Healthy Building Movement, an approach to improving health through strategies like greater natural light, improved ventilation, fewer toxic substances and the incorporation of plants and other natural materials. Think skylights, large windows, rooftop terraces, balconies and courtyards. Spaces for exercise and meditation could become standard along with home offices. The most valuable healthy building tool during the COVID-19 outbreak has been advanced ventilation, particularly in hospitals. These technologies include negative air pressure (which keeps pathogens from spreading to other parts of a hospital), displacement ventilation (in which cooler air enters from below and lifts contaminants), clean air ventilation (which brings in fresh air, rather than recirculating existing air), and various filtration and humidity systems. These kinds of techniques will likely become standard in hospitals after the pandemic, but might they expand to wherever people congregate, like homes, offices, factories, warehouses and schools? They could save lives where occupants don’t have a choice about social distance: prisons, homeless shelters and refugee facilities. Perhaps they could be complemented by germ-resistant strategies like antimicrobial polymer surfaces, copper alloy surfaces (which naturally kill germs and viruses) and flexible spatial designs to accommodate social distancing. Telecommuting and small-city living If we zoom out to the urban realm, we quickly find other “alternative” methods moving mainstream in the midst of this crisis. The most obvious is telecommuting, which has temporarily come to dominate our work and social lives. Distance communication could bring major change to cities and suburbs. The time savings of not commuting from home, the increased familiarity with telemedicine and distance learning, the convenience of online shopping and the cultural connection of online entertainment (virtual museum visits, livestreams of concerts, recorded theater) — these all could change our long-term habits, dramatically cutting traffic, sprawl and pollution. Have you seen the pictures of our cities from space lately? Increased acceptance of digital connectivity could bolster smaller cities and rural areas, where untethered workers, a.k.a. digital nomads, could become more prevalent. Coronavirus refugees from New York and other large metropolises are suddenly living and working from far away. Some inevitably will stay, drawn to a new lifestyle or wary of returning to places they now consider dangerous. The pandemic’s potency in the largest, densest metropolitan areas raises questions about the sustainability of so-called megacities already struggling with scant affordable housing, growing economic inequality, sprawl and aging infrastructure. The future is still unclear, but perhaps we will see a shift in regional balance toward less populated places. The town square, reconsidered Another potential change, one that’s somewhat paradoxical in this germophobic time: With social distancing dominating our lives, it’s becoming clearer how much we crave human contact and community interaction. Yes, we’ll all be nervous to socialize for a while, but when this pandemic is over, the call for connection will be that much greater. How this will play out in the urban realm is an open question. Some cities — particularly those in dire financial straits — may neglect public space in favor of other priorities. But I would argue (and others support this theory) that we will eventually devote more resources to help us congregate and to strengthen our frayed community bonds, be it through parks, plazas, promenades, community centers or streets turned over to pedestrians. Many of us are getting used to walking more, facing less interference from cars and finding nooks without too many people. Several cities have closed (or partially closed) streets to cars to aid residents with social distancing. Perhaps some streets could remain that way? We’ll need to think more carefully about how to keep these spaces safe in emergencies. Perhaps the digital systems now being used to track and contain the virus — like the one being developed by Apple and Google — could play a role? They could, among many other things, assess potential threats where we congregate, act as early warning systems, help us maintain social distance, quickly alert authorities to close spaces, or ensure that those infected are not out socializing. Building beyond COVID We’re not going to scrap how we’ve been building architecture and cities. But as our world moves faster and becomes more interconnected, we need to embrace a new tool kit of options that are more flexible, holistic and responsive. Yes, to better address pandemic response. But also to help tackle urgent issues like climate change, terrorism, migration, social disconnection and inequality, community disintegration, housing shortages, traffic, pollution, sprawl and over-development — not to mention problems we haven’t anticipated. Our architectural and urban planning systems, developed in a vastly different time, are long overdue to address many of these complex contemporary issues. The time to reassess our built world is now, not after the next catastrophe. What if we more effectively employed modular building tools not just to face pandemics or natural disasters, but also to create less costly, more quickly built buildings in general, from pop-up shops to affordable housing? What if we broadened our sense of what a building could be and turned vacant malls into schools, or vacant offices into transitional housing for the homeless? What if we harnessed telecommuting as not just a way to social distance, but a way to help employees achieve work-life balance — spending more time with family, or exercising, or doing any number of things that would make them healthier? The coronavirus has reminded us that we can see many challenges coming if we pay attention and listen to the experts. We can’t wait until we’re overwhelmed. We need to be proactive, not reactive. Do we want our response to be as flat-footed as our country’s initial response to COVID-19? Let’s learn from this tragedy. Let’s find the silver lining. 
Apr 22, 2020	Netflix on Wednesday said it is raising $1 billion in a debt offering, money that could be used for purchases related to content and potential acquisitions. In a statement, Netflix said money raised in the debt offering would be used for general corporate purposes that “may include content acquisitions, production and development, capital expenditures, investments, working capital and potential acquisitions and strategic transactions.” Last fall, Netflix telegraphed its plans to sell senior notes for 1.1 billion euros and $1 billion. Jeffrey Wlodarczak, a principal and analyst at New York-based Pivotal Research Group, said he believes Netflix doesn’t need any capital and that the uncertain economic climate could create opportunities for Netflix to buy a small tech company or acquire more content. “They are just being opportunistic and prudent after very strong results and given the uncertain global economic outlook,” Wlodarczak said. The Los Gatos streamer has benefited from the stay-at-home measures caused by the coronavirus crisis. It signed up a record amount of subscribers in the first quarter, as more people are looking for ways to stay entertained. From January to March, Netflix added 15.8 million subscribers, more than double what Wall Street had expected. Due to the pandemic, many Hollywood productions have been shelved, and it is unclear when work will restart. Netflix said it has shot most of its 2020 slate and popular shows such as the fourth season of “The Crown” will be released on schedule. Ted Sarandos, Netflix’s chief content officer, also said in an earnings presentation on Tuesday that Netflix is continuing production in Ireland and South Korea. The company expects that it will likely spend less on content this year. “The impact on us is less cash spending this year as some content projects are pushed out,” Netflix said in a letter to shareholders on Tuesday. “We are working hard to complete the content we know our members want, and we’re complementing this effort with additional licensed films and series.” The company said on Tuesday that its $750 million unsecured credit facility remains undrawn and it has more than 12 months of liquidity and “substantial financial flexibility.” Netflix had $5.2 billion in cash and $14.17 billion in long-term debt in the first quarter. “Our financing strategy remains unchanged — our current plan is to continue to use debt to finance our investment needs,” the company said. Other entertainment companies, including Walt Disney Co., which has been hard hit by the coronavirus, have also raised debt offerings amid the pandemic. 
Apr 22, 2020	Los Angeles artists and arts institutions have been pummeled by the coronavirus crisis. But some artistic projects are nonetheless moving forward. The Mike Kelley Foundation for the Arts is scheduled to announce its 2020 project grants on Wednesday morning, which will include support for interdisciplinary performances, a sound art project by Latinx artists and an exhibition that will bring together work by three important female artists who connected with one another in the 1970s through UC Irvine’s then-nascent master’s in fine arts program. “In the midst of a global crisis that is putting an unprecedented strain on our cultural community, grantmaking in the arts has a heightened sense of urgency,” said the foundation’s executive director, Mary Clare Stevens, in a statement. “While our grants in the past have primarily supported project-related expenses, this year we will be more flexible. We will work closely with each grantee and find the best ways to buoy their work during this time.” The grants to nine small and midsize L.A. arts organizations represent a total of $400,000 in donations, the fifth year that the Mike Kelley Foundation has supported artistic projects “that undertake compelling, inventive and risk-taking work in any medium, particularly projects that have proven difficult to develop or fund.” This year’s recipients include: - Los Angeles Contemporary Art Exhibition (LACE) in Hollywood, for “Intergalactix: against isolation / contra el aislamiento,” which will explore concepts of borders and immigration policies between Mexico and the United States. - The Armory Center for the Arts in Pasadena, for a group show that will bring together work by Nancy Buchanan, Marcia Hafif and Barbara T. Smith, three important L.A. artists who met at UCI in the ’70s. - Pieter, a community arts organization based in Lincoln heights, for “Knees, Schools, Urges,” a show that will invite local artists to respond to the history of modern dance in L.A. - The Vincent Price Art Museum at East Los Angeles College for the group show “Sonidx: Audio Culture in Latinx Art,” which will explore sound art by a range of contemporary Latinx artists.  - Human Resources L.A., an artist-run space in Chinatown, for a sound project — this one inspired by the influential composer and installation artist Maryann Amacher. - Fulcrum Arts and homeLA, two local experimental arts organizations, for a series of performance events organized by artists Julie Tolentino and the duo Rashaun Mitchell + Silas Riener at the Neighborhood Unitarian Universalist Church in Pasadena. - REDCAT, for a multimedia project by artist Nao Bustamante titled “The Wooden People,” which explores Mayan myth and the narrative conventions of the telenovela. - Visual Communications Media, which supports filmmakers of Asian descent, for a multi-disciplinary project led by artist Tina Takemoto that will explore the changing landscape of Little Tokyo. - Los Angeles Filmforum, for a program of newly commissioned short films by filmmakers who are based outside of Los Angeles (including South Korea, Mexico and the Philippines).  The foundation’s 2021 grant cycle will open to artists and arts organizations in June — but guidelines may be different than in years past due to the COVID-19 pandemic. “We are in discussion with the arts community to assess their needs and how the foundation can best address them in this disruptive environment,” said Stevens in her statement. The Mike Kelley Foundation, launched by the late Los Angeles artist, who was a longtime supporter of small arts organizations doing experimental work, is also among the arts nonprofits supporting the new Artist Relief Fund, a special emergency fund for artists whose income has been affected by the pandemic. 
Apr 22, 2020	Although pandemics have long been a tragic scourge on our cities, they've also forced architecture and city planning to evolve. The bubonic plague, which wiped out at least a third of Europe's population in the 14th century, helped to inspire the radical urban improvements of the Renaissance. Cities cleared squalid living quarters, developed early quarantine facilities, opened larger and less cluttered public spaces and deployed professionals with specialized expertise, from surveyors to architects. Likewise, 18th century yellow fever and 19th century cholera and smallpox outbreaks catalyzed innovations like broad boulevards, citywide sewer systems, indoor plumbing, disease mapping and the early suburbs.  In the 20th century, tuberculosis, typhoid, polio and Spanish flu prompted urban planning, tenement reform, waste management and, on a larger level, Modernism itself, with its airy spaces, zoning (separating residential and industrial areas, for instance), cleaner surfaces (think glass and steel) and emphasis on sterility. It's clear that the coronavirus will have a similarly profound effect on today's built world. It's shaking loose notions of what is "normal" in a field still employing many of the same techniques it did a century ago. Here is a look at five methods in the age of COVID-19. If history is a guide, their temporary rise likely will become permanent, at least in some form. Thinking modular The most pressing architectural need in the pandemic has been speed: the quick creation of emergency facilities like hospitals, quarantine centers and testing sites. That demand has prompted an overwhelming response, much of it employing techniques outside the mainstream. A good example is modular construction -- prefabricating standardized components in a factory, then assembling them on site. It's long been touted as a fast, flexible, less wasteful alternative to traditional building. The normal time to build a hospital is well over two years, but in February builders in Wuhan, China, the pandemic's epicenter, used modular construction for two hospitals -- the 1,000-bed Huoshenshan facility and the 1,600-bed Leishenshan Hospital -- in about two weeks. The structures, created by thousands of workers and filled with advanced medical infrastructure, consist of prefabricated panels placed into steel skeletons above concrete foundations. A variation on this model is FEMA's National Mobile Disaster Hospital, a collection of ready-to-go, portable tents and modular structures that can be trucked to disaster sites and set up in 48 to 72 hours. These units have been dispatched to California, Washington and New York. Italian architect and MIT professor Carlo Ratti has designed intensive-care pods within a shipping container called CURA, short for Connected Units for Respiratory Ailments. The prefabricated pods, connected by inflatable corridors and fitted with biocontainment systems, can be set up in just a few hours. The first prototype is being installed at a hospital in Milan. U.S. company Jupe is creating the "world's first standalone intensive care unit," an affordable structure (the company claims its units are one-thirtieth the cost of a hospital room) whose interchangeable modular components can be flat-packed and deployed via trucks or cargo ships to hospitals. Jupe is building solar or battery-powered prototypes -- including portable ICUs, off-grid recovery units and sleeping areas for medical professionals -- at its El Paso manufacturing facility. Adaptive reuse Also thrust into the spotlight is the use of existing buildings to serve newly relevant purposes. Increasingly popular before COVID-19, adaptive reuse is regarded as a sensitive, sustainable approach for our aging cities. And it's proving to be the most efficient way to create emergency facilities. New York's Javits Center has become a 2,900-bed hospital, the New Orleans Convention Center is a 3,000-bed facility, and Chicago's McCormick Place is becoming a 3,000-bed complex. Sports facilities-turned-medical-facilities include London's ExCel center, Seattle's CenturyLink Field and New York's Billie Jean King National Tennis Center, which is serving as a hospital and a meal distribution center in Queens. Less conventional conversions are ramping up. Vanderbilt University is converting a parking lot into an overflow medical facility, and FEMA is converting a Wall Street high-rise into additional bed space. Fabric architecture In South Korea designers developed a lightweight system of tent-like drive-through testing centers that have been emulated worldwide. Drawing from its experience with viruses such as SARS, and inspired by the fast-food drive-thru, designers developed a kit-of-parts that has been deployed in more than 600 locations in a matter of weeks. Workers from Milan to New York's Central Park are assembling tent structures as field hospitals, adapting a model from wartime. Fabric structures from UC San Francisco to a tent village in Lima, Peru, serve as triage and emergency room extensions, waiting and treatment areas, and, sadly, temporary morgues. In Mexico, the government of the state of Hidalgo has set up a 19,400-square-foot inflatable hospital in Pachuca, prepared to see up to 80 COVID-19 patients a day. Telecommuting If we zoom out to the urban realm, we quickly find other "alternative" methods moving mainstream. The most obvious is telecommuting. Distance communication could bring major change to cities and suburbs. The time savings of not commuting from home, the increased familiarity with telemedicine and distance learning, the convenience of online shopping and the cultural connection of online entertainment (virtual museum visits, livestreams of concerts, recorded theater) -- these all could change our long-term habits, dramatically cutting traffic, sprawl and pollution. Have you seen the pictures of our cities from space lately? Increased acceptance of digital connectivity could bolster smaller cities and rural areas, where untethered workers, a.k.a. digital nomads, could become more prevalent. Coronavirus refugees from New York and other large metropolises are suddenly living and working from far away. Some inevitably will stay, drawn to a new lifestyle or wary of returning to places they now consider dangerous. The pandemic's potency in the largest, densest metropolitan areas raises questions about the sustainability of so-called megacities already struggling with scant affordable housing, growing economic inequality, sprawl and aging infrastructure. The future is still unclear, but perhaps we will see a shift in regional balance toward less populated places. A new town square Another potential change, one that's somewhat paradoxical in this germophobic time: With social distancing dominating our lives, it's becoming clearer how much we crave human contact and community interaction. Yes, we'll all be nervous to socialize for a while, but when this pandemic is over, the call for connection will be that much greater. Cities in dire financial straits may neglect public space in favor of other priorities. But I would argue (and others support this theory) that we will eventually devote more resources to help us congregate and to strengthen our frayed community bonds, be it through parks, plazas or streets turned over to pedestrians. Many of us are getting used to walking more, facing less interference from cars and finding nooks without too many people. Beyond the now The time to reassess our built world is now, not after the next catastrophe. What if we more effectively employed modular building tools not just to face pandemics or natural disasters, but also to create less costly, more quickly built buildings in general, from pop-up shops to affordable housing? What if we broadened our sense of what a building could be and turned vacant malls into schools, or vacant offices into transitional housing for the homeless? What if we harnessed telecommuting as not just a way to social distance, but a way to help employees achieve work-life balance -- spending more time with family, or exercising? The coronavirus has reminded us that we can see many challenges coming if we pay attention and listen to the experts. We can't wait until we're overwhelmed. Do we want our response to be as flat-footed as our country's initial response to COVID-19? Let's learn from this tragedy. Let's find the silver lining. Caption: PHOTO: MORE PEOPLE telecommuting has contributed to light traffic on L.A. freeways. PHOTOGRAPHER:Carolyn Cole Los Angeles Times PHOTO:NEW YORK CITY'S Javits Center has been converted into a temporary hospital. PHOTOGRAPHER:Noam Galai Getty Images 
Apr 22, 2020	As several Southern governors began to reopen states shuttered by the coronavirus outbreak, some mayors and a senior Republican senator pushed back Tuesday, saying restrictions were being lifted too quickly. "I am beyond disturbed," Van R. Johnson, mayor of Savannah, Ga., said on CNN after Georgia Gov. Brian Kemp announced that gyms, hair and nail salons, tattoo parlors and bowling alleys could reopen Friday as long as customers obeyed social distancing guidelines. Johnson called the governor's order "reckless, premature and dangerous," and asked businesses in his city to show "common sense" by staying closed until testing increased and infections declined.  Nearly 800 people have died of COVID-19 in Georgia since the outbreak began, including 85 on Monday -- the worst day yet. In Atlanta, Georgia's biggest city, Mayor Keisha Lance Bottoms said she was "perplexed" by the governor's decision. "I don't see that it's based on anything that's logical," she said. Kemp joined his fellow Republican governors from South Carolina and Tennessee in announcing partial openings this week even as local authorities continued to grapple with COVID-19 deaths and called for more testing. In South Carolina, Gov. Henry McMaster said that department stores, flea markets and florists could resume business Monday night and that the state's beaches could reopen Tuesday. John Tecklenburg, mayor of Charleston, S.C., said during a news conference Tuesday that his city would comply with McMaster's order. But he said he was still concerned about testing capacity. Sen. Lindsey Graham (R-S.C.) said he supported the new guidelines in his state but thought neighboring Georgia was "going too fast too soon." "We respect Georgia's right to determine its own fate, but we are all in this together," Graham tweeted. "What happens in Georgia will impact us in South Carolina." Asked about the dispute at a White House briefing, President Trump didn't answer directly. "Two very capable people," Trump said of Kemp and McMaster, adding that "we'll find out" the impact of the changes. "They're going to be doing it safely ... with tremendous passion," Trump said broadly of reopening plans. Dr. Deborah Birx, the White House coronavirus coordinator, suggested that Georgia was going against federal guidelines by lifting restrictions on businesses where people are required to sit close together. "We were very clear" on the need to keep people at least six feet apart, she said, adding, "I don't know how" people would follow them while getting a tattoo, a haircut or a manicure. "People are very creative," she said. In Ohio, Republican Gov. Mike DeWine said that the state would begin a partial reopening on May 1, and that he would announce specific plans on Thursday. At a news conference, DeWine described it as a "high-wire act" and admitted that coronavirus infections could increase as a result. At least 1,828 inmates at a state prison in Marion, Ohio, nearly three-fourths of the prison population, are infected. In Tennessee, Gov. Bill Lee said the "vast majority" of businesses and services could reopen by May 1, but that people should still keep a healthy distance from one another to avoid spreading the virus. "For the good of our state, social distancing must continue, but our economic shutdown cannot," Lee said. Trump has called for the quick reopening of state economies, although he told governors last week they should "call the shots" on how and when to carry that out to prevent a new outbreak. Public health experts say most Americans should remain home until widespread testing is available to determine who is sick and who should be put in quarantine. Current testing is far from sufficient, they warn. About 4 million people have been tested in the U.S. so far. But studies by the Rockefeller Foundation and Harvard University researchers say the country needs at least 3 million tests per week, or about triple the current capacity. On Monday, Trump derided Maryland Gov. Larry Hogan, a Republican, after Hogan purchased half a million testing kits for his state from South Korea instead of waiting for assistance from the federal government. Hogan has expressed frustration for days with the Trump administration over his state's struggle to obtain more testing equipment. "If there were an easier way, we certainly would have taken it," Hogan said Tuesday on MSNBC. In New York and Detroit, two of the hardest-hit cities, officials have said the rate of infections may have peaked, although it may be months or longer before the economy recovers. New York Gov. Andrew Cuomo said Tuesday that he expects upstate areas to reopen before New York City. In Florida, Republican Gov. Ron DeSantis, who faced early criticism for waiting weeks to issue a stay-at-home order in his state while beaches were packed in late March, declared victory on Tuesday, saying "we have flattened the curve." Florida saw fewer than 800 new reported cases for the last three days, the lowest since late March.
Apr 22, 2020	The coronavirus outbreak has roiled much of the media and entertainment industries, but not the king of all streaming. Netflix on Tuesday reported a record increase in subscribers as the Los Gatos, Calif., company reaped the benefits of a massive increase in home viewing caused by stay-at-home measures intended to curb the spread of the coronavirus. The company gained 15.8 million global subscribers, surging ahead of Wall Street's expectations of 7.6 million. It now has a total of 183 million customers.  Netflix generated net income of $709 million, or $1.57 earnings per share, in the first quarter, more than double from a year earlier. Revenue during the same period rose 28% to $5.77 billion. Analysts surveyed by FactSet had estimated $5.75 billion in revenue and income of $753 million in the first quarter. The company had added 9.6 million global subscribers in the first quarter of 2019 -- its previous all-time quarterly high -- and had forecast it would add 7 million global subscribers in the first quarter of this year. "While everyone in the media industry is hurting from COVID-19 and related economic impacts, Netflix currently is in much better shape to weather the storm than its competitors," Eric Haggstrom, an analyst with research firm EMarketer, said in a statement. "With most of the U.S., Europe, and the rest of the world stuck at home, people are spending more time watching streaming video than ever before." During the week of March 16, Americans streamed more than 156 billion minutes of content, up 36% compared with three weeks earlier, before the social distancing restrictions took effect, according to Nielsen. Netflix said that it has seen an increase in demand as a result of people staying at home, but it expects viewing and membership growth to decelerate when home confinement ends. "Our small contribution in these difficult times is to make home confinement a little more bearable," said Reed Hastings, Netflix's chief executive, said in a video presentation for investors. Chief Content Officer Ted Sarandos added that the 2020 slate of series and films have been largely shot and are in post-production. He said Netflix is "pretty deep" into its 2021 slate and is shooting some projects in Iceland and South Korea, "taking those key learnings and applying them to plans for productions around the world." Highly anticipated programs such as the fourth season of "The Crown" will be released as planned. "We don't anticipate moving things around," Sarandos said. Netflix continues to distribute some of the most talked-about shows, including the docuseries "Tiger King," which drew 64 million households and the unscripted dating show "Love Is Blind," which pulled in 30 million households during its first four weeks. Netflix counted households that watched at least two minutes of the programs. The pandemic has helped change the narrative for Netflix from last year, when the number of U.S. subscribers declined after the streamer raised its prices. Some analysts at the time were concerned about whether Netflix would be able to keep up its growth trajectory as new competitors such as Disney+ and Apple TV+ entered the market. Now, Netflix, which does not offer any live sports, has a significant advantage compared with competitors such as Disney, analysts said. Walt Disney Co. is furloughing workers after it closed its popular theme parks, a key part of its business. Meanwhile, Netflix is adding to its staff and said it has hired 2,000 more workers to handle customer service. "In this environment, it will be tough for Netflix competitors to go all out and put up a huge fight and grab their market share," said Haris Anwar, a senior analyst with Investing.com. If the economy falls into a deep recession, however, some consumers could view paying for Netflix as a luxury. Netflix's ability to entice audiences with new shows and movies could be hampered if Hollywood productions continue to be suspended. The company has committed $150 million to supporting the industry and says it has been able to keep some of its work going amid the coronavirus crisis. Netflix's animation team is working from home and was back up and running within two weeks of the shelter-in-place orders in L.A. It also has been able to keep more than 200 postproduction projects going remotely, the company said. "The impact on us is less cash spending this year as some content projects are pushed out," Netflix said. Netflix stock has mushroomed more than 30% this year as the Standard & Poor's 500 index has declined about 13%. The stock closed Tuesday at $433.83 a share, down 0.8%. Caption: PHOTO: NETFLIX'S net income in the first quarter was more than double from a year earlier. It expects viewing and membership growth to decelerate when stay-at-home orders end. Above, a Netflix user in London. PHOTOGRAPHER:Luke Dray Getty Images
Apr 21, 2020	As several Southern governors began to reopen states shuttered by the coronavirus outbreak, some mayors and a senior Republican senator pushed back Tuesday, saying restrictions were being lifted too quickly. “I am beyond disturbed,” Van R. Johnson, mayor of Savannah, Ga., said on CNN after Georgia Gov. Brian Kemp announced that gyms, hair and nail salons, tattoo parlors and bowling alleys could reopen Friday as long as customers obeyed social distancing guidelines. Johnson called the governor’s order “reckless, premature and dangerous,” and asked businesses in his city to show “common sense” by staying closed until testing increased and infections declined. Nearly 800 people have died of COVID-19 in Georgia since the outbreak began, including 85 on Monday — the worst day yet. In Atlanta, Georgia’s biggest city, Mayor Keisha Lance Bottoms said she was “perplexed” by the governor’s decision. “I don’t see that it’s based on anything that’s logical,” she said. Kemp joined his fellow Republican governors from South Carolina and Tennessee in announcing partial openings this week even as local authorities continued to grapple with COVID-19 deaths and called for more testing. In South Carolina, Gov. Henry McMaster said that department stores, flea markets and florists could resume business Monday night and that the state’s beaches could reopen Tuesday. John Tecklenburg, mayor of Charleston, S.C., said during a news conference Tuesday that his city would comply with McMaster’s order. But he said he was still concerned about testing capacity. Sen. Lindsey Graham (R-S.C.) said he supported the new guidelines in his state but thought neighboring Georgia was “going too fast too soon.” “We respect Georgia’s right to determine its own fate, but we are all in this together,” Graham tweeted. “What happens in Georgia will impact us in South Carolina.” Asked about the dispute at a White House briefing, President Trump didn’t answer directly. “Two very capable people,” Trump said of Kemp and McMaster, adding that “we’ll find out” the impact of the changes. “They’re going to be doing it safely... with tremendous passion,” Trump said broadly of reopening plans. Dr. Deborah Birx, the White House coronavirus coordinator, suggested that Georgia was going against federal guidelines by lifting restrictions on businesses where people are required to sit close together. “We were very clear” on the need to keep people at least six feet apart, she said, adding “I don’t know how” people would follow them while getting a tattoo, a haircut or a manicure. “People are very creative,” she said. In Ohio, Republican Gov. Mike DeWine said that the state would begin a partial reopening on May 1, and that he would announce specific plans on Thursday. At a news conference, DeWine described it as a “high-wire act” and admitted that coronavirus infections could increase as a result. At least 1,828 inmates at a state prison in Marion, Ohio, nearly three-fourths of the prison population, are infected. In Tennessee, Gov. Bill Lee said the “vast majority” of businesses and services could reopen by May 1, but that people should still keep a healthy distance from one another to avoid spreading the virus. “For the good of our state, social distancing must continue, but our economic shutdown cannot,” Lee said. Trump has called for the quick reopening of state economies, although he told governors last week they should “call the shots” on how and when to carry that out to prevent a new outbreak. Public health experts say most Americans should remain home until widespread testing is available to determine who is sick and who should be put in quarantine. Current testing is far from sufficient, they warn. About 4 million people have been tested in the U.S. so far. But studies by the Rockefeller Foundation and Harvard University researchers say the country needs at least 3 million tests per week, or about triple the current capacity. On Monday, Trump derided Maryland Gov. Larry Hogan, a Republican, after Hogan purchased half a million testing kits for his state from South Korea instead of waiting for assistance from the federal government. Trump said Hogan, who heads the National Governors Assn., “needs to get a little knowledge.” Hogan has expressed frustration for days with the Trump administration over his state’s struggle to obtain more testing equipment. “If there were an easier way, we certainly would have taken it,” Hogan said Tuesday on MSNBC. In New York and Detroit, two of the hardest-hit cities, officials have said the rate of infections may have peaked, although it may be months or longer before the economy recovers. New York Gov. Andrew Cuomo said Tuesday that he expects upstate areas to reopen before New York City. Cuomo met Trump at the White House, where he said they discussed the need for greater coronavirus testing. “It has to be a real partnership” between states and the federal government, Cuomo said on MSNBC. He said Trump was “very open and understanding” of his request for more federal aid to states to increase testing. In Florida, Republican Gov. Ron DeSantis, who faced early criticism for waiting weeks to issue a stay-at-home order in his state while beaches were packed in late March, declared victory on Tuesday, saying “we have flattened the curve.” Florida saw fewer than 800 new reported cases of the coronavirus for the last three days, the lowest since late March when testing was more limited. At least 867 have died across the state. White House guidelines say regions should see two weeks of declines before reopenings. Louisiana also seemed to be turning the corner after drastic increases in infections and deaths. Democratic Gov. John Bel Edwards has asked for patience from residents before lifting restrictions but not until testing increased. “We have to do what we have to do to save lives. We gotta get through this together, and I assure you, we will,” Edwards said. In California, the number of infections appears to be leveling off even as death rates remain high. Gov. Gavin Newsom, who has partnered with governors in Oregon and Washington to coordinate a regional recovery plan, is allowing limited easing of shutdown orders in certain areas. Parks are reopening in Ventura County, for example. So are golf courses in Riverside County. But the governor said Tuesday that he would not allow communities to unilaterally lift stay-at-home orders. New outbreaks of COVID-19 are also emerging, including in Massachusetts, which reported a 10% increase in hospitalizations last week. Officials say the crisis in the Chicago area is yet to reach its peak. Major events also continued to be canceled. Organizers announced Tuesday that the Scripps National Spelling Bee, which has taken place since 1925 and was called off only once before — during World War II — will not take place this year. 
Apr 21, 2020	The coronavirus outbreak has roiled much of the media and entertainment industries, but not the king of all streaming. Netflix on Tuesday reported a record increase in subscribers as the Los Gatos, Calif., company reaped the benefits of a massive increase in home viewing caused by stay-at-home measures intended to curb the spread of the coronavirus. The company gained 15.8 million global subscribers, surging ahead of Wall Street’s expectations of 7.6 million. It now has a total of 183 million customers. Netflix generated a net income of $709 million or $1.57 earnings per share in its first quarter, more than double from a year earlier. Revenue during the same period rose 28% to $5.77 billion. Analysts surveyed by FactSet had estimated $5.75 billion in revenue and income of $753 million in the first quarter. The company had added 9.6 million global subscribers in the first quarter of 2019 — its previous all-time quarterly high — and had forecast it would add 7 million global subscribers in the first quarter of this year. “While everyone in the media industry is hurting from COVID-19 and related economic impacts, Netflix currently is in much better shape to weather the storm than its competitors,” Eric Haggstrom, an analyst with research firm EMarketer, said in a statement. “With most of the U.S., Europe, and the rest of the world stuck at home, people are spending more time watching streaming video than ever before.” During the week of March 16, Americans streamed more than 156 billion minutes of content, up 36% compared with three weeks earlier, before the social distancing restrictions took effect, according to Nielsen. Netflix said that it has seen an increase in demand as a result of people staying at home, but it expects viewing and membership growth to decelerate when home confinement ends. “Our small contribution in these difficult times is to make home confinement a little more bearable,” said Reed Hastings, Netflix’s CEO, said in a video presentation for investors. Ted Sarandos, Netflix’s chief content officer, added that the 2020 slate of series and films have been largely shot and are in post-production. He said Netflix is “pretty deep” into its 2021 slate and is shooting some projects in Iceland and South Korea, “taking those key learnings and applying them to plans for productions around the world.” Highly-anticipated programs such as the fourth season of “The Crown” will be released as planned. “We don’t anticipate moving things around,” Sarandos said. Netflix continues to distribute some of the most talked-about shows, including the docuseries “Tiger King,” which drew 64 million households and unscripted dating show “Love is Blind,” which pulled in 30 million households during its first four weeks. Netflix counted households that watched at least two minutes of the programs. The pandemic has helped to change the narrative for Netflix from last year, when the number of U.S. subscribers declined after the streamer raised its prices. Some analysts at the time were concerned about whether Netflix would be able to keep up its growth trajectory as new competitors such as Disney+ and Apple TV+ entered the market. Now, Netflix, which does not offer any live sports, has a significant advantage compared with competitorssuch as Disney, analysts said. Walt Disney Co. is furloughing workers after it closed its popular theme parks, a key part of its business. Meanwhile, Netflix is adding to its staff and said it has hired 2,000 more workers to handle customer service. “In this environment, it will be tough for Netflix competitors to go all out and put up a huge fight and grab their market share,” said Haris Anwar, a senior analyst with Investing.com. If the economy falls into a deep recession, however, some consumers could view paying for Netflix as a luxury. Netflix’s ability to entice audiences with new shows and movies could be hampered if Hollywood productions continue to be suspended. The company has committed $150 million to supporting the industry and says it has been able to keep some of its work going amid the coronavirus crisis. Netflix’s animation team is working from home and was back up and running within two weeks of the shelter-in-place orders in L.A. It also has been able to keep more than 200 post-production projects going remotely, the company said. “The impact on us is less cash spending this year as some content projects are pushed out,” Netflix said. Netflix stock has mushroomed more than 30% this year, as the Standard & Poor’s 500 index has declined about 13%. The stock closed Tuesday at $433.83 a share, down 0.8%. 
Apr 21, 2020	North Korea’s enduring secrecy means that morsels of often thinly sourced information can quickly capture the attention of the world. In 1986, newspapers splashed across their front pages stories of the death of Kim Il Sung, the nation’s founder. He would live another eight years. The latest rumor concerns Kim Il Sung’s grandson and current North Korean leader, Kim Jong Un. A Seoul-based website reported Monday that the dictator had undergone a “cardiovascular procedure,” sparking a media frenzy and widespread speculation that Kim was seriously ill — and possibly even at death’s door. But experts who study North Korea have almost unanimously expressed skepticism of the report, which relied on anonymous sources. Both the governments of South Korea, which tracks activity north of the border closely, and China, which is North Korea’s most important backer, also dismissed the report. “Only one source right now. Echo chamber,” Victor Cha, Korea chairman at the Center for Strategic and International Studies and a former member of the U.S. National Security Council under President George W. Bush, said in an email. “I have a sheet with about 18 different rumors of coup attempts and deaths from the late ’80s through the ’90s. Many more after that,” added Michael Madden, an expert at the Stimson Center on North Korea’s leadership. “If you do this for a certain number of years, the occasional far-out rumors are an amusing diversion.” The North Korean rumor mill is a constant background noise that complicates the already-difficult task of gleaning information from a nuclear-armed state that’s maintained isolation for decades. The report about Kim’s medical procedure earlier this month originated from the Daily NK, a website affiliated with the South Korea Unification Ministry. The outlet, which relies on anonymous sources in North Korea, counts the Washington-based National Endowment for Democracy as one of its financial backers. South Korea’s intelligence service has contacted the outlet for information on occasion, but not all the information it has published has proven accurate. A spokesman for the South Korean president’s office said Tuesday that “no unusual developments have been detected inside North Korea.” Madden said Seoul has taken a harder stance against death rumors involving the leadership in Pyongyang over the last decade because of attempts to manipulate the stock market with unsubstantiated news. Kim’s health has always been a source of speculation. The portly 36-year-old is a heavy smoker with a penchant for excess. When he didn’t appear at his grandfather’s birthday ceremonies last week, some wondered if his absence was related to the coronavirus. If nothing else, the rumor has raised questions about what would happen to North Korea if Kim died unexpectedly, which would plunge the impoverished nation and Chinese-dominated region into uncertainty at a time when the world is distracted by a pandemic. Who would replace Kim? Hereditary succession is a feature of North Korean rule, but little is known about Kim’s children (he’s believed to have three), who are anyway too young to take control. The country could break with gender tradition and keep power within the immediate family by tapping Kim’s sister, Kim Yo Jong, who has emerged as a trusted confidant of her brother. “Kim Yo Jong’s profile has risen and her role has broadened significantly over the past couple years,” said Rachel Lee, a former North Korea analyst for the U.S. government. Kim Yo Jong could serve as a placeholder until one of her brother’s children is old enough to take over. Regardless, the regime has procedures in place to keep the ruling Workers’ Party of Korea in power, experts said. “Military generals or party officials might jockey for power,” said Duyeon Kim, a senior advisor for the International Crisis Group on Northeast Asia. “China-backed North Korean elites might look for a successor. Some forces might try to bring back and elevate [Kim’s] nephew Kim Han Sol. The list goes on with so many variables.” Newsletter Get our free Coronavirus Today newsletter Sign up for the latest news, best stories and what they mean for you, plus answers to your questions. Sign Me Up You may occasionally receive promotional content from the Los Angeles Times. Someone outside the Kim family, such as insider Choe Ryong Hae, a military official, could assume the mantle of leader. But Lee doesn’t see that happening. “Upholding a non-Kim as the leader is unthinkable in North Korea,” Lee said. “Moreover, being wealthy and powerful in the North Korean leadership under Kim Jong Un does not necessarily mean you have enough power or the resources to wage a power struggle and succeed. The top echelons of the North Korean leadership know that they have everything to lose if the system went down, and I think they would unite around the next Kim for regime stability.” For now, the rumors of Kim’s poor health are being treated with caution by analysts, who have frequently seen such frenzied conjecture about North Korea come to nothing. Among the more outlandish and grisly rumors was the supposed execution by firing squad of singer Hyon Song-wol in front of her family and bandmates in 2014. Hyon was said to have angered Kim, a rumored love interest, for participating in a pornographic film. Hyon, singer of the North Korean hit “Excellent Horse-Like Lady,” appeared on TV the following year. 
Apr 21, 2020	Several Southern states moved on Monday to lift stay-at-home orders amid the COVID-19 pandemic, even as top federal health officials warned that too abrupt a reopening could spark new outbreaks of disease. South Carolina and Georgia made the most aggressive pitches to return life to normal. In South Carolina, Gov. Henry McMaster allowed beaches to open and said florists and furniture stores could do business by Monday evening.  In Georgia, Gov. Brian Kemp said gyms, salons, bowling alleys and other businesses would reopen Friday. Kemp also said he would release guidelines this week that would let restaurants -- but not bars or clubs -- open in a week. Tennessee Gov. Bill Lee announced that the "vast majority" of businesses could reopen by May 1 in all but the most populated counties, with some opening as early as April 27. The three governors, all Republicans, said social distancing guidelines would be maintained. "I don't give a damn about politics now," Kemp said. The governor said he was concerned about residents "going broke worried about whether they can feed their children and make the mortgage payment." None of the three states has achieved the 14 days of sustained decline in coronavirus infections that White House guidelines said should be in place before lifting restrictions on commercial activity. Some public health experts have said widespread measures to reopen the economy would need to be accompanied by half a million tests a day -- a level that the country has not yet reached. In Louisiana, Gov. John Bel Edwards, a Democrat, asked for patience from his state's residents, saying that he hoped to be able to lift restrictions soon, but that the state needed to increase its capacity for testing first. "We have to do what we have to do to save lives. We gotta get through this together, and I assure you, we will," Edwards said. Edwards did say that some hospitals would be allowed to resume elective surgical procedures, a step also taken in several other states under new federal guidance issued over the weekend. Hospitals nationwide largely stopped conducting non-emergency procedures last month in order to clear beds, a move that has significantly reduced revenue and caused serious financial strain for some medical centers. At a White House briefing Monday, Vice President Mike Pence said "we have enough testing capacity for every state in America" to go to "phase one" of White House reopening guidelines for states and localities once they have achieved a 14-day decline in cases. That message contradicted Maryland Gov. Larry Hogan, a Republican, who said Monday that the state was paying millions to secure hundreds of thou-sands of tests from South Korea. Asked about Maryland, Trump said the governor needs to "get a little knowledge." "I don't think he needed to go to South Korea," Trump said. Dr. Anthony Fauci, director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, warned Americans against returning too quickly to life as it was before the pandemic. "It's going to backfire," Fauci said in an interview on "Good Morning America." "That's the problem." In New York, Gov. Andrew Cuomo said Monday that although the state appears to be moving past the worst of COVID-19, the possibility of "horrifically high" death rates remains if restrictions are eased too soon. In New York City, the worst-hit place in the country, Mayor Bill de Blasio said that healthcare workers could run out of surgical gowns by next week. Underlining the continued crisis in the city, the mayor canceled permits for major public events in June, which included New York's LGBTQ Pride March and Puerto Rican Day Parade. Statewide in New York, officials reported 478 people died Sunday of COVID-19, the disease caused by the coronavirus. That's a drop from a week ago, when the disease killed close to 800 people each day. Hospitalizations have also declined in the state. Polls continue to show large majorities of Americans support stay-at-home measures and are worried about states loosening them too early. A minority has differed and taken to the streets in several states to protest. American flag-waving demonstrators gathered Monday in Harrisburg, Pa., with signs that included the phrases "The media is the virus" and "Jesus is my vaccine," and another small group stood with similar messages outside the North Dakota Capitol in Bismarck. The rallies followed ones last week in Michigan and Washington state. Speaking on Fox News, White House advisor Kellyanne Conway echoed Trump, who has tweeted in support of the protest movements. Conway said some state governors, including Michigan's, have "physically distanced from common sense" in placing restrictions. By example, she cited the state shutting down nurseries but allowing marijuana dispensaries to operate. "You can basically smoke your grass but not cut your grass. This makes no sense to many people," she said. In his Monday interview, Fauci acknowledged the economic havoc that efforts to contain the virus have caused. "The message is that clearly this is something that is hurting, from the standpoint of economics and the standpoint of things that have nothing to do with the virus," he said. The U.S. still lags behind other nations in coronavirus testing even as it leads the world in number of infections and deaths from COVID-19, the disease caused by the virus. More than 42,000 people have died. Some local health clinics around the nation have put faith in the dozens of new kinds of antibody tests that promise to determine if patients have already recovered from the virus without showing symptoms. But almost all of those tests remain unapproved by the Food and Drug Administration. Fauci warned on Monday against relying on them. "The assumption that, with the tests that are out there, if you have an antibody positivity, you are good to go -- unless that test has been validated, and you can show there's a correlation between the antibody and protection, it is an assumption to say that this is something that we can work with," he said. "We still have a way to go." Caption: PHOTO: PROTESTERS DEMONSTRATE at the state Capitol in Harrisburg, Pa., on Monday, demanding that Gov. Tom Wolf reopen businesses in Pennsylvania. PHOTOGRAPHER:Matt Rourke Associated Press
Apr 20, 2020	Several Southern states moved on Monday to lift stay-at-home orders amid the COVID-19 pandemic, even as top federal health officials warned that too abrupt a reopening could spark new outbreaks of disease. South Carolina and Georgia made the most aggressive pitches to return life to normal. In South Carolina, Gov. Henry McMaster allowed beaches to open and said florists and furniture stores could do business by Monday evening. In Georgia, Gov. Brian Kemp said gyms, salons, bowling alleys and other businesses would reopen on Friday. Kemp also said he would release guidelines this week that would let restaurants — but not bars or clubs — open in a week. Tennessee Gov. Bill Lee announced that the “vast majority” of businesses could reopen by May 1 in all but the most populated counties, with some opening as early as April 27. The three governors, all Republicans, said social distancing guidelines would be maintained. “I don’t give a damn about politics now,” Kemp said. The governor said he was concerned about residents “going broke worried about whether they can feed their children and make the mortgage payment.” None of the three states has achieved the 14 days of sustained decline in coronavirus infections that White House guidelines said should be in place before lifting restrictions on commercial activity. Some public health experts have said widespread measures to reopen the economy would need to be accompanied by half a million tests a day — a level that the country has not yet reached. In Louisiana, Gov. John Bel Edwards, a Democrat, asked for patience from his state’s residents, saying he hoped to be able to lift restrictions soon, but that the state needed to increase its capacity for testing first. “We have to do what we have to do to save lives. We gotta get through this together, and I assure you, we will,” Edwards said. Edwards did say that some hospitals would be allowed to resume elective surgical procedures, a step also taken in several other states under new federal guidance issued over the weekend. Hospitals nationwide largely stopped conducting non-emergency procedures last month in order to clear beds, a move that has significantly reduced revenue and caused serious financial strain for some medical centers. At a White House briefing Monday, Vice President Mike Pence said “we have enough testing capacity for every state in America” to go to “phase one” of White House reopening guidelines for states and localities once they have achieved a 14-day decline in cases. That message contradicted Maryland Gov. Larry Hogan, a Republican, who said Monday that the state was paying millions to secure hundreds of thousands of tests from South Korea. Asked about Maryland, Trump said the governor needs to “get a little knowledge.” “I don’t think he needed to go to South Korea,” Trump said. Dr. Anthony Fauci, director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, warned Americans against returning too quickly to life as it was before the pandemic. “It’s going to backfire,” Fauci said in an interview on “Good Morning America.” “That’s the problem.” × In New York, Gov. Andrew Cuomo said Monday that although the state appears to be moving past the worst of COVID-19, the possibility of “horrifically high” death rates remains if restrictions ease too fast. In New York City, the worst-hit place in the country, Mayor Bill de Blasio said that healthcare workers could run out of surgical gowns by next week. Underlining the continued crisis in the city, the mayor canceled permits for major public events in June, which included New York’s LGBTQ Pride March and Puerto Rican Day Parade. Statewide in New York, officials reported 478 people died Sunday of COVID-19, the disease caused by the coronavirus. That’s a drop from a week ago, when the disease killed close to 800 people each day. Hospitalizations have also declined in the state. Polls continue to show large majorities of Americans support stay-at-home measures and are worried about states loosening them too early. A minority has differed and taken to the streets in several states to protest. American flag-waving demonstrators gathered Monday in Harrisburg, Pa., with signs that included the phrases “The media is the virus” and “Jesus is my vaccine,” and another small group stood with similar messages outside the North Dakota Capitol in Bismarck. The rallies followed ones last week in Michigan and Washington state. Speaking on Fox News, White House advisor Kellyanne Conway echoed Trump, who has tweeted in support of the protest movements. More coronavirus coverage  Conway said some state governors, including Michigan’s, have “physically distanced from common sense” in placing restrictions. By example, she cited the state shutting down nurseries but allowing marijuana dispensaries to operate. “You can basically smoke your grass but not cut your grass. This makes no sense to many people,” she said. In his Monday interview, Fauci acknowledged the economic havoc that efforts to contain the virus have caused. “The message is that clearly this is something that is hurting, from the standpoint of economics and the standpoint of things that have nothing to do with the virus,” he said. The U.S. still lags behind other nations in coronavirus testing even as it leads the world in number of infections and deaths from COVID-19, the disease caused by the virus. More than 42,000 people have died. Some local health clinics around the nation have put faith in the dozens of new kinds of antibody tests that promise to determine if patients have already recovered from the virus without showing symptoms. But almost all of those tests remain unapproved by the Food and Drug Administration. Fauci warned on Monday against relying on them. “The assumption that, with the tests that are out there, if you have an antibody positivity, you are good to go — unless that test has been validated, and you can show there’s a correlation between the antibody and protection, it is an assumption to say that this is something that we can work with,” he said. “We still have a way to go.”
Apr 19, 2020	The first day President Trump mentioned the coronavirus in public, only one American was known to be infected. He assured the rest of the country it had no reason to worry. "We have it totally under control," Trump said Jan. 22 from Davos, Switzerland. "It's going to be just fine." Behind the scenes, however, even some of his close aides thought the virus posed a much greater threat to the nation and to Trump.  Three months later, the United States leads the world in reported numbers of people infected and killed by the virus, with more than 38,000 dead. States, counties and local hospitals are desperately bidding against one another for scarce ventilators and other lifesaving equipment in a marketplace dominated by chaos, profiteering and fraud. And the country's economy is in free fall, with more than 20 million Americans filing unemployment claims in the last month. Trump has at various times called the catastrophe unforeseeable or blamed the World Health Organization and China; his predecessor, who he claimed left him an "empty shelf" of medical equipment; and state governors whom he accused of mismanaging the health crisis. But from the first international reports of the virus' appearance in China in late December until Trump declared a nationwide emergency in mid-March, his administration delayed or bungled basic but crucial steps to contain the spread of infections and prepare the country for a pandemic, according to a Times review of internal government records and interviews with administration officials and outside experts. In that key early period, many of the Trump presidency's most deeply ingrained characteristics -- its distrust of the federal bureaucracy, internal personality conflicts, lack of a formal policymaking process and Trump's own insistence on controlling the public message -- severely hampered the federal response, according to current and former White House officials and public health experts. Even senior members of the administration who sought to warn Trump about the looming dangers were rebuffed, said several administration officials who spoke on condition of anonymity because they were not authorized to comment on internal discussions. Containing such an easily spread contagion was certain to be arduous under any circumstances, many experts concede. Making it even harder, China initially played down the infection danger, and it was unclear at that point how readily the virus could spread. But Trump's unwillingness to take the health threat seriously and disagreements among his top aides in effect sidelined the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, leaving key responders without direction from a White House that was focused on the president's impeachment trial in the Senate. Weeks were lost that could have been used to test and isolate the first infected patients, purchase medical supplies, prepare makeshift hospitals and enlist corporations in quickly ramping up production of badly needed respirators and other supplies. "In an ideal world, there would have been a structure and someone with vision empowered in the White House," said J. Stephen Morrison, a health policy expert at the Center for Strategic and International Studies, a Washington think tank. "Everything was seen through the impeachment and reelection process." The White House said in a statement that Trump acted to control the virus while Democrats in Congress and the news media ignored the danger in January and February. "President Trump took bold action to protect Americans and unleash the full power of the federal government to curb the spread of the virus, expand testing capacities, and expedite vaccine development when we had no true idea the level of transmission or asymptomatic spread," White House spokesman Judd Deere said. The statement added that Trump "remains completely focused on the health and safety of the American people and it is because of his bold leadership that we will emerge from this challenge healthy, stronger, and with a prosperous and growing economy." Advisors worry The first official warning about the new virus came on the last day of 2019, when Chinese authorities reported that residents of Wuhan in the central Hubei province were coming down with pneumonia from an unknown cause. China soon identified the cause of the outbreak as a new strain of coronavirus but said there was "no evidence of significant human-to-human transmission." At the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Director Robert Redfield, a physician and former AIDS researcher, tweeted Jan. 14 that "there is no confirmed person-to-person spread" of the illness in China, though his agency was "monitoring the situation closely." The CDC issued a routine "level 1 travel notice," advising Americans traveling to Wuhan to "practice usual precautions." Three days later, the CDC announced that airports would conduct health screenings for passengers traveling from Wuhan to Los Angeles, San Francisco and New York. The screenings didn't initially cover all airports with flights from China. Nor did they address travelers from Europe, another likely source of infection. And the cursory temperature checks didn't detect patients who were carrying the virus but were still asymptomatic, a problem that became fully apparent only later. At the White House, Trump and his close advisors, consumed by his impending impeachment trial in the Senate, rebuffed attempts by Redfield's boss, Health and Human Services Secretary Alex Azar, to alert them about the threat, according to a former federal official with knowledge of the communications. Unlike some other Trump Cabinet officials, Azar has considerable experience in his field, having served in the agency in the administration of President George W. Bush and having been an executive at pharmaceutical giant Eli Lilly and Co. His relationship with Trump and senior health and budget officials in the White House had been strained for months, in part because of Azar's inability to deliver on one of Trump's signature campaign promises -- to lower prescription drug prices. Trump also blamed Azar for entangling him in what turned out to be a politically complicated effort to crack down on vaping. The health secretary finally connected with Trump on Jan. 18, when the president was at Mar-a-Lago, his Palm Beach, Fla., resort. By then, Thailand and Japan were reporting confirmed coronavirus infections. Trump wanted to discuss the vaping ban, not the coronavirus, a White House aide familiar with the call said. Two days later, the CDC confirmed the first coronavirus case in the U.S. A Washington state man in his 30s had returned from Wuhan on Jan. 15 at Seattle-Tacoma International Airport, where no screening was being conducted. Later, he reported pneumonia-like symptoms to his doctor. "It's one person coming in from China," Trump said during his Jan. 22 interview with CNBC from Davos. As Trump reassured the nation, the WHO, the United Nations agency for international public health, announced that evidence suggested "human to human" transmission in China but that more investigation was necessary. Trump did not consider the virus a major worry and trusted Azar to handle it, a senior administration official said. Other White House aides were concerned that Azar would overreact, the official and another senior White House aide added. In late January, Joseph Grogan, the White House domestic policy chief and a former lobbyist for a pharmaceutical company, sounded the alarm about the administration potentially overlooking what could become a major crisis. He voiced reservations about Azar's ability to handle the matter during a meeting in the office of Mick Mulvaney, then the president's acting chief of staff, one of the senior administration officials said. "It could be so big that if we mishandle it, it will cost the election," Grogan said with several senior staffers present. Mulvaney convened meetings aimed at coordinating the U.S. government response, but the discussion at first focused only on evacuation flights to bring Americans in China and other affected countries home, one of the senior White House officials said. There was little discussion about how to keep the virus out. Daily intelligence updates from the CIA and other intelligence organizations tracked the international spread of the coronavirus, but their reports did not recommend steps to contain it in the U.S., according to a senior Defense official familiar with the warnings. On Jan. 29, the White House announced a 12-member task force of officials from multiple agencies "to work to prevent the spread of the new coronavirus." Trump was briefed in the White House Situation Room. Privately, some advisors were warning about massive disruptions if the virus caused a pandemic. Peter Navarro, Trump's director of trade and manufacturing policy, suggested stopping travel from China in a memo written the same day the task force was announced. The memo, first reported by the New York Times, warned of potentially devastating effects on the economy if no containment measures were taken. But Navarro, a longtime China hawk known around the West Wing as having a combustible temper, was largely dismissed after he erupted at Azar during a staff meeting, leading the health secretary to demand that Mulvaney keep him off the task force, according to one of the senior administration officials. The conflicts inside the White House along with the impeachment trial underway in the Senate kept the health threat barely on Trump's radar. "You have Trump as the lone-wolf operator," said Anthony Scaramucci, who served briefly as Trump's director of communications and has recently been critical of the president. "What happens is everybody gets immobilized. They don't know what their marching orders are ... so that's caused them to be very slow-footed in the midst of this crisis." Others in the administration took their cue from Trump. The same day as the Situation Room briefing, Commerce Secretary Wilbur Ross observed that the alarming rise in cases in China could "accelerate the return of jobs to North America." White House counselor Kellyanne Conway told reporters the next day that Trump and his senior aides were continuing "to monitor the situation." Standing next to her, Brett Giroir, assistant secretary for health, said that the outbreak was "under control" and that "all the resources were in place." As head of the task force, Azar tried to carve out a major role overseeing the federal response without sounding public alarms that were sure to upset the president, according to another administration official, who spoke on condition of anonymity. On Jan. 31, Azar declared a public health emergency and announced the U.S. was temporarily prohibiting foreign nationals who had traveled in China within the previous 14 days from entering the country. Americans returning from China were allowed back after being screened at select ports of entry and for 14 days afterward to monitor any possible symptoms. It was Trump who had made the decision to impose the travel restrictions, Azar told reporters, following the "uniform recommendation of the career public health officials here at HHS." But Azar would run into resistance from some White House aides later as he sought more federal funding to respond to the virus. During one tense meeting, a White House budget official accused him of trying to go around the president to get the money from Congress, according to a former government official. For much of the next month, Trump and other senior White House officials played down the risk to Americans, even as evidence mounted that the virus was deadly and highly communicable. Disaster predicted Public health and disaster experts had warned for years about the possible devastation that a pandemic could wreak. Internal government studies conducted months earlier had shown that a fast-spreading flu virus from China would quickly overwhelm the nation's health system unless preparations were taken beforehand. A 2019 exercise overseen by the Department of Health and Human Services, dubbed Crimson Contagion, concluded that a massive, deadly epidemic would result in confusion and limited coordination among federal agencies and state governments as school closures and other social distancing measures were put into place. Hospitals would struggle with shortages of medications, personal protective equipment, ventilators and other supplies, according to a draft report on the results, disclosed by the New York Times. At the White House, the Council of Economic Advisors warned in September that the economic damage of a fast-spreading virus could reach $3.79 trillion and kill 500,000 Americans. And a 2017 study by the Defense Department on the possibility of a pandemic predicted a shortage of medical masks, gloves, ventilators and hospital beds. The federal government had an array of options to prevent the predictions from becoming a reality, experts said, including invoking the Defense Production Act to require private companies to address shortages of medical masks, ventilators and other equipment; mobilizing the military to construct field hospitals and organize testing centers around the country; and dispatching Navy hospital ships to New York and Los Angeles sooner. But there was little urgency to the federal government's response. "It was one failure after another, piling up on each other," said Dr. Ashish Jha, faculty director of the Harvard Global Health Institute. "When that happens, it usually means it wasn't a priority. It was a lack of leadership." In early February, the WHO warned that the coronavirus was spreading rapidly in China and assumed in its response plan that human-to-human transmission was widespread. Chinese authorities had quarantined entire cities. Limited testing in other countries was complicating the effort to detect the virus. The international organization urged countries to scale up "preparedness and response operations, including strengthening readiness to rapidly identify, diagnose and treat cases." Taiwan, South Korea and Singapore rolled out COVID-19 tests fairly quickly, giving health officials a head start on tracing the spread of the virus and imposing a degree of containment measures that the United States did not take until weeks later, said Dr. C. Jason Wang, director of Stanford University's Center for Policy, Outcomes and Prevention. Not everything went smoothly. Singapore is now fighting an outbreak among a large population of migrant workers the government mostly overlooked in its initial efforts against the virus. But as of late Saturday, the total number of deaths reported in Singapore was just 11, and only half a dozen had been tallied in Taiwan. There were 234 reported fatalities in South Korea -- a tiny fraction of the per capita deaths in the United States. "South Korea did massive testing and containment," Wang said. He said Taiwan also deployed its military to manufacture medical masks, upping production from 2 million to 10 million a day within three weeks. "We could have done that -- absolutely," said Nick Vyas, executive director of USC's Center for Global Supply Chain Management. "Masks would have been very easy to replicate and inventory." In the U.S., Trump mentioned the virus during a Feb. 10 campaign rally in New Hampshire, telling the crowd that "by April, you know, in theory, when it gets a little warmer, it miraculously goes away." It is now clear that the virus was spreading rapidly in the U.S., but tracing its path proved impossible because the CDC had fumbled its initial attempt to create a reliable test. The agency shunned a proven German test that had been adopted by the WHO, and it relied on an existing network of public health labs, a model better suited for smaller, less deadly outbreaks. It distributed kits to more than 100 public health labs run by states and counties, sending each facility enough testing supplies to sample 300 to 400 patients, far fewer than would eventually be needed. The agency's early effort was on a small scale because there was little initial recognition that the virus could be transmitted easily between humans, said an agency official who discussed the CDC response. When state labs began to run sample tests using the CDC kits, a flaw quickly became apparent: Running ordinary water through the test produced false positives. Paul Fulton, a CDC spokesman, said the agency was still studying the flawed test but said a new version is now "accurate and reliable." He noted that the CDC's role was "to equip state public health labs, which is only one part of total testing that needs to be conducted." The Food and Drug Administration was responsible for approving tests by private labs for commercial use by hospitals and clinics -- a step that took the agency until March 16. Difficulties in responding to a health crisis are hardly unusual, noted Dr. Richard Besser, who served as acting director of the CDC in 2009 during the outbreak of the H1N1 swine flu. The agency has long prided itself on its independence and sometimes made mistakes as it rushed to respond in a crisis. "I was never involved in a public health response where everything rolled out perfectly," said Besser, who now heads the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation. But the missteps in responding to the current outbreak were slow to be corrected -- in part because of the agency's isolation under Trump, Besser added. During past outbreaks, the CDC played a prominent role in public briefings, helping increase accountability within the agency and push its scientists to make any needed changes quickly. "It was the ability to be transparent and share what we were learning that allowed us to maintain trust in the public and make adjustments," Besser explained. At a news briefing Feb. 25, Dr. Nancy Messonnier, director of the CDC's National Center for Immunization and Respiratory Diseases, said she was frustrated with the flaws in the tests and raised the possibility of significant social disruption, including closing schools, canceling mass gatherings and delaying elective surgeries. Her comments were a sharp contrast to the message delivered that same day by Trump, who was 10 time zones away in New Delhi for a state visit. "We think we're in very good shape in the United States," Trump told reporters, referring briefly to the virus. "And we think it's going to remain that way." On the 18-hour flight home, the president grew upset about the plunging stock market and grim picture painted in news reports he watched aboard Air Force One. Instead of sleeping, he called Azar from the plane and complained that Messonnier's comments were worrying the markets. Upon landing, Trump convened the task force in the Oval Office ahead of a news briefing. When the president stepped to the lectern, he announced that Vice President Mike Pence would be taking over the task force. The aides who'd been in the room with him moments earlier had gotten no warning. Nor had Azar, who heard along with everybody else the news that he'd been replaced. The decision, according to two administration officials familiar with the president's thinking, reflected Trump's fixation on the virus' economic effects and his desire to prevent public health officials from asserting too much control over the response. The number of U.S. cases was "going very substantially down, not up," Trump said at a news conference. There would be only five infected Americans shortly, he predicted. Azar openly contradicted him: "We can expect to see more cases in the United States," he said. Pence's staff immediately ordered that all public statements about the virus go through his office, according to one of the officials. On Feb. 27, as reported infections spread through Europe, Trump told reporters his administration had "done an incredible job." "One day -- it's like a miracle -- it will disappear," he said. "It could get worse before it gets better. It could maybe go away. We'll see what happens. Nobody really knows." The next day, a WHO report warned that the virus was highly contagious and urged countries with infections to immediately "activate the highest level of national Response Management protocols." On Feb. 29, the CDC announced that a man in his 50s had died of COVID-19 near Seattle, marking the first publicly reported fatality in the U.S. But as the coronavirus outbreak spread in March, Trump failed to mount an organized government response to address medical supply shortages hobbling hospitals, clinics and doctors' offices nationwide. Instead, he turned to his daughter Ivanka Trump; her husband, Jared Kushner; and Navarro, a former economics professor from Southern California, none of whom have expertise in logistics or procurement. Kushner set himself up in an office at the Department of Health and Human Services at the foot of Capitol Hill, much to the chagrin of some in the health agency. The Kushner team began calling chief executives of major corporations, lobbying them to scrounge up supplies outside the normal procurement channels set up by the government, one private sector official said. Matthew Beckmann, a UC Irvine political science professor who focuses on the presidency, said Trump's response to the pandemic reflected not so much his ideology as his overall lack of interest in the nitty-gritty work of running the government and his reliance on a small number of inexperienced people close to him. "The way he runs things is more like a family restaurant," Beckmann said. Off the California coast, the cruise ship Grand Princess had circled for days as thousands of worried passengers and crew members potentially exposed to the coronavirus waited for federal and state officials to decide where and when they would dock. Trump said he wasn't in favor of bringing the passengers ashore for testing that would cause the official tally of infected Americans to surge. "I like the numbers being where they are. I don't need to have the numbers double because of one ship," Trump told reporters during a visit March 6 to the CDC in Atlanta. The passengers were unloaded in Oakland anyway and sent to hospitals or placed in quarantine. The worsening outlook -- and the slow pace of testing -- increased pressure on Trump to announce far-reaching additional measures. "The bottom line: It is going to get worse," Dr. Anthony Fauci, who leads the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, testified at a House committee hearing March 11, the same day the WHO labeled the virus a pandemic and the continuing losses in the stock market officially ended the longest bull market in U.S. history. Hours later, in a rare prime-time address from the Oval Office, Trump said he was extending the travel restrictions to Europe, barring entry to foreign nationals who had been in parts of the continent within the previous 14 days. It was a measure some advisors had been urging him to take for weeks, a White House official said. He urged that "older Americans should avoid nonessential travel" and said people in general should "stay home," even as he continued to minimize the potential severity of the disease. Wall Street futures dropped sharply after the speech, which came within minutes of the actor Tom Hanks announcing he had the disease and the National Basketball Assn. suspending its entire schedule. One former White House official said the speech prompted an intervention from some of the Wall Street executives whom Trump most trusts: "Your press conferences and your Oval Office speech where you're making light is not helping you," the former official said, paraphrasing the message. "The markets know math and this is not a math thing. This is a science thing." The takeaway was clear: The usual playbook would not work with a pandemic. "He can't yell from the podium, 'fake science,' " the ex-official said. "You've got to adjust and calibrate this." The speech marked the first sign that Trump intended to take over the White House messaging on the pandemic. But his continued downplaying of the coronavirus threat so alarmed Fauci and Dr. Deborah Birx, the State Department's top global health expert, that they decided they needed to shock him into taking action, according to a former health official close to Birx. They showed him the findings of an alarming study by Imperial College London, an institution noted for its research into global health, that found an unchecked epidemic could infect 8 in 10 people and cause as many as 2.2 million U.S. deaths. The day after their briefing, Trump declared a national emergency, freeing more than $40 billion in federal assistance for states. Within days, the Pentagon, the Federal Emergency Management Agency and other agencies moved off the sidelines. State and local officials began shutting down schools and enforcing restrictions on contacts. The virus was still spreading, and many weeks of upheaval, medical emergencies and human tragedy were to come. Over that time, Trump has vacillated on how long the nation's social distancing rules should remain and who is to blame for the rising death toll. But he has consistently maintained that his administration's response was flawless, a "10 out of 10," he told reporters at one news conference. Problems such as the slow rate of testing were not his fault. "I don't take responsibility at all," he said. -- Times staff writers Noah Bierman, Noam N. Levey and Tracy Wilkinson contributed to this report. Caption: PHOTO: MEDICAL STAFFERS bring a COVID-19 patient into a Seoul hospital last month. South Korea benefited from its "massive testing and containment" early in the outbreak, one Stanford health expert said. PHOTOGRAPHER:Chung Sung-Jun Getty Images PHOTO:A MAN has his temperature taken in January in Wuhan, China. PHOTOGRAPHER:Hector Retamal AFP/Getty Images PHOTO:A PATIENT is wheeled into a Red Cross hospital in Wuhan on Jan. 25, when nearly all confirmed cases were in China only. PHOTOGRAPHER:Hector Retamal AFP/Getty Images PHOTO:FUNERAL HOME workers carry the casket of a Madera, Calif., woman who died of COVID-19. Family members and friends of the 76-year-old nurse were not allowed to leave their cars for the April 8 burial. PHOTOGRAPHER:Carolyn Cole Los Angeles Times PHOTO:WORKERS FROM a Servpro disaster recovery team enter the Life Care Center in Kirkland, Wash., last month to disinfect the nursing home, which was an early hotbed of the U.S. coronavirus outbreak. PHOTOGRAPHER:Ted S. Warren Associated Press PHOTO:PRESIDENT TRUMP, with First Lady Melania Trump, is welcomed at a stadium in India during his February state visit. PHOTOGRAPHER:Alex Brandon Associated Press PHOTO:INDIAN Prime Minister Narendra Modi greets Trump on his arrival. PHOTOGRAPHER:Mandel Ngan AFP/Getty Images PHOTO:A PASSENGER raises his arms in celebration after being let off the Grand Princess cruise ship in Oakland last month. The ship was held off the coast for days because of a coronavirus outbreak on board. PHOTOGRAPHER:Josh Edelson AFP/Getty Images PHOTO:MEDICAL WORKERS put a patient in an ambulance Tuesday in Wuhan, China, where the coronavirus outbreak began late last year. The U.S. now leads the global COVID-19 toll with more than 38,000 deaths. PHOTOGRAPHER: Costfoto PHOTO:PRESIDENT TRUMP at January's World Economic Forum, where he said the U.S. had the virus "totally under control." PHOTOGRAPHER:Fabrice Coffrini AFP/Getty Images 
Apr 18, 2020	Men contending with coronavirus infection may have a pair of vulnerabilities that could increase their risk of longer, more severe illness: their testicles. A pilot study that tracked the clearance of the virus from patients in Mumbai, India, offered further evidence that men are indeed harder hit by the pathogen. And it offered a theoretical explanation for that gender disparity that focuses on the cells that the coronavirus is most drawn to. Those cells serve as the front door for the coronavirus because they express a protein called angiotensin converting enzyme 2, which the virus just happens to bind with. In both men and women, these ACE2 proteins, or receptors, are plentiful in the lungs, the gastrointestinal tract and the heart. Not surprisingly, all of those tissues are vulnerable to attack from the virus that causes COVID-19. Testicular tissue also pumps out ACE2 receptors at a high rate. Ovarian tissue does not. Newsletter Get our free Coronavirus Today newsletter Sign up for the latest news, best stories and what they mean for you, plus answers to your questions. Sign Me Up You may occasionally receive promotional content from the Los Angeles Times. A group of researchers led by an oncologist in New York and her mother, a microbiologist in Mumbai, has put forth a hypothesis it acknowledges is highly preliminary: that the testes may harbor the SARS-CoV-2 virus in men, providing it sanctuary from the immune system. While women offer the coronavirus plenty of opportunities to enter their cells, men’s testes may give the virus an extra point of entry. And since the testicles are walled off from the immune system, they may be among the last hiding places from which the virus is driven out. The hypothesis was presented in a preliminary report posted on MedRxiv, a website on which researchers share their unpublished work. Unlike studies published in medical journals, it has not yet been subjected to scrutiny by other researchers. Still, the hypothesis has three important things going for it. First, there are many precedents for a pathogen taking up residence in a quiet corner to elude the body’s immune defenses. The Ebola virus was found to hide in the pigment cells of the human retina, leaving even recovered patients with lingering virus. Second, it is a biologically plausible explanation for an observed gender disparity in COVID-19 infections. The coronavirus is known to bind to ACE2 receptors, which are plentiful in just a handful of tissues, including those of the testicles. Third, it may help explain a clear pattern emerging from the COVID-19 epidemic. While rates of confirmed cases are running close to even by gender, men have died of COVID-19 at notably higher rates than women in China, South Korea, Italy and the United States. In New York City, 68% of deaths attributed to COVID-19 have been in men, and 32% in women. It’s a trend that Dr. Deborah Birx, the White House coronavirus coordinator, has called “concerning.” What the hypothesis does not yet have is clear evidence to support the link between testicles and COVID-19. That, said Dr. Aditi Shastri, an oncologist at Montefiore Medical Center, should be explored by researchers working with cell cultures, animals and the growing number of recovered COVID-19 patients. Shastri led a team based in New York while her mom, Dr. Jayanthi Shastri of Topiwala National Medical College, led a team in Mumbai. The researchers in India tested hospitalized patients and their infected family members every two days to gauge how speedily they cleared the coronavirus once infected. In the 20 female patients, the median time to viral clearance was four days. In the 48 males, the median was 50% longer, at six days. A similar pattern emerged in three extended families of COVID-19 sufferers, whose members had viral samples taken every two days to track the speed at which they threw off the virus. There are a handful of factors that may contribute to that gender mismatch. Men are more likely than women to smoke cigarettes, have high blood pressure and suffer coronary artery disease. All of those conditions seem to predispose people to become more seriously ill from the coronavirus. The younger Shastri said that if the coronavirus is found hiding in the testes, that might mean the virus can be sexually transmitted. “I would definitely consider that virus could be secreted into seminal fluid,” she said. Dr. Kathryn Sandberg of Georgetown University, who studies gender differences in immune response, said women are known to clear many viruses more quickly in men, partly because their immune systems’ opening response to invasion is stronger. Sandberg said the idea that coronavirus could be finding sanctuary in the testes is “speculative.” But she said “it’s worth pointing out to people who have forgotten that ACE2 is in the testes, and could be a player.” She added that she’s been frustrated by the dearth of statistics that carefully record cases, symptoms, hospitalizations, severe illnesses and deaths by gender. Without such careful tracking, potentially important insights could be lost. “The message is, we really have to disaggregate the data we’re collecting by sex,” Sandberg said. “And we have to look at the mechanisms by which this virus works, not just males.” 
Apr 18, 2020	Ariel Miranda threw the first pitch in the first professional baseball game that mattered this year. He also gave up the first home run -- a fastball caught too much of the plate in the second inning -- but settled down after the mistake. The former Seattle Mariners left-hander, starting for the Chinese Professional Baseball League's Chinatrust Brothers in Taiwan, allowed just the one run across five innings Sunday and said he felt great on the mound. It was everything around him that was wonky.  His team was playing a home game at Taichung Intercontinental Baseball Stadium, but it didn't seem much like an opening day. The ballpark was empty because the CPBL, the first major professional baseball league in the world to begin its 2020 season, is staging games without fans for the foreseeable future. "The adrenaline is different," Miranda said in Spanish during a phone interview. "You feel alone." The CPBL is a five-team league in Taiwan, which has a population of nearly 24 million. Baseball is the top sport in Taiwan, which has produced more than a dozen Major League Baseball players. Founded in 1989, the CPBL has faced game-fixing scandals that forced a franchise to fold in 1998 and the expulsion of another in 2008, but it is the only major professional baseball league up and running amid the COVID-19 pandemic. Japan's NPB and South Korea's KBO are targeting starts in early May after delays. Major League Baseball, which suspended operations March 12, has discussed various scenarios for the 2020 season, including having all 30 teams play in the Phoenix area, but a plan has not been finalized. Taiwan has been credited with administering one of the world's best responses to the novel coronavirus. The Central Epidemic Command Center reported just 395 confirmed cases and six deaths since the virus surfaced in December. Authorities reported two new cases Wednesday after reporting none Tuesday. The United States reported 29,465 new cases Wednesday. According to the Journal of the American Medical Assn., the aggressive measures, which included setting up COVID-19 testing at nine facilities by Jan. 24 and swift quarantines, were instrumental in allowing Taiwan to avoid strict lockdown measures. Many schools, restaurants and offices were kept open. Hope for a baseball season, as a result, was kept afloat. The CPBL regular season was slated to start March 11. It was initially delayed to March 28, then rescheduled for April 11. Rain pushed opening day back one more day. The all-star game was canceled, but the league hopes to hold 240 games through mid-October. Fans are at least temporarily barred, but one club, the Rakuten Monkeys, has placed robots in the stands to cheer them on at home. The league is eyeing allowing 150 fans per game in two months. "It's very strange," Miranda said. "But that was the step taken and you have to make the adjustments and work with it." Miranda, 31, is familiar with adapting. He defected from Cuba in 2014 to establish residency in Haiti and signed with the Baltimore Orioles out of the Dominican Republic a year later. He made one appearance with the Orioles and 43 with the Mariners over three years before pitching in Japan the last two seasons. He signed a one-year, $600,000 contract, plus incentives, with the Chinatrust Brothers in January. A month later, on Valentine's Day, he arrived -- scared -- in Taiwan. He left his wife and twin 8-year-old sons in Miami when life was normal in Miami. He doesn't know when he will see them again. "I can't until this is over," Miranda said, "so I can maybe bring my family." He didn't know what to expect living in Taichung, a city of nearly 3 million people. He felt better after a conversation with the Brothers' Spanish-language interpreter. He was told if a player in the league tested positive, the season would be suspended indefinitely and potentially canceled. He is confident, though not certain, he would get paid in full regardless. Miranda said he hasn't been tested for the coronavirus and doesn't know anyone who has been tested since he arrived in Taiwan. But he said stringent precautions are taken around the clock. Teams are not allowed to stay in hotels on road trips; they make same-day trips for games away from home. Miranda said the longest trip is a three-hour bus ride each way. Almost every night before he falls asleep, a team trainer knocks on his door to take his temperature. It happened last Saturday. The next morning, Miranda woke up, got dressed and took the elevator to the lobby of his Taichung apartment building, where every member of the Brothers is housed. When he reached the lobby, his temperature was taken again and sanitizer was squeezed into his hands before he could hop on the bus. Upon arrival, entry to the stadium required another temperature check at the gate and more sanitizer. "They always do it. Every day," Miranda said. "That's something we have gotten used to." Miranda, No. 28 in a bright yellow Chinatrust uniform, took the mound with the sun poking out. Rows of empty blue seats served as his backdrop. In the second inning, outfielder K.W. Cheng led off with a solo home run to left field, giving the Uni-President Lions the lead. Two innings later, Brothers outfielder Tzu Hsien Chan, his walk-up song playing throughout his at-bat, crushed a solo shot off American left-hander Ryan Feierabend to even the score. The hyped voice of the public-address announcer echoed as Chan rounded the bases. Cheers from the Brothers dugout could be heard clearly throughout the park. There was baseball to celebrate, even if fans weren't there to see it. Caption: PHOTO: CHEERLEADERS pump up a nonexistent crowd during a game in Taiwan's pro baseball league, the first since the pandemic hit. PHOTOGRAPHER:Steven Lee AFP/Getty Images PHOTO:TAIWAN'S Chinese Professional Baseball League opened play with a game between the Uni-President Lions and Chinatrust Brothers. Paid attendance: 0. PHOTOGRAPHER:Steven Lee AFP/Getty Images PHOTO:(D1) THESE "fans" at a Chinese Professional Baseball League game don't drink or curse the umpire. PHOTOGRAPHER:Gene Wang Getty Images
Apr 17, 2020	U.S. officials drew a lot of attention recently when they approved a $2-trillion relief package to help people face economic challenges tied to the coronavirus, but also said it would not be enough to fend off mounting unemployment. Additional help is needed, officials agree, but what form it takes and when it might be available remained undetermined as of Wednesday. The original relief package includes $1,200 payments for millions of residents, along with provisions for small and large companies struggling to stay afloat. In some cases, local or state governments are also offering various forms of relief.  Through an executive order, for instance, California Gov. Gavin Newsom issued a two-month delay on residential evictions for tenants who can't pay their rent. Californians will also not have their water turned off due to unpaid bills, and governors in several other states, including Michigan and North Carolina, have enacted similar policies. Other countries have also been trying to come up with plans to get through the economic havoc caused by COVID-19. Here is a sampling of what some of them are doing. -- El Salvador El Salvador instituted a mandatory 30-day quarantine, enforced by soldiers and police officers. Then, President Nayib Bukele's administration suspended water, electricity, telephone, cable and internet bills for three months. It also established a fund for "micro, small and medium" businesses that includes payroll subsidies and froze credit card bills, mortgage loans and retailers' rent payments for the same period. The government also promised $300 a month to its most vulnerable families. The small nation's response to the outbreak made international headlines. For weeks, Bukele's action was lauded as an example to follow. The Grammy Award-winning rapper Residente included Bukele among the current and former officials in the Americas he's been interviewing about the pandemic. Then things went awry. After the website for potential beneficiaries crashed in late March, thousands of desperate citizens broke the quarantine to inquire about the money in person. Since then, the site has been repaired and, according to the Bukele administration, more than 1 million families had received the $300 payment as of early this week. Members of the Health Ministry, national police and military keep crowds from congregating at banks and take people's temperatures before they go inside. Despite the apparent success of the measures, critics have raised concerns about the nation's economy in the long term. Because El Salvador took out a $389-million emergency loan from the International Monetary Fund to deal with COVID-19, they worry that the country will be seriously indebted once the health crisis is over. Last week, the president extended the quarantine by 15 days, meaning that the lockdown is expected to continue at least until early May. The country had 164 confirmed infections and six deaths as of Thursday. -- South Africa South Africa, the most industrialized country on the African continent, was struggling financially before the pandemic was declared. About half its citizens live below the national poverty line, and poverty continues to be concentrated in regions where black South Africans lived under apartheid. Shortly before the nation went into lockdown on March 27 -- also enforced by the military and police -- the unemployment rate hovered at nearly 30%. That same day, the country received a sub-investment grade by Moody's Investors Service, marking South Africa as a bad investment with a high risk of default. "The decision by Moody's could not have come at a worse time," South African Minister of Finance Tito Mboweni said in a statement, noting that investors had already been leaving the country. To stem economic fallout, the Ministry of Finance on March 29 began granting employer tax subsidies for four months. The Department of Small Business Development is supplying rental and payroll relief. Also, because tourism has plummeted, the government made grants of up to about $2,600 available to small businesses in that industry. Other low-interest loans, up to about $268,000, are specifically geared at South African-owned businesses making products to combat COVID-19, such as hand sanitizer, steel beds for hospitals, hand soap and face masks. Additionally, some $10.6 million will be used to provide interest-free loans to black entrepreneurs who make healthcare products. Companies that produce staples such as flour, fruits and vegetables, milk, baby food and cooking oil can also apply for relief. "With the downgrade, imports are going to be very expensive, so we need to start to produce locally," Minister of Small Business Development Khumbudzo Ntshavheni said in an interview with a radio station. -- South Korea South Korea, having taken early and aggressive measures to control a local outbreak, hasn't had to impose widespread business closures and shelter-in-place orders like other countries. Even so, the country's already flagging economy, which is heavily reliant on exports and closely linked to China's, has been hard hit from the beginning of the year with the impact of supply-chain disruptions and travel bans. To cushion the blow, the South Korean government has announced plans to issue emergency relief funds of about $800 for a family of four to households with income levels in the bottom 70%. Families with children 6 or younger will receive an additional $300 per child. South Korea has also said it will spend more than $100 billion to stabilize financial markets and assist businesses ranging from mom-and-pop stores to large corporations, by providing emergency loans, rescue packages and deferments in insurance premiums. The government is also rewarding commercial landlords who give tenants temporary cuts on rent by compensating for 50% of the discounted rent in tax breaks for the first half of 2020. At the same time, the country has relaxed standards on who can apply for public assistance, allowing freelancers and those who are self-employed to obtain welfare funds if their work has been drastically cut since the virus outbreak. -- France On March 17, the French government announced a nationwide lockdown banning all public gatherings and forcing residents to remain indoors, except for essential tasks such as grocery shopping. Soon after, President Emmanuel Macron signed an ordinance barring the interruption of electricity, gas and water services for small businesses. Under this measure, utility companies will issue their invoices over time once the country overcomes the health crisis. Distressed companies are not to be penalized or charged any fees in the interim. Macron's ordinance also allows small businesses to postpone or suspend their rent payments. These benefits do not extend to average citizens, but financial aid is available for tenants on a case-by-case basis. France is also providing state-guaranteed loans for businesses of all sizes and has set aside about $1.3 billion for "solidarity funds" to support small businesses, self-employed people and freelancers. These funds can provide up to $3,820 per company or individual. Government officials have said the pandemic is expected to plunge the country into recession. To help those already struggling to make ends meet, the government allocated about $54 million to help the homeless population. -- Portugal After declaring a state of emergency March 18 that enables Portugal's government to deploy the army for security purposes, Finance Minister Mario Centeno said late last month that the country ended 2019 with a solid economy that would allow its citizens to face the pandemic with confidence. The country's minister of state, economy and digital transition, Pedro Siza Vieira, however, signaled that the closure of commercial and service establishments, along with the decrease in international and domestic travel, was "having a major negative impact on our companies." As a result, the government began several measures to protect businesses and workers. These include covering some employee wages for up to three months. Officials are authorized to allocate more than $14 billion in state-guaranteed loans for businesses. Portugal has more relief plans in the works. The Council of Ministers, for instance, approved a measure that aims to provide loans for people struggling to make rent. -- Times digital editor Agnus Dei Farrant contributed to this report. Caption: PHOTO: SALVADORAN President Nayib Bukele, shown in parliament this year, won early praise for his response to the coronavirus-related economic crisis. It proved to be short-lived when a government website crashed. PHOTOGRAPHER:Salvador Melendez Associated Press
Apr 16, 2020	Ariel Miranda threw the first pitch in the first professional baseball game that mattered this year. He also gave up the first home run — a fastball caught too much of the plate in the second inning — but settled down after the mistake. The former Seattle Mariners left-hander, starting for the Chinese Professional Baseball League’s Chinatrust Brothers in Taiwan, allowed just the one run across five innings Sunday and said he felt great on the mound. It was everything around him that was wonky. His team was playing a home game at Taichung Intercontinental Baseball Stadium, but it didn’t seem much like an opening day. The ballpark was empty because the CPBL, the first major professional baseball league in the world to begin its 2020 season, is staging games without fans for the foreseeable future. “The adrenaline is different,” Miranda said in Spanish during a phone interview. “You feel alone.” The CPBL is a five-team league in Taiwan, an island state off the coast of China with a population of nearly 24 million. Baseball is the top sport in Taiwan, which has produced more than a dozen Major League Baseball players. Founded in 1989, the CPBL has faced game-fixing scandals that forced a franchise to fold in 1998 and the expulsion of another in 2008, but it is the only major professional baseball league up and running amid the worldwide COVID-19 pandemic. Japan’s NPB and South Korea’s KBO are targeting starts in early May after delays. Major League Baseball, which suspended operations March 12, has discussed various scenarios for the 2020 season, including having all 30 teams play in the Phoenix area, but a plan has not been finalized. Taiwan has been credited with administering one of the world’s best responses to the novel coronavirus. The Central Epidemic Command Center reported just 395 confirmed cases and six deaths since the virus surfaced in December. Authorities reported two new cases Wednesday after reporting none Tuesday. The United States reported 29,465 new cases Wednesday. According to the Journal of the American Medical Association, the aggressive measures, which included setting up COVID-19 testing at nine facilities by Jan. 24 and swift quarantines, were instrumental in allowing Taiwan to avoid strict lockdown measures. Many schools, restaurants and offices were kept open. Hope for a baseball season, as a result, was kept afloat. The CPBL regular season was slated to start March 11. It was initially delayed to March 28, then rescheduled for April 11. Rain pushed opening day back another day. The all-star game was canceled, but the league hopes to hold 240 total games through mid-October. Fans are at least temporarily barred, but one club, the Rakuten Monkeys, has placed robots in the stands to cheer them on at home. The league is eyeing allowing 150 fans per game in two months.  Nothing can stop Taiwanese cheering up for #BASEBALL#StayHome and watch #CPBL #OpeningDay #CTBros#RakutenMonkeys pic.twitter.com/yRbSXdeRvT — CPBL 中華職棒 (@CPBL) April 11, 2020 “It’s very strange,” Miranda said. “But that was the step taken and you have to make the adjustments and work with it.” Miranda, 31, is familiar with adapting. He defected from Cuba in 2014 to establish residency in Haiti and signed with the Baltimore Orioles out of the Dominican Republic a year later. He made one appearance with the Orioles and 43 with the Mariners over three years before pitching in Japan the past two seasons. He signed a one-year, $600,000 contract, plus incentives, with the Chinatrust Brothers in January. A month later, on Valentine’s Day, he arrived — scared — in Taiwan. He left his wife and twin 8-year-old sons in Miami when life was normal in Miami. He doesn’t know when he will see them again. “I can’t until this is over,” Miranda said, “so I can maybe bring my family,” He didn’t know what to expect living in Taichung, a city of nearly 3 million people. He felt better after a conversation with the Brothers’ Spanish-language interpreter. He was told if a player in the league tested positive, the season would be suspended indefinitely and potentially canceled. He is confident, though not certain, he would get paid in full regardless. Miranda said he hasn’t been tested for the coronavirus and doesn’t know anyone who has been tested since he arrived in Taiwan. But he said stringent precautions are taken around the clock. Teams are not allowed to stay in hotels on road trips; they make same-day trips for games away from home. Miranda said the longest trip is a three-hour bus ride each way. Almost every night before he falls asleep, a team trainer knocks on his door to take his temperature. It happened last Saturday. The next morning, Miranda woke up, got dressed and took the elevator to the lobby of his Taichung apartment building, where every member of the Brothers is housed. When he reached the lobby, his temperature was taken again and sanitizer was squeezed into his hands before he could hop on the bus. Upon arrival, entry to the stadium required another temperature check at the gate and more sanitizer. “They always do it. Every day,” Miranda said. “That’s something we have gotten used to.” Miranda, No. 28 in a bright yellow Chinatrust uniform, took the mound with the sun poking out. Rows of empty blue seats served as his backdrop. Four cheerleaders danced on top of the Brothers’ dugout without an audience. Cameramen wore masks. In the second inning, outfielder K.W. Cheng led off with a solo home run to left field, giving the Uni-President Lions the lead. Two innings later, Brothers outfielder Tzu Hsien Chan, his walk-up song playing throughout his at-bat, crushed a solo shot off American left-hander Ryan Feierabend to even the score. The hyped voice of the public address announcer echoed as Chan rounded the bases. Cheers from the Brothers dugout could be heard clearly throughout the park. There was baseball to celebrate, even if fans weren’t there to see it.
Apr 15, 2020	America’s obesity epidemic appears to be making the coronavirus outbreak more dangerous — and potentially more deadly — in the United States, new research suggests. For younger and middle-aged adults in particular, carrying excess weight may significantly boost the likelihood of becoming severely ill with COVID-19. The evidence for this comes from thousands of COVID-19 patients who sought treatment in emergency departments in New York, and it’s prompting alarm among doctors and other health experts. In the U.S., 42.4% of adults have obesity, which means their body-mass index, or BMI, is 30 or more. In one of two new studies released this week, COVID-19 patients who were younger than 60 and had a BMI between 30 and 34 were twice as likely as their non-obese peers to be admitted to the hospital for acute care instead of being sent home from the ER. They were also 1.8 times more likely to require critical care in a hospital’s intensive care unit. More severe obesity posed an even greater risk to COVID-19 patients in this under-60 age group. When these patients had a BMI of 35 or higher, they were 2.2 times more likely than their non-obese peers to need standard hospital care and 3.6 times more likely to end up in the ICU. “Obesity appears to be a previously unrecognized risk factor for hospital admission and need for critical care,” wrote the authors of the study published this month in the journal Clinical Infectious Diseases. But that only applies to relatively younger patients; among those ages 65 and older, there was no link between obesity status and hospital care. The authors, from New York University’s Grossman School of Medicine, suggested that the country’s high prevalence of obesity might be nudging rates of severe illness and death higher in the U.S. than in South Korea, China and Italy, where obesity rates are lower. Newsletter Get our free Coronavirus Today newsletter Sign up for the latest news, best stories and what they mean for you, plus answers to your questions. Sign Me Up You may occasionally receive promotional content from the Los Angeles Times. The results also give doctors a new way to predict which COVID-19 patients who are not yet senior citizens run a higher risk of hospitalization and critical illness. “Unfortunately, obesity in people In a second report, a different team of NYU doctors and researchers examined the factors that appeared to predispose 4,103 COVID-19 patients of all ages to hospitalization. That study was posted Saturday to the website MedRxiv, a forum for sharing work that has not yet been peer-reviewed and published in a medical journal. Consistent with virtually all research on the coronavirus, this study found that being older than 75 was the most potent predictor of hospitalization for COVID-19, followed by being between the ages of 65 and 75. The third-best predictor was having a BMI over 40, a condition doctors call “severe obesity.” When all other factors were held equal, COVID-19 patients with severe obesity were more than six times more likely to be hospitalized than were patients who were not obese. Even a history of heart failure was less likely to land a COVID-19 patient in the hospital, the researchers found. Almost 10% of U.S. adults have a BMI of 40 or more. To make matters worse, the authors of the study found that elevated levels of inflammation upon hospital admission was one of the four top signs that a patient’s condition would become critical. Because stored fat is a powerful driver of inflammation, that measure tends to be higher in people with obesity. “We find particularly strong associations of older age, obesity, heart failure and chronic kidney disease with hospitalization risk, with much less influence of race, smoking status, chronic pulmonary disease and other forms of heart disease,” the researchers wrote. Obesity is linked to higher rates of many disorders affecting the respiratory system, including obstructive sleep apnea and asthma. So people carrying extra weight may be more susceptible to infections that affect the lungs. But there’s also good reason to expect that people with obesity might suffer more from a respiratory infection, said William Dietz, an obesity researcher at George Washington University . Since they typically carry more fat around their midsections, people with obesity tend to have reduced lung volume to begin with. For the same reason, they need to expend more effort with each breath, Dietz said. That is a particular burden when an infection compromises the lungs’ ability to take in oxygen for transport to the blood. And when patients are immobile and lying flat on their backs, as is often the case in a hospital bed, excess weight in the midsection is a force that works against even the power of mechanical ventilation, he said. For that reason, patients with obesity who are mechanically ventilated are often laid on their stomachs, a practice that has been widely observed in ICUs caring for COVID-19 patients. “This is not reassuring for the United States,” said Dietz of the new findings. Vulnerability to lung infections is further compounded by many of the social factors that are also linked to obesity, said Steven Gortmaker of Harvard’s Chan School of Public Health. African Americans, low-wage workers, those in poverty and people with poor access to healthcare have higher rates of both obesity and of respiratory illnesses, he said. That these groups appear to be disproportionately affected by COVID-19 is probably not a coincidence, Gortmaker added. Nor is the new coronavirus the first novel pathogen to afflict those with obesity, he added. A 2011 study found that half of California adults who were hospitalized with the H1N1 “swine flu” virus in 2009 and 2010 had obesity, and those with extreme obesity were more likely to die. The finding prompted researchers to recommend that adults with obesity be given priority for vaccines and for antiviral medications that could treat the infection. 
Apr 15, 2020	U.S. officials drew a lot of attention recently when they approved a $2-trillion relief package to help people face economic challenges tied to the coronavirus, but also said it would not be enough to fend off mounting unemployment. Additional help is needed, officials agree, but what form it takes and when it might be available remained undetermined as of Wednesday. The original relief package includes $1,200 payments for millions of residents, along with provisions for small and large companies struggling to stay afloat. In some cases, local or state governments are also offering various forms of relief. Through an executive order, for instance, California Gov. Gavin Newsom issued a two-month delay on residential evictions for tenants who can’t pay their rent. Californians will also not have their water turned off due to unpaid bills, and governors in several other states, including Michigan and North Carolina, have enacted similar policies. Other countries have also been trying to come up with plans to get through the economic havoc caused by COVID-19. Here is a sampling of what some of them are doing. El Salvador El Salvador instituted a mandatory 30-day quarantine, enforced by soldiers and police officers. Then, President Nayib Bukele‘s administration suspended water, electricity, telephone, cable and internet bills for three months. It also established a fund for “micro, small and medium” businesses that includes payroll subsidies and froze credit card bills, mortgage loans and retailers’ rent payments for the same period. The nation also promised $300 a month to its most vulnerable families. The small nation’s response to the outbreak made international headlines. For weeks, Bukele’s action was lauded as an example to follow. The Grammy Award-winning rapper Residente included Bukele among the current and former officials in the Americas he’s been interviewing about the pandemic. Then things went awry. After the website for potential beneficiaries crashed in late March, thousands of desperate citizens broke the quarantine to inquire about the money in person. Since then, the site has been repaired and, according to the Bukele administration, more than 1 million families had received the $300 payment as of early this week. Members of the Health Ministry, national police and the military keep crowds from congregating at banks and take people’s temperatures before they go inside. Despite the apparent success of the measures, critics have raised concerns about the nation’s economy in the long term. Because El Salvador took out a $389-million emergency loan from the International Monetary Fund to deal with COVID-19, they worry that the country will be seriously indebted once the health crisis is over. Last week, the president extended the quarantine by 15 days, meaning that the lockdown is expected to continue at least until early May. The the country had 159 confirmed infections and six deaths as of Wednesday. South Africa South Africa, the most industrialized country on the African continent, was struggling financially before the pandemic was declared. About half of its citizens live below the national poverty line, and poverty continues to be concentrated in regions where black South Africans lived under apartheid. Shortly before the nation went into lockdown on March 27 — also enforced by the military and police — the unemployment rate hovered at nearly 30%. That same day, the country received a sub-investment grade by Moody’s Investors Service, marking South Africa as a bad investment with a high risk of default. “The decision by Moody’s could not have come at a worse time,” South African Minister of Finance Tito Mboweni said in a statement, noting that investors had already been leaving the country. To stem economic fallout, the Ministry of Finance on March 29 began granting employer tax subsidies for four months. The Department of Small Business Development is supplying rental and payroll relief. Also, because tourism has plummeted, the government made grants of up to about $2,600 available to small businesses in the tourist industry. Other low-interest loans, which go up to about $268,000 are specifically geared at South African-owned businesses making products to combat COVID-19, such as hand sanitizer, steel beds for hospitals, hand soap and face masks. Additionally, some $10.6 million will be used to provide 0%-interest loans to black entrepreneurs who make healthcare products. Companies that produce staples such as flour, fruits and vegetables, milk, baby food and cooking oil can also apply for relief. “With the downgrade, imports are going to be very expensive, so we need to start to produce locally,” Minister of Small Business Development Khumbudzo Ntshavheni explained in an interview with a local radio station. South Korea South Korea, having taken early and aggressive measures to control a local outbreak, hasn’t had to impose widespread business closures and shelter-in-place orders like other countries. Even so, the country’s already flagging economy, which is heavily reliant on exports and closely linked to China’s, has been hard hit from the beginning of the year with the impact of supply-chain disruptions and travel bans. To cushion the blow, the South Korean government has announced plans to issue emergency relief funds of about $800 for a family of four to households with income levels in the bottom 70%. Families with children 6 or younger will receive an additional $300 per child. South Korea has also said it will spend upward of $100 billion to stabilize financial markets and assist businesses ranging from mom-and-pop stores to large corporations, by providing emergency loans, rescue packages and deferments in insurance premiums. The government is also rewarding commercial landlords who give tenants temporary cuts on rent by compensating for 50% of the discounted rent in tax breaks for the first half of 2020. At the same time, the country has relaxed standards on who can apply for public assistance, allowing freelancers and those who are self-employed to obtain welfare funds if their work has been drastically cut since the virus outbreak. France On March 17, the French government announced a nationwide lockdown banning all public gatherings and forcing residents to remain indoors, except for essential tasks such as grocery shopping. Soon after, President Emmanuel Macron signed an ordinance barring the interruption of electricity, gas and water services for small businesses. Under this measure, utility companies will issue their invoices over time once the country overcomes the health crisis. Distressed companies are not to be penalized or charged any fees in the interim. Macron’s ordinance also allows small businesses to postpone or suspend their rent payments. These benefits do not extend to average citizens, but financial aid is available for tenants on a case-by-case basis. France is also providing state-guaranteed loans for businesses of all sizes and has set aside about $1.3 billion for “solidarity funds” to support small businesses, self-employed people and freelancers. These funds can provide up to $3,820 per company or individual. Government officials have said the pandemic is expected to plunge the country into recession. To help those already struggling to make ends meet, the government allocated about $54 million to help the homeless population. Portugal After declaring a state of emergency March 18 that enables Portugal’s government to deploy the army for security purposes, Finance Minister Mário Centeno said late last month that the country ended 2019 with a solid economy that would enable its citizens to face the pandemic with confidence. The country’s minister of state, economy and digital transition, Pedro Siza Vieira, however, signaled that the closure of commercial and service establishments, along with the decrease in international and domestic travel, was “having a major negative impact on our companies.” As a result, the government began several measures to protect businesses and workers. These include covering some employee wages for up to three months. Officials are authorized to allocate upward of $14 billion in state-guaranteed loans for businesses. There are more relief plans in the works. The Council of Ministers, for instance, approved a measure that aims to provide loans for people struggling to make rent. Times digital editor Agnusdei Farrant contributed to this report. 
Apr 15, 2020	Even as the COVID-19 pandemic puts civic life on hold in many countries around the world, South Koreans turned out in record numbers to vote in their country’s parliamentary elections Wednesday, setting aside fears of the coronavirus in a democratic show of force. More than 17 million voters went to the polls Wednesday, joining 12 million who had previously cast their ballots in early voting. The record total flouted expectations that the virus outbreak would dampen voter participation and marked a 66.2% turnout, the highest since 1992. Voting at more than 14,000 polling stations across the country — at which voters were required to have their temperature taken, wear disposable plastic gloves and line up at three-foot intervals — appeared to run smoothly. More than 13,000 people under mandatory quarantine were also allowed to vote in the hour after polls closed to other voters, in separate booths where poll workers wore goggles and white head-to-toe protective suits. Whether the precautions were enough to significantly offset the risks of transmission presented by millions of people going to the polls remains to be seen. Despite not having imposed a large-scale lockdown or business closures as other countries have, South Korea has managed to slow the rate of new infections to a couple dozen a day this week. South Korea is one of a handful of countries to press ahead with elections as dozens of others have postponed theirs owing to the coronavirus outbreak. If it becomes clear in coming weeks that South Korea has managed to pull off a nationwide election without jeopardizing public health, the country could serve as an example for others trying to protect democracy and minimize the virus’ toll. As the votes were still being tallied, U.S. Secretary of State Michael R. Pompeo congratulated South Korea on holding “successful” elections in the midst of a pandemic. “South Korea’s dedication to democratic values and a free and open society is what the world needs to fight #COVID19,” he wrote on Twitter. Voters on Wednesday included two women 116 years of age as well as 18-year-olds newly allowed to vote thanks to a lowered voting age. The election was widely viewed as a midterm referendum on President Moon Jae-in. The results were a resounding victory for Moon and his Democratic Party. It and an allied party were on track to take three-fifths of 300 National Assembly seats, giving the incumbents an unprecedented majority. The president has received a boost in approval ratings from South Korea’s early and extensive response to the coronavirus outbreak. Thae Yong-ho, a former North Korean diplomat who defected to the South, running as a member of the opposition conservative party, secured a seat representing a wealthy district in Seoul, becoming the first North Korean refugee to be directly elected a legislator. Former Prime Minister Lee Nak-yeon, who until January served in Moon’s government, and Moon’s former spokeswoman, Ko Min-jung, both won their closely watched legislative races. Lee Che-hwa, 33, said that before coming out to vote Wednesday, he’d largely stayed indoors out of coronavirus concerns since losing his job at a hostel a month ago, when travel dried up because of the pandemic. With a 5 o’clock shadow showing under a white mask — which all voters were required to wear to enter polling stations — Lee said voting mattered now more than ever to make sure the country and its economy were in good hands. “This is not just Korea,” he said. “It’s going to be a worldwide problem of how we’re going to survive.” Casting his vote for the ruling party, Lee said he was satisfied with the government’s handling of the outbreak and the measures it has announced to help people like him who have been affected by the pandemic. He said he felt assured the voting setup was safe. Ko Hyung-pyo, a 46-year-old management consultant, said all his acquaintances were eager to vote because the country was polarized between liberals supportive of Moon and conservatives who vehemently oppose his North Korea and economic policies. “Of course the interest is high. The coronavirus has dominated everything, and whether you’re liberal or conservative, you think, if I don’t go out to vote, my side is going to be at a disadvantage,” he said. Ko said he split his ballot Wednesday, voting for a conservative candidate and a more progressive party, hoping for some balance in the country’s politics. Because South Korea’s National Assembly is a combination of directly elected district representatives and proportional seats assigned to parties based on voter support, each constituent votes for a district candidate and a party. “I’d like for them to come together in one voice and give society some hope,” he said. “We’re all worried about what’s going to happen after the coronavirus.” 
Apr 15, 2020	At a time when most governments are urging citizens to stay at home, one country is calling on them to come out in force this week -- to the polls. South Korea is going ahead with its hotly contested parliamentary elections Wednesday, even as nations around the world, from Britain to Bolivia, have postponed races out of coronavirus concerns and a primary this month in Wisconsin raised myriad worries about safety and disenfranchisement. With nearly 4 out of 5 South Koreans saying they intend to cast a ballot and early voting already logging record turnout, the country may offer an early look at how to hold a general election in the midst of a pandemic.  Election officials have assured citizens that they are taking every precaution to keep voters safe. All voters are being required to wear masks, and polling stations are being thoroughly sanitized. Poll workers wearing gloves, masks and protective face shields will take each voter's temperature, squirt his or her hands with sanitizer and then distribute a pair of disposable gloves. Anyone with a fever or other coronavirus-related symptoms will be routed to a separate voting booth, which will be disinfected after each use. After much debate, the government also announced measures to allow those under mandatory 14-day quarantine -- people who have traveled abroad or come into contact with a known COVID-19 patient -- to leave their homes during a 1 hour, 40-minute window Wednesday evening to cast their ballots. Only those without symptoms will be permitted to do so, and they're required to walk or drive themselves to the polls rather than take public transit. Some coronavirus patients under quarantine also had the option of voting by mail, which South Korea typically allows only in limited cases. Despite the COVID-19 pandemic, more than a quarter of eligible voters turned out for early voting over the weekend in an election widely viewed as a referendum on the presidency of Moon Jae-in. Moon, a liberal, was voted into office in 2017 after his predecessor was impeached in a corruption scandal that triggered a large-scale protest movement that filled the streets of Seoul. Before the pandemic, the elections were shaping up to be dominated by South Korea's lackluster economy and Moon's stalled policy of engagement with North Korea, which has been at an impasse since talks between the U.S. and North Korea fell apart. But the virus changed everything. Even though Moon made an early blunder, prematurely saying out of concern for the economy that the outbreak would be over soon, politicians in South Korea have largely stayed out of the way of the disease-control professionals who took charge of the epidemic response. Systems and laws kicked in that had been created after the government's bungled handling of an outbreak of Middle East respiratory syndrome, or MERS, in 2015. Daily COVID-19 infections, after a surge in late February, slowed to fewer than 30 new cases this week. The country's success in controlling the outbreak and flattening the curve of new infections has received acclaim and attention from around the world. That's translated into the highest approval ratings for Moon -- 57% -- since 2018, according to Gallup Korea. Moon said Monday that the election could serve as an example to other countries still struggling to curb the epidemic. "If we can maintain the results of our disease-prevention efforts while holding nationwide elections, we can give the world the hope that it's possible to return to normal social systems and daily activities," he said. Running for seats in South Korea's 300-seat parliament are a high-profile former North Korean diplomat who defected to the South, young feminists who've formed their own party on a platform against misogyny and sexism, and two former prime ministers going head to head in a district in central Seoul. On street corners in recent weeks, campaigners courted voters wearing jackets, hats and matching face masks in each political party's color. At competing rallies in the race between the two former premiers, enthusiasm for the candidates appeared to trump any social distancing concerns as citizens mobbed candidates for photos and handshakes. The opposition has largely supported the government's anti-virus efforts but has faulted Moon for not swiftly banning travel from China and accused him of taking advantage of South Korea's coronavirus-related economic stimulus to buy votes. Hwang Kyo-ahn of the conservative main opposition United Future Party did not mention the coronavirus once in a 15-minute speech, focusing instead on economic woes and taxation. "If he mentions it, he's just helping the incumbents. I'm on this side [of the political spectrum], but a good job is a good job," said Lee Wan-jae, a 67-year-old taxi driver watching Hwang's speech, who said he always voted with the conservatives. "With the coronavirus, it's not the administration but the public health officials who are doing good work. They're trying to free-ride on that." Lee said his primary concern was the economy -- he stopped driving a couple of months ago because he wasn't getting enough fares. He said he wasn't optimistic about either party being able to turn the economy around. Across the street, Lee Nak-yeon, who served as Moon's prime minister until January, stumped primarily on praising the current government's coronavirus successes. "Isn't South Korea really remarkable?" he said, noting that treatment for COVID-19 for one individual in the U.S. would cost many times more the amount -- 40,000 Korean won, or about $32 -- it would cost the average South Korean patient. "We seem like a small country, but we're not a small country." Jun Sung-man, a 29-year-old occupational therapist, said he was a moderate but planned to vote for Moon's party because of the government's outbreak response -- and the couple of hundred dollars in a stimulus check he was due to receive. "They're dealing with the coronavirus in a transparent way and doing a good job of implementing policy," he said. Caption: PHOTO: A BUDDHIST monk casts an early vote in Seoul on Friday in the South Korean parliamentary elections. PHOTOGRAPHER:Ahn Young-joon Associated Press
Apr 14, 2020	At a time when most governments are urging citizens to stay at home, one country is calling on them to come out in force this week — to the polls. South Korea is going ahead with its hotly contested parliamentary elections Wednesday, even as nations around the world, from Britain to Bolivia, have postponed races out of coronavirus concerns and a primary in Wisconsin raised myriad concerns about safety and disenfranchisement. With nearly four out of five South Koreans saying they intend to cast a ballot and early voting already logging record turnout, the country may offer an early look at how to hold a general election in the midst of a pandemic. Election officials have assured citizens that they are taking every precaution to keep voters safe. All voters are being required to wear masks, and polling stations are being thoroughly sanitized. Poll workers wearing gloves, masks and protective face shields will take each voter’s temperature, squirt his or her hands with sanitizer and then distribute a pair of disposable plastic gloves. Anyone with a fever or other coronavirus-related symptoms will be routed to a separate voting booth, which will be disinfected after each use. After much debate, the government also announced measures to allow those under mandatory 14-day quarantine — people who have traveled abroad or come into contact with a known COVID-19 patient — to leave their homes during a one hour, 40-minute window Wednesday evening to cast their ballots. Only those without symptoms will be permitted to do so, and they’re required to walk or drive themselves to the polls rather than take public transit. Some coronavirus patients under quarantine also had the option of voting by mail, which South Korea typically only allows in limited cases. Despite the coronavirus pandemic, more than a quarter of eligible voters turned out for early voting over the weekend in an election widely viewed as a referendum on the presidency of Moon Jae-in. Moon, a liberal, was voted into office in 2017 after his predecessor was impeached in a corruption scandal that triggered a large-scale protest movement that filled the streets of Seoul. Before the pandemic, the elections were shaping up to be dominated by South Korea’s lackluster economy and Moon’s stalled policy of engagement with North Korea, which has been at an impasse since talks between the U.S. and North Korea fell apart. But the virus changed everything. Even though Moon made an early blunder, prematurely saying out of concern for the economy that the outbreak would be over soon, politicians in South Korea have largely stayed out of the way of the disease-control professionals who took charge of the epidemic response. Systems and laws put in place after the country’s bungled handling of a 2015 outbreak of the Middle East Respiratory Syndrome kicked in, and after a surge in late February, daily coronavirus infections slowed to fewer than 30 new cases this week. The country’s success in controlling the outbreak and flattening the curve of new infections has received acclaim and attention from around the world. That’s translated into the highest approval ratings for Moon — 57% — since 2018, according to Gallup Korea. Moon said Monday that the election could serve as an example to other countries still struggling to curb the epidemic. “If we can maintain the results of our disease-prevention efforts while holding nationwide elections, we can give the world the hope that it’s possible to return to normal social systems and daily activities,” he said. Running for seats in South Korea’s 300-seat parliament are a high-profile former North Korean diplomat who defected to the South, young feminists who’ve formed their own party on a platform against misogyny and sexism, and two former prime ministers going head to head in a district in central Seoul. On street corners in recent weeks, campaigners courted voters wearing jackets, hats and matching face masks in each political party’s color.  Masks color-coded to match your party -- electioneering in the time of coronavirus, South Korea edition. pic.twitter.com/67EO6KcAhH — Victoria Kim (@vicjkim) April 3, 2020 At competing rallies in the race between the two former premiers, enthusiasm for the candidates appeared to trump any social distancing concerns as citizens mobbed candidates for photos and handshakes. The opposition has largely supported the government’s anti-virus efforts but has faulted Moon for not swiftly banning travel from China and accused him of taking advantage of South Korea’s coronavirus-related economic stimulus to buy votes. Hwang Kyo-ahn of the conservative main opposition United Future Party did not mention the coronavirus once in a 15-minute speech belted over loudspeakers, focusing instead on economic woes and taxation. “If he mentions it, he’s just helping the incumbents. I’m on this side [of the political spectrum], but a good job is a good job,” said Lee Wan-jae, a 67-year-old taxi driver watching Hwang’s speech, who said he always voted with the conservatives. “With the coronavirus, it’s not the administration but the public health officials who are doing good work. They’re trying to free-ride on that.” Newsletter Get our free Coronavirus Today newsletter Sign up for the latest news, best stories and what they mean for you, plus answers to your questions. Sign Me Up You may occasionally receive promotional content from the Los Angeles Times. Lee said his primary concern was the economy — he stopped driving a couple of months ago because he wasn’t getting enough fares. He said he wasn’t optimistic about either party being able to turn the economy around. Across the street, Lee Nak-yeon, who served as Moon’s prime minister until January, stumped primarily on praising the current government’s coronavirus successes. “Isn’t South Korea really remarkable?” he said, noting that treatment for COVID-19 for one indvidual in the U.S. would cost many times more the amount — 40,000 Korean won, or about $32 — it would cost the average South Korean patient. “We seem like a small country, but we’re not a small country.” Jun Sung-man, a 29-year-old occupational therapist, said he was a moderate but planned on voting for Moon’s liberal party because of the current government’s outbreak response — and the couple of hundred dollars in a stimulus check he was due to receive. “They’re dealing with the coronavirus in a transparent way and doing a good job of implementing policy,” he said.
Apr 14, 2020	Remember BBC Dad? You know, Robert E. Kelly, that polisci professor in South Korea who in 2017 was being interviewed remotely about the impeachment of then-South Korean President Park Geun-hye when his adorable 4-year-old daughter marched into his office with her baby brother hilariously rolling behind her? Remember how stricken their mother, Jung-a Kim, looked as she dashed in to haul them out? Remember how the video dominated news cycles for days, briefly sparking conversations about balancing work and family? Nevertheless, since in this country conversations about balancing work and family are ongoing and thus far fairly fruitless, BBC Dad was seen by most as a blooper supreme that made everyone on the planet laugh. No one's laughing now. In the universal coronavirus-mandated stay-at-home office, you're lucky if one of the 12 co-workers on your Zoom meeting gives you the heads-up before your own 4-year-old empties the fishbowl onto the floor behind you.  (Full disclosure: Times owner Dr. Patrick Soon-Shiong is an investor in Zoom.) Nowadays, every interview, Skype session and conference call is prefaced by the parental warnings -- participants listing the number and ages of the children who are supposed to be doing schoolwork/watching TV/napping/being amused by another family member but could interrupt at any moment. Just so everyone's aware. Those of us fortunate to remain well during the COVID-19 pandemic have learned many new things about people we thought we already knew pretty well. Like, we are stress-baking way too much. And refusing to acknowledge that no matter how young you are, overhead lighting is not your friend. (Seriously. I cannot emphasize enough the benefits of indirect lighting.) Those of us fortunate to remain employed in ways that require regular tele-contact have learned other things as well. Longtime co-workers are suddenly revealed to have a wide range of pets or an alarming number of snake plants; others have, shall we say, unexpected taste in art or a nearly endless collection of hooded sweatshirts (OK, that's me -- but honestly, you all should have known). Most important, it has been revealed that many of us have children. Children who are not, as it turns out, theoretical or compartmentalizable. Children who exist as actual humans outside the confines of adorable pictures -- and are capable of disrupting work in ways far less manageable than the occasional request to leave early so as not to miss a parent/teacher conference. Here they are, these children, now banned from day care, school and college, suddenly -- and no doubt to some, shockingly -- displaying measurable physical dimensions, and immeasurable physical needs, including a near-constant desire to be fed while showing you a really funny TikTok right now. Children, even the older ones, who need to express their frustration, especially now, in a highly unscheduled way. Children who just want to show you the latest missive from their university and demand you promise college will resume in the fall. Or tell you the dog got out again and should they get him? Or show you this very cool ginormous bug they just found, only wait ... it was right here a second ago, where did it go? Children who need to do all of these things and more even and especially if their mother or father is in a Zoom meeting. Suddenly the BBC Dad video seems less like a blooper and more like an unexpected tear in the Potemkin village we have built at the border of work and family. You know, the one that "proves" everything is just fine -- nothing to see here, parents are perfectly capable of juggling two full-time jobs on their own! -- so American businesses can pretend there is no need for things like on-site day care, flex time, telecommuting or extended parental leave. You know, the kinds of resources that virtually every other first-world nation has had for decades? "I'm really hoping that one of the silver linings of this thing is that we can all stop apologizing for having families," a television producer and mother said to me recently. "I can't tell you the number of times I've had to apologize for being interrupted even though I was working at night or on a weekend." BBC Dad, if you remember, was mortified by his children's on-camera incursion and feared it would end his career as a go-to expert on South Korea. Instead, it had the opposite effect. He got even more on-camera gigs the following year and no one seemed to think he had less insight into that country's politics because he had young children. Kim took it on the chin for a bit, however. Many people assumed -- because Kelly is white and Kim is Asian -- that she must be the nanny, while others were concerned at how panicked she looked as she attempted to corral her children. Concerned, it must be added, that she was personally being mistreated in some way, not that social pressures to keep work and family separated could, and do, create such palpable panic. In fact, it was the look on Kim's face, rather than Kelly's ability to remain calm, that spoke to many, in a fairly unfunny way. Working mothers, and to an increasing extent working fathers, know that panic all too well: Somehow one of the 85 balls in the air has fallen and everyone will now see we are incapable of doing the impossible. When my younger daughter was 3, I had to interview a celebrity on a Sunday morning because that was the only time he could talk to me. So I locked myself in my bedroom. And when my daughter started pounding on the door, completely ignoring her father and yelling for me, I wedged myself under my bed in the hope the mattress would act as soundproofing. It didn't. "What the hell is wrong with that kid?" the (then-childless) celebrity growled, only partly in jest. "Nothing is wrong with that kid," I should have said. "She is 3 and it is Sunday morning and she wants her mother. Like 3-year-olds do on a Sunday morning. You work in theater, you must be used to tantrums. Carry on." Instead I apologized, profusely, and wiggled further under the bed. Now, any business able to remain open is also open to doing business any way it can be done, mostly from home. Homes that are shared by children, who are dealing with their own sequestration side effects and cannot reasonably be expected to pretend that mom is at her office when clearly she is in her bedroom, wearing a nice top over sweatpants and fiddling with the lamp so she doesn't look 108 years old. A mom like that might very well need a snack during her "meeting" -- and that snack might very well consist of Lucky Charms that then spill all over the bed, and how is that the Lucky Charms-proffering child's fault? He was just trying to be nice. And you know what? He was nice. And there is no reason, mid-pandemic or not, why business cannot be conducted while a person mops up the fallout of a large bowl of Lucky Charms. Or takes a minute to tell her college student daughter, now stuck at home, where the cheese grater is kept. (The same daughter who has a big sign on her door announcing the hours she is in Zoom class because, while it may be OK for a young-adult child to interrupt an interview with a question asked in hand gestures, the thought of her classmates getting the merest glimpse of an inquiring parent is too ghastly to contemplate.) It is OK for two things to be occurring at once because for working parents, at least two things are always occurring at once. The boss may not know it, but Mom has been doing this balancing act for years. Whether silently making a grocery list while Simpson from HR drones on in some required meeting or correcting homework during an 8 p.m. conference call, working parents have functioned this way for decades. The only difference is that now everyone is seeing it live-streamed. So maybe, once this pandemic has passed and we emerge from isolation, we can all remember what we have learned: that being at work doesn't mean you temporarily don't have a family any more than being at home means that when you are there you never do any work. That workers need things like flex time, extended leave and subsidized family care. And if those resources are not going to be provided, well, businesses will just have to deal with the interruptions. Certainly this crisis has put our previous definitions of "interruption" in perspective. When a fear of illness and potential death is what's keeping you from your place of work, ducking out of a FaceTime conversation because your kid needs you to proofread an essay due at noon, which is five minutes from now, just doesn't seem like that big of a deal. Because it isn't. Caption: PHOTO: ROBERT E. KELLY, professor of political science at Pusan National University, is seen being interrupted by his children during a 2017 BBC interview in his home. PHOTOGRAPHER:BBC News via YouTube 
Apr 13, 2020	No, “The Simpsons” did not predict the coronavirus outbreak. Neither did science-fiction author Dean Koontz, nor “Jeopardy!” But Bill Gates came pretty close. The billionaire Microsoft mastermind had an I-told-you-so moment Monday on “The Ellen DeGeneres Show,” reflecting on a harrowing prediction he made during a 2015 TED Talk titled “The next outbreak? We’re not ready.” “If anything kills over 10 million people in the next few decades, it’s most likely to be a highly infectious virus rather than a war — not missiles but microbes,” he said at the time. “We have invested a huge amount in nuclear deterrents, but we’ve actually invested very little in a system to stop an epidemic. We’re not ready for the next epidemic.” While video-chatting with Gates from home, DeGeneres reminded the tech mogul of his prescient lecture now that the world is struggling to contain a public health crisis similar to what he outlined. × “You predicted this would happen, and so I’m sure you’re very prepared because you knew this was going to happen,” the host said. “Do you feel like you prepared for this?” “Well, the goal of the 2015 talk ... was so that the government would do the work to be ready for the next epidemic,” Gates replied. “That would have meant that we would have had diagnostics very quickly, drugs very quickly, even a vaccine — all of those things — dramatically faster than what we’re going through here.” The philanthropist also noted that he and his wife, Melinda Gates, have made efforts in the last five years to prepare for an epidemic through their foundation, which recently donated $100 million to fight the spread of COVID-19. “We had epidemics like the Ebola epidemic in Africa that should have gotten us ready,” he said. “Then we had Zika. But a respiratory pandemic that’s very widespread, really, we haven’t seen anything like this for 100 years.” × Citing the responses of other countries such as China and South Korea, Gates seemed optimistic about the possibility of flattening the curve with strict quarantine practices and an efficient testing system. But he doesn’t foresee life going “back to normal until we have that phenomenal vaccine or therapeutics that are over 95% effective.” Echoing the projections of healthcare professionals and world leaders, Gates estimated such a solution won’t arrive for another 18 months. “I feel very confident that this time, we won’t ignore the potential for the next epidemic — that this is such a dramatic thing that has reshaped our lives and the economy and created so many tragedies, we will get ready,” he said. “I also think we have great examples of heroics where people are stepping up or communities are coming together to solve these problems. “And so although it’s very bad news and almost a worst-case scenario, the ingenuity of people, the compassion of people ... hopefully this will renew our sense that we’re in this together in our communities, in our country and in the world.” 
Apr 12, 2020	If you’re an aspiring dictator, this pandemic is a job opportunity. People are sick, dying, scared of getting sick and dying, and desperate not to be scared of being sick and dying. They want help. They want solutions. They want jobs. They want drugs. They want leaders with no pharmaceutical expertise to prescribe them drugs. They are not interested in choices. They want to be told what to do. James Madison warned that tyranny arises “on some favorable emergency.” In wartime, American presidents have encroached on our liberties. Abraham Lincoln suspended habeas corpus, Woodrow Wilson jailed dissidents, Franklin Roosevelt interned Japanese Americans, and George W. Bush instituted massive wiretapping. In 1972, Philippine dictator Ferdinand Marcos used a staged assassination attempt on his defense secretary to impose martial law and extend his rule for another 14 years. Using terrorism as a pretext, Russian leader Vladimir Putin seized control of private television in 2002 and abolished elected regional governors in 2004. In response to the coronavirus pandemic, national governments are seizing new powers. South Korea and Singapore launched invasive surveillance systems. Bolivia suspended its presidential election. Israel’s prime minister is shutting down courts. Thailand’s prime minister can now impose curfews and censor the news media. Hungary’s parliament just gave Prime Minister Viktor Orban the power to suspend existing laws, suspend elections and rule by decree. Last year, U.S. Ambassador to Hungary David Cornstein said that President Trump “would love to have the situation that Viktor Orban has.” Unlike Orban, Trump is lazy. As much as he would love to have dictatorial powers, he doesn’t want to put forth the effort necessary to seize them, even though he has a great excuse: preventing mass death. Instead of consolidating power, he is delegating to governors. Rather than fomenting public hysteria to justify emergency action, he minimized the dangers of the coronavirus, comparing it to the flu and saying it would go away on its own. Even now, after his decision to keep social distancing measures in place through at least April, he doesn’t want to talk about the coronavirus. The focus of his April 1 press briefing was drug cartels. Five days later, he tweeted, “Fake News is bad for America!” So are hundreds of thousands of preventable deaths. Americans want the federal government to do more to keep them safe. But Trump largely refuses to employ his powers. Until late March, he had hesitated to invoke the Defense Production Act — a wartime law his administration has used literally hundreds of thousands of times — to acquire coronavirus test kits and hospital equipment. Rather than using his powers, he simply wants to be adored for having them. This isn’t to say that Trump misprizes all crises. To avoid taking responsibility, he’s desperate to manufacture a fake crisis to distract from his failures in this real crisis. Talking about drug cartels after predicting at least 100,000 deaths in the U.S. from the pandemic is like telling a meth addict that watching CNN will kill him. Trump is using his daily press briefings on his coronavirus response as a platform to distract us from his coronavirus response. Instead of trying to solve a real problem, Trump is offering new imaginary problems — that he can control. He’s done it before. Trump stoked fears about illegal immigrants before the government shutdown last year. In an Oval Office address on Jan. 8, 2019, he said the word “crisis” six times and accused illegal immigrants of committing “30,000 sex crimes and 4,000 violent killings.” After fabricating a crisis, the president declared a national emergency. The result? His fake crisis produced a real crisis: a partial shutdown of the federal government. Trump’s brief, impulsive attempt at autocracy failed, just like his fragrance, Success, did. Trump prefers fake problems to real problems because real problems demand real solutions, which demand real work. Trump doesn’t like to work and rarely does. While marking 100 days in office, he complained, “This is more work than in my previous life. I thought it would be easier.” He spends most of his waking hours watching TV, tweeting and talking on the phone. In addition to being too lazy to do things, Trump is uninterested in doing things. He’s interested in having things. This is what makes his narcissism malignant rather than benign. As the social psychologist Erich Fromm observed, narcissists derive their self-worth from their possessions, not from achievements. Subverting democracy requires more effort than Trump is willing to exert. He wants to be a dictator, but he’s unwilling to do the work to become one. Just as he inherited a fortune, he wants to inherit an autocracy. To be a successful strongman, you need a strong work ethic. Trump has only weak ethics. Windsor Mann is the editor of “The Quotable Hitchens: From Alcohol to Zionism.”
Apr 12, 2020	If you're an aspiring dictator, this pandemic is a job opportunity. People are sick, dying, scared of getting sick and dying, and desperate not to be scared of being sick and dying. They want help. They want solutions. They want jobs. They want drugs. They want leaders with no pharmaceutical expertise to prescribe them drugs. They are not interested in choices. They want to be told what to do. James Madison warned that tyranny arises "on some favorable emergency." In wartime, American presidents have encroached on our liberties. Abraham Lincoln suspended habeas corpus, Woodrow Wilson jailed dissidents, Franklin Roosevelt interned Japanese Americans, and George W. Bush instituted massive wiretapping. In 1972, Philippine dictator Ferdinand Marcos used a staged assassination attempt on his defense secretary to impose martial law and extend his rule for another 14 years. Using terrorism as a pretext, Russian leader Vladimir Putin seized control of private television in 2002 and abolished elected regional governors in 2004.  In response to the coronavirus pandemic, national governments are seizing new powers. South Korea and Singapore launched invasive surveillance systems. Bolivia suspended its presidential election. Israel's prime minister is shutting down courts. Thailand's prime minister can now impose curfews and censor the news media. Hungary's parliament just gave Prime Minister Viktor Orban the power to suspend existing laws, suspend elections and rule by decree. Last year, U.S. Ambassador to Hungary David Cornstein said that President Trump "would love to have the situation that Viktor Orban has." Unlike Orban, Trump is lazy. As much as he would love to have dictatorial powers, he doesn't want to put forth the effort necessary to seize them, even though he has a great excuse: preventing mass death. Instead of consolidating power, he is delegating to governors. Rather than fomenting public hysteria to justify emergency action, he minimized the dangers of the coronavirus, comparing it to the flu and saying it would go away on its own. Even now, after his decision to keep social distancing measures in place through at least April, he doesn't want to talk about the coronavirus. The focus of his April 1 news briefing was drug cartels. Five days later, he tweeted, "Fake News is bad for America!" So are hundreds of thousands of preventable deaths. Americans want the federal government to do more to keep them safe. But Trump largely refuses to employ his powers. Until late March, he had hesitated to invoke the Defense Production Act -- a wartime law his administration has used literally hundreds of thousands of times -- to acquire coronavirus test kits and hospital equipment. Rather than using his powers, he simply wants to be adored for having them. This isn't to say that Trump misprizes all crises. To avoid taking responsibility, he's desperate to manufacture a fake crisis to distract from his failures in this real crisis. Talking about drug cartels after predicting at least 100,000 deaths in the U.S. from the pandemic is like telling a meth addict that watching CNN will kill him. Trump is using his daily news briefings on his coronavirus response as a platform to distract us from his coronavirus response. Instead of trying to solve a real problem, Trump is offering new imaginary problems -- that he can control. He's done it before. Trump stoked fears about illegal immigrants before the government shutdown last year. In an Oval Office address on Jan. 8, 2019, he said the word "crisis" six times and accused illegal immigrants of committing "30,000 sex crimes and 4,000 violent killings." After fabricating a crisis, the president declared a national emergency. The result? His fake crisis produced a real crisis: a partial shutdown of the federal government. Trump's brief, impulsive attempt at autocracy failed, just like his fragrance, Success, did. Trump prefers fake problems to real problems because real problems demand real solutions, which demand real work. Trump doesn't like to work and rarely does. While marking 100 days in office, he complained, "This is more work than in my previous life. I thought it would be easier." He spends most of his waking hours watching TV, tweeting and talking on the phone. In addition to being too lazy to do things, Trump is uninterested in doing things. He's interested in having things. This is what makes his narcissism malignant rather than benign. As the social psychologist Erich Fromm observed, narcissists derive their self-worth from their possessions, not from achievements. Subverting democracy requires more effort than Trump is willing to exert. He wants to be a dictator, but he's unwilling to do the work to become one. Just as he inherited a fortune, he wants to inherit an autocracy. To be a successful strongman, you need a strong work ethic. Trump has only weak ethics.  Credit: Windsor Mann is the editor of "The Quotable Hitchens: From Alcohol to Zionism."
Apr 12, 2020	It began for Peter Daszak, a British American scientist, a couple of days after Christmas. While the rest of the world trundled along, the president of the New York-based EcoHealth Alliance was in his office in lower Manhattan, picking up the first clues of something amiss. Weibo, China's Twitter, carried the warning signals: An odd illness in the city of Wuhan. Patients in respiratory distress. Some developing pneumonia. A few dying, or so said the reports, unconfirmed. Most of the sick had worked in, or visited, a "wet" market in the central Chinese city, where live fish, crabs and livestock are sold, gill-by-jowl, alongside more exotic fare, such as snakes, hedgehogs and bamboo rats. An ebullient zoologist and parasitologist, Daszak had associates around the globe in the One Health movement -- the professional community trying to prevent the spread of disease between the animal and human worlds. But, as New Year's approached, his colleagues in China suddenly went mum.  "They were all saying 'I'm sorry, I can't talk. We're very busy. We'll talk to you soon.' They wouldn't respond, even to a 'Happy New Year's' message. That wasn't normal," Daszak recalled. "That's when you know, you just know, something serious is going down." Those fleeting days of 2019 and the first three months of 2020 have passed in a blur for America and the world, turned upside down by a virus previously not identified by humankind and now responsible for a death toll that has climbed past 100,000. For the 54-year-old Daszak and his fellow germ trackers, it's been a period of long hours and roiling emotions -- anxiety about the trajectory of the killer they spotted in its first days, a queasy satisfaction that their years of warnings had not been misplaced and a stolid determination to do more to prepare the world for the pandemics yet to come. There's also frustration, and some anger, as they watch world leaders move too slowly to marshal healthcare workers, set aside medical supplies and, especially, to isolate millions of people with no immunity to the new invader. It appears probable that the disease found its first human victim as early as October, and that the virus now labeled SARS-CoV-2 likely originated in the tiny horseshoe bat, not much bigger than a large moth. Reporting by award-winning disease journalist Laurie Garrett suggests that the outbreak might not even have originated in the South China Seafood Market, implicated by the Chinese government. The hunt for answers continues. "We've talked about this in the abstract form for years," said Daszak from his home in the Hudson River Valley, where he is now sheltering in place with his wife and two grown daughters. "When we go to policy-makers and say, 'Look, this could be the next big one.' Then afterward we might think, 'Well, am I over-exaggerating the risk?' "Now it's just the most bizarre feeling. The bat coronavirus, one of the many that we have worked on for years, is here, in my neighborhood. It's around the world. And it's killing people." -- Daszak and his team at EcoHealth Alliance weren't the only ones scrambling at the end of 2019 to understand the tidbits escaping from Wuhan, a sprawling city of more than 11 million in central China's Hubei province. In mid-December, Lawrence Gostin, a professor of global health law at Georgetown Law, had a guest over to dinner. "I just heard from a friend in Wuhan that there is a novel coronavirus, and it looks very serious," Gostin remembered saying. "He just said, 'Pass the biscuits.' " Few people grasped the potentially catastrophic implications of an outbreak in China. Gostin would spend the next weeks imploring international bodies to take this new threat seriously. On Dec. 30, Marjorie Pollack and her husband had just finished dinner at their weekend home on the far end of Long Island. About 9 p.m., the physician-epidemiologist checked her email and found a Weibo alert. It included what looked like a photograph of an urgent notice from Wuhan's Municipal Health Committee about several cases of pneumonia, of unknown cause. As deputy editor of ProMED, an email service with more than 80,000 subscribers worldwide, Pollack had fielded scores of messages like this one. It was her job to suss out real public health threats from the background noise and to deliver notices to an audience of doctors and health professionals. Pollack quickly found the verification she needed. China Business News had confirmed the Health Committee alert was real. One minute before midnight on Jan. 30, Pollack hit send on a ProMED email, "Undiagnosed pneumonia," followed by "RFI," Request for Information. In the middle of New Year's Eve day, Helen Branswell opened the email and stopped. The veteran journalist for the health website STATnews.com had been finishing a project on an Ebola vaccine. She supposedly had the day off. "Hopefully this is nothing out of the ordinary," she wrote on Twitter. The ProMED notice, she said, "is giving me #SARS flashbacks." That observation, from a full-time infectious-disease sleuth, was no small matter. Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome appeared in China in 2003 before sweeping much of the globe. Caused by a coronavirus from a small mammal, the illness sickened far fewer people than the current COVID-19 virus, about 8,000 worldwide. But it killed with greater efficiency, taking roughly one in 10 it infected. Since its 1994 founding, ProMED had become an essential tool for public health officers, also offering the first worldwide alerts on SARS and on MERS, another of what epidemiologists call a "spillover" coronavirus from the animal world, which emerged in Saudi Arabia in September 2012. "The earlier people know about a problem, the sooner they are preparing," Pollack said. Preparing means more time to quarantine sick patients, to ready tests, to scale up clinics. "Preparing," Pollack said, "can save lives." Though solidly beyond retirement age, Pollack is an "adrenaline junkie," her lawyer husband tells her. She would need that fuel in the coming weeks, working on as little as three hours' sleep as she foraged for updates. Daszak, too, worried about another SARS, or worse -- tweeting his concern in the predawn hours New Year's Eve. But he also took heart that there was not yet a sign of a wider outbreak and that the Chinese public health system had been upgraded. "Let's hope this is not a novel viral agent," he tweeted. The ProMED alert served as a global tripwire. Soon, Pollack's inbox overflowed with 1,200 Weibo alerts a day. Emails poured into the small, mostly volunteer organization -- which is sponsored by the International Society for Infectious Diseases. It was three days later, on Jan. 3, that President Trump's appointee as secretary of Health and Human Services, Alex Azar, said he was alerted to the initial reports of the virus. He got the news from the federal Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Five days after that, the Chinese confirmed they had sequenced a full coronavirus genome, finding evidence of the pathogen in 15 people. The genetic mapping cleared the way to create tests and hunt down the roots of the illness. (Though later investigation would show that this news had been suppressed and greatly underestimated the disease's early spread.) At STAT News in Boston, Branswell tweeted off a series of questions troubling her colleagues worldwide: "How did the new coronavirus jump to people? From what species? And are animals infected with it found in other markets?" Her sober conclusion: "Can't assume that one seafood market would be the sole transmission location." -- Still, the illness' lethality remained theoretical until Jan. 11, when Chinese state media finally confirmed the first death from the virus. It was a 61-year-old man, a regular customer at the South China Seafood Market. A full month before the World Health Organization would declare a pandemic, Daszak did not mince words, alerting his 6,300 Twitter followers: "A clear and present danger for pandemic emergence!" Daszak's wife, an immunologist, didn't dally. She soon bought surgical masks, gloves, bleach, paper towels and other gear for a "pandemic box." Enough supplies to quarantine for two weeks. The looming crisis had the EcoHealth Alliance president wracking his brain: "There is a kind of guilt you feel. ...Why weren't we louder? Why weren't we more aggressive and more anxious and activist about the concern?" But the public record suggests Daszak and his colleagues had not been quiet. As far back as 2005, he and colleagues warned how bats, in particular, carried dangerous SARS-like viruses. Five years ago, he co-authored a paper spelling out the likelihood that another bat-borne coronavirus would emerge in humans. Daszak and colleagues such as Jonna Mazet at UC Davis in California have pushed for years for increased funding of programs that track so-called zoonotic viruses that transfer to humans, and for the creation of programs to prevent the spillover between species. The creatures' waste can be ingested by livestock or make its way more directly to humans. In China, bat feces is used as an ingredient in folk remedies, and bat meat is considered a delicacy. In 2015, Daszak told Wired: "I think people should stop hunting bats and stop eating bats." On Jan. 13, hopes that the Chinese would contain the virus domestically evaporated. A case popped up in Thailand. Another emerged two days later, in Japan. At Johns Hopkins University's Center for Health Security, its highly respected director, Tom Inglesby, saw the "offramps" to a worldwide crisis narrowing. "A very important time," he tweeted, "to set course for a wide surveillance strategy." The picture was even more dire than the West had been led to believe, it was later revealed in an interview with Yuen Kwok-yung, a Hong Kong-based scientist allowed to visit Wuhan on Jan. 17. Doctors there appeared to have been coached to withhold details of the illness. Yuen, a renowned infectious-disease expert, told Chinese public health officials that Wuhan needed to be locked down immediately. The window to prevent a huge spread "was very small." As January progressed, Gostin, the Georgetown Law professor, began calling for the World Health Organization to declare a global health emergency. He stressed the need for independent verification of the reports from China. Having served to reform the WHO and on numerous commissions after the Ebola outbreak, Gostin knew the need for a global response. But unable to enter China without an invitation, the WHO wasn't able to send people to the country for field visits until mid-February. -- As the virus slowly advanced, courtesy of its human hosts, the U.S. media's eyes remained firmly locked on other things. Furious partisan sparring preceded Trump's impending impeachment trial. Democratic challengers flooded Iowa, which would hold its caucuses at the start of February, though a "monumental" Pete Buttigieg victory would ultimately leave him, still, as the former mayor of South Bend, Ind. Viruses have no regard for human constructs such as national boundaries, or even natural ones, like oceans. On Jan. 19, a 35-year-old man who had visited family, and the wet market in Wuhan, entered an urgent care clinic in Snohomish County, Wash. He had been coughing for four days, with a light fever. A day later, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention tested his nasal swab and made it official: The coronavirus had arrived in America. CNBC's Joe Kernen asked Trump on Jan. 22 about the possibility of a pandemic. "No. Not at all," the president responded. "And we have it totally under control. It's one person coming in from China, and we have it under control. It's going to be just fine." It would be the first of many reassurances from Trump, and a few other elected officials, that would prove overblown. Even the virus watchers, armed with their expertise, marveled at the virus' headlong progress. "I still find myself flabbergasted this is happening," Branswell said, weeks later. "We've all been through a relatively recent pandemic, the H1N1 pandemic of 2009. It was pretty mild. ... I would have thought it would be a long time till the next one. And I was definitely hoping not to ever experience one as devastating as this one is and will be." By mid-January, most public health experts in the U.S. had gotten the message from the germ hunters, in no uncertain terms. Exits on the freeway to pandemic had whizzed by: the virus quickly skipped from animal-to-human to human-to-human transmission, it leaped outside of China and it sped across continents in disguise; as many as 25% of its carriers apparently healthy even as they unwittingly exposed their friends and families to a pathogen with no known cure. "This is one of the smartest viruses we've run across," Pollack said. "It's insidious. It gets out there quickly and quietly." At a level slightly removed from the germ hunters were the public health academics, who had to decide what message to deliver to elected leaders. "There's always this balance between people being worried that they will overreact and that they will underreact," said Inglesby, of the Center for Health Security. "If you go too far, political leaders will say you blew it and diverted resources. If you underreact, everyone stays asleep too long and it's out of control." The online chatter from the Pollacks and Branswells and Daszaks spoke with one voice. "All of these people and others were very worried that people were going to underreact and not appreciate what was happening," said Inglesby, a physician and infectious-disease authority. "You could just feel the slow burn." On Jan. 23, Inglesby told Science Insider that the World Health Organization needed to raise its alert level to a Public Health Emergency of International Concern, to urge the world to a more coordinated response. A day later, Trump assured the country, "It will all work out well." Americans mused about the upcoming Super Bowl between the Kansas City Chiefs and the San Francisco 49ers. Democrats prosecuted their impeachment case against Trump. And, on a foggy Sunday morning, an executive helicopter plowed into a hillside in Calabasas. The Jan. 26 death of basketball legend Kobe Bryant, his daughter Gianna and seven others dominated the news for weeks. In the week after the crash, The Times published 37 stories that mentioned the coronavirus and 101 on the Bryant tragedy. Basketball fans and commentators agreed: the world had changed. -- But one group of leaders, in South Korea, focused on the advancing virus. On Jan. 27, they pulled infectious-disease experts away from Lunar New Year celebrations to a special meeting at a Seoul train station, along with representatives from 20 drug companies, to design a test for the virus, Reuters reported. Less than a week later, the first tests had been approved. By the end of February, South Korea was testing thousands of its people daily, many in drive-through centers. The United States, meanwhile, counted on the Centers for Disease Control. And it sent out test kits with a "faulty chemical." That meant local labs in L.A., San Francisco and other cities could not do the surveillance testing needed to track down asymptomatic patients, including those unwitting souls who would become "super spreaders" of the disease. "We didn't have the technology we needed in the right places. And we started testing too slowly," Inglesby said. "We therefore didn't have time to do the social distancing we would need to do." The divergence between amateur and expert opinion continued. On Feb. 10, Trump told a rally in New Hampshire: "Looks like by April, you know, in theory, when it gets a little warmer, it miraculously goes away." A day later, an infectious-disease expert in Hong Kong warned that, without containment measures, two-thirds of the world could be infected. America continued to see itself as a series of ponds, with just a few -- in Seattle and Silicon Valley, to start -- tainted by disease. Mayor Bill de Blasio and other New York officials urged people to go about their lives in mid-February. New Orleans celebrated a rip-roaring Mardi Gras -- sharing hugs and drinking glasses -- through almost the end of the month. Few were heeding the experts who insisted that the nation, the world, had become one ocean of disease and that its currents might be delayed but would eventually reach every shore. A UC San Francisco doctor posted a paper in mid-February warning that the virus wasn't just airborne; it might live on some surfaces for up to two days. Touring California to stress the crisis among the homeless, Gov. Gavin Newsom did not hold his first news conference on the coronavirus until the end of February. He pushed for more testing and pledged that he would strike a balance between under- and overreacting, noting "the understandable anxiety many people have." At a Feb. 28 news conference, Trump said: "It's going to disappear. One day, it's like a miracle, it will disappear," adding, "It could get worse before it gets better. It could maybe go away. We'll see what happens. Nobody really knows." In the following weeks, the president would tout statistics to suggest the common flu was more lethal, quote a friendly congressman who suggested that construction of a border wall with Mexico would help slow the spread of the virus, and attack President Obama's (and Vice President Biden's) response to the 2009 H1N1 swine flu as a "full-scale disaster." -- It was then that the response in cities and states began to diverge sharply with the White House. By March 16, seven San Francisco Bay Area counties had ordered residents to stay home to slow the spread of the virus. California Gov. Newsom followed three days later with a statewide shelter-in-place order. On March 20, New York Gov. Andrew Cuomo followed suit. At a March 24 town hall on the Fox News network, the president said he wanted the nation "opened up and just raring to go by Easter." He said he looked forward to seeing churches "packed" on that day. Public health experts cringed. On March 27, the U.S. surpassed China in confirmed coronavirus cases, with more than 81,000 ill and nearly 1,300 dead. (Though there is some suspicion about under-reporting by the Chinese, given their early attempts to minimize the danger from the disease.) Even before Trump's "Easter" pronouncement, Inglesby had become alarmed by statements from political leaders about getting America back to work and school without social distancing precautions. "COVID would spread widely, rapidly, terribly, could kill potentially millions in the [year] ahead with huge social and economic impact across the country," he tweeted on March 23. He pleaded, in an interview with The Times, for Americans to continue their sacrifice, "for their fellow Americans and for healthcare workers, who are risking their health and safety to care for the rest of us." Before a cruel April would begin, a certain madness seemed to descend on some in America and around the world. Wild conspiracy theories about China, or America, releasing the virus gained steam inside the social media hothouse. Daszak had seen an American colleague -- who had cloned bat viruses to search for medicines that might contain them -- attacked for allegedly releasing SARS-CoV-2 into the world. The blasphemy churned over Twitter. "To put pressure and threats on a guy who's trying to save your life?" Daszak said of his colleague. "Well, that's just dumb as a rock." New Orleans, slow to take up social distancing, had become a hotbed of the illness. Still, Daszak had seen how Sweden, where his brother lives and sings opera, would wait until April to even begin to ask people to stay home. It defied all science and logic. "That sort of thing," he sighed, "can extend the life of a pandemic." The virologist had observed the way viruses move in the real world. He had watched humankind intruding, ever farther, into regions where exotic creatures released germs for which we have no defenses. From the pandemic's early days, Daszak accepted a simple truth. "We're all going to know someone who will die," he explained. "We have to get emotionally prepared for that." By April, the idea was no longer theoretical. An octogenarian Daszak had known for decades, and held dear, had died. In the scientist's home in semi-rural Suffern, N.Y, vultures continued to perch on his roof, conjuring a "nightmare vision" in which the birds came to him like an invasion of bats. "It's like [they've] flown all the way from China. They're now in your neighborhood and they're all over the world. "It's just the Grim Reaper, you know. This is what's going on right now," he said. "You are getting a tap on the shoulder, with COVID, and you don't know if you're going to make it to the other side." In all likelihood, the vast majority of Americans will survive, as will Daszak and his wife. They have outfitted a "safe room" on the top floor of the family's farmhouse, suited to accommodate either the couple or their daughters, one home from high school, the other from college. The scientist and his fellow virus hunters know the great coronavirus pandemic is hardly over. But they already can't help but think about the next time. "We have many viruses out there we know already are able to invade humans," Daszak said. "And they are still out there. People are still exposed to them. So the next one will come. Unless we change our strategy and pay attention." Caption: PHOTO: RESIDENTS wearing face masks purchase seafood at a wet market in Macao, China, on Jan. 28. Chinese state media had confirmed the first death from the coronavirus on Jan. 11. PHOTOGRAPHER:Anthony Kwan Getty Images PHOTO:ON DEC. 30, Dr. Marjorie Pollack, an infectious-disease epidemiologist, received an alert from China's version of Twitter about several cases of pneumonia, of unknown cause, in that country. PHOTOGRAPHER:Timothy Fadek Oliver Wyman Forum PHOTO:PETER DASZAK, 54, a British American scientist, is shown at his home in Suffern, N.Y. As far back as 2005, he and colleagues warned how bats, in particular, carried lethal SARS-like viruses. PHOTOGRAPHER:Ben Hider For The Times P: GRAPHIC: How the coronavirus spread (MAPS: the World) CREDIT: Lorena Iniguez Elebee Los Angeles Times 
Apr 11, 2020	Even as China's President Xi Jinping mobilized a "people's war" against the coronavirus, Chinese warships were busy on another front: maintaining their pressure campaign in the South China Sea, where a buildup of military activity foreshadows a new U.S.-China cold war. Across the resource-rich waterway, China Coast Guard and paramilitary vessels have continued to harass fishing boats, military ships and oil and gas rigs belonging to smaller Southeast Asian states that reject Beijing's sweeping claims over nearly the entire sea. Last month, the Chinese navy carried out combat drills with a fleet of submarines, fighter jets and fast-moving missile boats. The exercises occurred as a U.S. aircraft carrier in the region was sidelined thousands of miles away in Guam, its crew members and former commander sickened with COVID-19.  The tussle in the South China Sea is driving a deeper wedge between China and the U.S. The Trump administration accuses Beijing of capitalizing on the pandemic by helping countries fight the coronavirus while the People's Liberation Army tightens its grip on disputed islands and reefs, defying international rulings and territorial claims by neighboring countries. "There's no apparent pause or reduction at all" in Chinese activity in the South China Sea, said Collin Koh, a maritime security expert at Nanyang Technological University in Singapore. "It appears to be business as usual for the PLA, and for that matter, the China Coast Guard as well." But the coronavirus crisis has also highlighted the United States' diminishing global leadership. As the isolationist, "America first" Trump administration is preoccupied at home with containing the world's severest outbreak -- with half a million infected and more than 18,000 dead -- allies in Asia and around the world are accepting Chinese aid even as they bristle at Chinese violations of international norms. The pandemic "confirms their worst fears about us both -- that the U.S. is withdrawing while China is going to put its own interests above those of its neighbors," said Gregory B. Poling, director of the Asia Maritime Transparency Initiative at the Center for Strategic and International Studies. On one day last month, Chinese state media trumpeted more than a dozen reports of Beijing donating aid to battle the coronavirus: gloves to Italy, testing kits to Ethiopia, protective medical suits to South Korea. The same day, March 20, the official New China News Agency carried a report headlined, "New research stations come into operation on Nansha Islands," describing the opening of two civilian labs to study the marine environment in the South China Sea. The announcement, using China's name for what are more commonly known as the Spratly Islands, elided the bitter dispute surrounding the archipelago, where the Chinese military has created a series of artificial islands to house military outposts. The two research stations are located on Fiery Cross Reef and Subi Reef, each claimed by the Philippines and Vietnam, where China has dredged land to build runways, missile emplacements, radar towers and barracks that could house thousands of troops. Although the labs are described as civilian in nature, security analysts say China could use the research to step up exploration of deep-sea oil and gas, rare metals and other resources. Last month, a Chinese transport plane landed on Fiery Cross Reef, the sort of routine supply mission that often goes unnoticed in what Poling called "China's low-level, day-to-day consolidation of the South China Sea." The waterway, through which more than $3 trillion in goods transits every year, is one of the most contested regions of the world. Sitting atop large oil and gas reserves, it is the main sticking point in China's relations with Southeast Asian countries, including half a dozen that hold competing island claims. Beijing's aggressive actions there are at odds with the softer image it has tried to project since the coronavirus outbreak, which emerged in central China late last year and raced around the world. China was criticized for initially underreporting the severity of the outbreak, but has since held itself up as an indispensable power in helping contain the virus' global spread. As China reports that COVID-19 cases are on the wane domestically, it has donated protective equipment to more than 120 countries, fired up factories to meet the global demand for ventilators and deployed medical experts to assist other nations. The Chinese leadership has rejected criticism that its assistance is politically motivated, saying that "it is never on its agenda to make aid a ploy to pursue influence." The U.S. has increased aid as well, contributing an additional $274 million in emergency health and humanitarian assistance to countries worldwide, including $18 million in Southeast Asia. In this region, which is battling to get a new wave of infections under control, China's humanitarian aid is welcome, Koh said. But governments also recognize that China's maritime maneuvers have continued as rival claimants "have their hands full grappling with the coronavirus crisis," he added. "There'll be inevitably an impact on trust and how these governments view Beijing's intentions," Koh said. "China will have to tread water very carefully if it doesn't wish to see its diplomatic gains from this coronavirus outreach offset by what it's doing in the South China Sea." The tensions spilled into view last week after a Chinese military vessel rammed and sank a Vietnamese fishing boat off the disputed Paracel Islands, the second such incident in less than a year. Vietnam lodged a formal protest, and the Trump administration accused China of "exploiting the distraction or vulnerability of other states to expand its unlawful claims in the South China Sea." Beijing blamed the Vietnamese ship for fishing illegally in Chinese waters. Individually, the claimants can do little to counter China's military might. The U.S. has been unable to alter the status quo in the South China Sea even after a much touted "pivot to Asia" under the Obama administration and Trump's trade war against Beijing. The most important U.S. ally in the region, the Philippines, has failed to demand China adhere to a 2016 international ruling that denied Beijing's sweeping claims over the South China Sea. Although the Philippines sided with Vietnam in the fishing boat incident, President Rodrigo Duterte has generally sought rapprochement with China and announced plans to cancel a major security pact with the U.S. that could unravel the decades-old alliance. The U.S. military's ability to project force in the South China Sea -- usually by conducting port calls and sailing warships on "freedom of navigation" missions -- has also been weakened by the pandemic. The aircraft carrier Theodore Roosevelt had just concluded a visit to the Vietnamese port of Da Nang last month when sailors aboard were found to be infected with the virus. The ensuing fiasco -- which culminated in the acting secretary of the Navy resigning after he criticized the ship's commander, who was fired after speaking out about the risks to his crew -- has grounded one of the key U.S. carriers in the region the Pentagon calls the Indo-Pacific. Countries are beginning to worry about Washington's capacity to fulfill its security commitments as it grapples with the health and economic costs of the pandemic, according to a commentary published this week by the Lowy Institute, an Australian think tank. "Stricken warships, stalled deployments and Washington's acute preoccupation with its own poorly handled humanitarian crisis will not reassure Indo-Pacific allies," wrote the authors, Ashley Townshend and Jim Golby. For now, the pandemic appears likely to widen the U.S.-China divide while convincing other Asian countries that both powers are unreliable. Malaysia, for example, has been stuck in a months-long confrontation with Chinese military vessels near two offshore blocks where Malaysia's state-owned Petronas is drilling for oil and gas. A China Coast Guard ship drew to within 0.3 of a nautical mile of the Petronas rig in January before pulling away, highlighting what the Center for Strategic and International Studies said is China's determination to bully any country that attempts to develop new energy sources in the area. Last month, however, when China delivered a shipment of N95 masks, other protective gear and 200 ventilators to the Malaysian capital of Kuala Lumpur to help fight the coronavirus, New China News Agency reported that Malaysia's foreign minister thanked Beijing by saying, "We really, truly know our friends in times of crisis." "Southeast Asian countries are getting used to dealing with China in this way -- having some local skirmishes on territorial issues, but having the larger trade and diplomatic relationship going on at the same time," said Zack Cooper, a research fellow at the American Enterprise Institute. "These countries don't have a lot of options on how to contest these claims," Cooper said. "The Chinese are confident that the status quo is stable in the South China Sea, and trending in their favor in the long term." Caption: PHOTO: A CAMBODIAN soldier helps unload aid supplies from a Chinese military plane at Phnom Penh International Airport this month. Chinese President Xi Jinping has declared a "people's war" against the coronavirus. PHOTOGRAPHER:Tang Chhin Sothy AFP/Getty Images PHOTO:ETHIOPIAN OFFICIALS welcome the delivery of medical protective gear from China last month. PHOTOGRAPHER:Mulugeta Ayene Associated Press PHOTO:STUDENTS CHEER the arrival of a Chinese military ship, background, at a Manila port in 2019. PHOTOGRAPHER:Bullit Marquez Associated Press
Apr 11, 2020	The COVID-19 pandemic has ignited a worldwide scramble for medical gear: masks, gowns, ventilators, testing kits, much of it made in China, which is attempting to recast its image as the source of the virus to the leader in the fight against it. But that narrative is threatened by a major problem: quality control. A growing list of foreign complaints about faulty medical gear and testing kits imported from China has upset Beijing's designs. Within the last few weeks, scientists and health authorities in Spain, the Czech Republic, Slovakia, Turkey and Britain have complained of faulty antigen or antibody coronavirus tests purchased from Chinese companies -- in some cases, costing these governments millions of dollars.  Georgia has canceled a contract with the Chinese company that sent flawed test kits to Spain, and Malaysia has opted to buy testing kits from South Korea instead of China because of the Chinese tests' reported low accuracy rate. Last week, the Netherlands asked to return 600,000 face masks purchased from China that had inadequate filters and fit incorrectly. On Tuesday, Finland tested a shipment of personal protective equipment, or PPE, from China and found the items unsuitable for hospital use. Australian border officials have also reportedly seized 800,000 faulty or counterfeit masks from China. The problem is worse at home. On March 12, officials at a State Council news briefing announced that authorities had seized more than 80 million counterfeit or faulty masks and 370,000 defective or fake disinfectants and other anti-coronavirus products in the prior month alone. In some cases, defective masks have been reported after buyers purchased them online as a donation to Wuhan and other Chinese cities, only for medical staff to discover they can't use them. China is trying to rein in its subpar PPE manufacturers. Authorities have detained dozens of counterfeiters and threatened those producing poor quality medical products with life imprisonment. Beijing has also tightened export standards in recent days, requiring domestic certification as well as foreign licenses for medical products shipped abroad. Previously, exported medical products only had to have the certifications in receiving countries, such as the European Union's CE certification, which could be easily counterfeited in China. But the desperation of states, nations, hospitals and individuals competing worldwide, shelling out millions of dollars to get medical gear as people die by the thousands each day, has created a scammer's paradise. "It's a complete mess," said Dan Harris, a lawyer whose firm Harris Bricken has advised companies on sourcing from China for more than 15 years. He called the current situation "unprecedented," especially as frenzied Chinese suppliers attempt to recoup losses after months of quarantine. "A year ago, Chinese companies were fine. Now they're desperate," Harris said. "A lot of them know they're going to be bankrupt in a week. A lot are going to be bankrupt already. So they're selling bad product, fake product" -- and the whole world is buying those products, regardless of how they're made. Many of those calling Harris' firm for help are hospital purchasing managers who are under pressure from overwhelmed doctors asking, "Where the hell are the masks?" he said. Then there are the middlemen, including experienced distributors and longtime sourcing agents who think it's easy to shift into PPE. And a smattering of "crooks, who go to the hospital and say, 'I can get you 5 million face masks.' ... And they have no clue what they're doing," Harris said. Meanwhile in China, many factories have pivoted into PPE manufacturing under government encouragement, even though they lack capacity and quality control. "Everybody is jumping on this market and they have zero understanding of quality," said Renaud Anjoran, a manufacturing supply chain auditor based in Hong Kong. "But these are high-risk items. If they don't work, people might die." It's common for Chinese suppliers to export a product under one licensed company's name but to source their products from second, third or fourth factories, like a chain of Russian nesting dolls, with little to no traceability down the chain of supply. "In China, nothing is really black and white," Anjoran said. "You have manufacturers selling you stuff they don't really manufacture. They're making it somewhere else, but you don't know where." There are many ways medical product exporters could get away with counterfeited or substandard goods even with the certification requirements, Anjoran said: Certificates can be faked. Certificates can be real but altered to display another manufacturer's name. Certificates can be valid, with goods made at the factory, but the manufacturer may not be checking the quality of its raw materials -- especially the filter material in masks, the most important factor in protecting medical workers from the coronavirus. Testing filter material can take up to two weeks and cost more than $2,000. "You've got speed and greed," Harris said. "It's perfect for con artists." Many of the newly established mask factories also operate in unhygienic conditions, with no process to keep the air clean, Anjoran said, based on his own auditing visits. "But this is not even on the radar of most buyers these days," he said. "They're like, 'But did you see the masks were dirty? No? OK, who cares! It's going to save lives. Don't be picky.' " Testing kits also require careful buying. The World Health Organization has listed only two COVID-19 diagnostic tests for emergency use, both nucleic acid tests that use a slower, swab-based method to detect viral RNA. The faulty rapid test kits foreign governments bought from Chinese companies have all been antibody tests, which use blood samples to look for antibodies developed only a week or so into a person's infection with the coronavirus, or antigen tests, which detect virus proteins. But both kinds of testing are relatively new and not replacements for the nucleic acid tests -- notably the antibody test, which is fast and can catch mild or asymptomatic cases in people who've already recovered from the coronavirus, but cannot determine whether a person currently has the coronavirus. That's why antibody tests should not be used for diagnosis, said Dale Fisher, chair of the WHO's Global Outbreak Alert and Response Network. "At the moment, we've just got the PCR as a gold standard," he said, referring to the nucleic acid tests. "Antibody tests are really for research, to help us understand the transmission dynamics." Britain reportedly bought 3.5 million antibody tests from two Chinese companies, Guangzhou Wondfo Biotech Co. and Hangzhou AllTest Biotech Co. Only one of those, Wondfo, was on the Chinese National Medical Products Administration's list of authorized test kits. Chinese national guidelines also state that antibody tests should only be used as a supplement to nucleic acid tests, not for "screening in general population," and that they should not be used as the sole basis to diagnose or exclude infections with SARS-CoV-2, as the new coronavirus is called. The company that Spain bought faulty test kits from, Shenzhen Bioeasy Biotechnology Co., was also not on the list of nationally authorized suppliers. The Spanish government reportedly acquired the test kits through a middleman who produced documentation showing that Shenzhen Bioeasy had CE certification. Chinese diplomats have tried to distance the government from the companies selling faulty medical products, while also asserting that due diligence is the buyer's responsibility. "We want to remind everyone to double-check the instructions for use to make sure what they purchase can serve their intended purposes and avoid making mistakes in a rush," Chinese Ministry of Foreign Affairs spokeswoman Hua Chunying said at a recent news briefing. China is worried about low-quality medical products damaging its image. On April 6, customs authorities announced they'd confiscated more than 11 million unregistered medical products within one week, including 9.94 million masks, 144,000 protective gowns, more than a million testing kits and 24,000 infrared thermometers. Orders have meanwhile continued to roll in, with Germany beginning this week to ship millions of masks from China with the government's help. The governors of New York and Massachusetts have worked with the Chinese government and internet company Tencent to facilitate PPE deliveries. The United States' Project Airbridge, a public-private partnership led by President Trump's advisor and son-in-law Jared Kushner, began chartering airlifted supplies from China this week. But the coronavirus has exposed the world's dependence on China and that country's problems with quality control. Whether this experience will lead to further "decoupling" after the pandemic, with more countries seeking to diversify supply chains away from China, will depend in part on how China's regulators perform. -- Special correspondent Meg Bernhard in Brussels and Nicole Liu and Gaochao Zhang in The Times' Beijing bureau contributed to this report. Caption: PHOTO: A WORKER sorts face masks in Nanjing, China. The country is a leading producer of protective gear. PHOTOGRAPHER:Getty Images PHOTO:THIS MEDICAL equipment factory in Nanjing, China, shown in February, switched from producing surgical instruments and dental equipment to face masks to meet increased demand amid the coronavirus outbreak. PHOTOGRAPHER: AFP/Getty Images PHOTO:SEVERAL COUNTRIES have cited faulty gear and testing kits from China. Above, a worker sorts masks. PHOTOGRAPHER: AFP/Getty Images
Apr 11, 2020	In a grim global milestone, the worldwide death toll from the COVID-19 pandemic passed the 100,000 mark on Friday, with the United States on the brink of surpassing Italy as the nation with the highest number of fatalities. Worldwide, the number of confirmed deaths hit nearly 103,000 by Friday afternoon, according to a count maintained by Johns Hopkins University. The true death toll, however, is probably much higher, considering the handicaps of limited testing, different rules for counting the dead and incomplete reporting by some governments. The coronavirus has laid siege to healthcare systems, battered economies, emboldened nationalist leaders, exposed the intricacies and potential perils of an interconnected world and served as a reminder, like the plagues and natural disasters of past ages, of how vulnerable the planet is to mercurial unseen dangers.  Since December, when health officials first identified the virus in Wuhan, the sprawling capital of China's Hubei province, the deadly virus has quickly skipped to other Asian countries, where governments sought to limit its impact by imposing strict testing requirements, frequent temperature checks and social distancing measures. The efforts were successful in slowing the spread locally, but the virus had also begun stealthily hopscotching around the globe, with particularly devastating consequences in Italy, Spain and Iran. In Iran, so many victims died suddenly that Islamic end-of-life rituals were sometimes abandoned in place of mass burial pits, and in northern Italy doctors said they were making life-and-death rationing decisions unheard of outside of times of war. Meanwhile, the hardest days, experts warn, appear to remain ahead. "This virus is moving with speed and velocity across the globe and it's not going to let up for some time," said Michael Mina, a professor of epidemiology at Harvard University, who emphasized that, given the nearly certain undercount, the 100,000-death threshold was actually met several days ago. "There will be darker days," he predicted, "especially in underdeveloped parts of the world." On Friday, the U.S. death toll stood at about 18,750, just behind Italy's roughly 18,900, according to Johns Hopkins University. As the startling scope of the economic devastation comes into sharper focus, the chief of the International Monetary Fund warned that the disease was steering the global economy toward what is sure to be the deepest recession since the Great Depression. The projection by IMF Managing Director Kristalina Georgieva came amid mounting concerns that the virus would soon explode across the world's poorest nations -- where frequent hand-washing and social distancing are often all but impossible -- and inevitably return to countries recovering from outbreaks. A few European and Asian countries have started easing up on stay-at-home orders, which experts say risks a second wave of coronavirus infections that could prolong the global economic meltdown. The threat of contagion at Good Friday and Easter observances left public health authorities on edge. In Italy, helicopters, drones and police patrols have been deployed to keep people in their homes over the holiday weekend. Police issued summonses Thursday to 10,000 people traveling for nonessential reasons. And in Paris, the fire-scarred Notre Dame Cathedral, normally packed on Good Friday, was nearly empty as a French archbishop led a televised Good Friday service. In Jerusalem, the chanting of a small group of clerics inside the Church of the Holy Sepulcher echoed faintly through the heavy wooden doors as a few people stopped and knelt outside to pray. The centuries-old church, built on the site where Christians believe Jesus was crucified, buried and rose from the dead, is usually packed. Later, four monks prayed at the Stations of the Cross along the Via Dolorosa, the ancient route through the Old City where Jesus is believed to have carried the cross before his execution at the hands of the Romans. During ordinary times, tens of thousands of pilgrims from around the world retrace Jesus' steps in the Holy Week leading up to Easter. But this year, flights are grounded and religious sites in the Holy Land are closed. While Latin America has thus far been spared the brunt of the pandemic, there is a widespread expectation throughout the region that the worse is yet to come. Governments from Mexico to Brazil are anticipating virus cases to peak later in April or May. Slightly fewer than 50,000 confirmed cases of the new coronavirus had been recorded in Mexico, Central America and South America, with about 1,900 fatalities -- all much lower than in the United States. China, meanwhile, has reported about 3,300 deaths and South Korea just over 200. An increase in new confirmed cases in the last few weeks, however, has shown that the fight against COVID-19 will take much longer than anticipated. Many Asian countries have had to step up distancing measures, close schools and impose more quarantines. There's also growing concern that poorer countries with threadbare health systems such as Cambodia, Laos and Myanmar could be hiding the extent of their outbreaks. Lack of testing in the Philippines and Indonesia are also fueling fears that the death toll will rise exponentially. In Spain, more than 16,000 people have died, and in France the number of dead reached about 13,200. In Britain, where Prime Minister Boris Johnson recently left the intensive care unit of a London hospital after being treated for COVID-19, about 9,000 people have died. -- Times staff writers Patrick J. McDonnell in Mexico City and David Pierson in Singapore contributed to this report. Caption: PHOTO: WORKERS BURY bodies in a trench on Hart Island in the Bronx, N.Y. The true death toll globally is probably much higher than reported because of testing limitations and variations in counting and reporting methods. PHOTOGRAPHER:John Minchillo Associated Press 
Apr 11, 2020	If you cancel a travel-related reservation because of a pandemic, shouldn't you get your money back? Easy and logical question to ask, but hard to answer in this time of the coronavirus. Or is it?  Let's look at two vacation rental organizations that faced these hard questions. Vrbo and Airbnb are different in their intent (or used to be). Vrbo, which grew out of the idea of vacation rentals by owner, helps match vacationers with cabins and cottages, houses and apartments, and yurts and villas, including those over water. Airbnb, meanwhile, grew out of the sharing economy as a way for owners to take rooms or a higher-end property they weren't using and turn them into cash. That spare room becomes a guest room for a visitor who pays to stay somewhere that's sometimes less expensive than a hotel. Besides the differences in dwellings, the two companies also have taken different paths with their customers as the coronavirus story has unfolded. Here's what it means for the consumer. AIRBNB "It's not like we had a pandemic playbook," said Chris Lehane, vice president, global policy and communications for Airbnb. But because Airbnb has properties in more than 220 countries and regions, its website noted, it has dealt with hurricanes and cities struck by terrorism, earthquakes and fires. And because it has properties in China, South Korea and Japan, the organization had experience with the novel coronavirus. The World Health Organization declared the coronavirus a pandemic March 11, and President Trump declared a national emergency March 13. On its website, Airbnb noted that those who were renting between March 14 and May 31 and had booked on or before March 14 would receive a refund. That may have pleased guests, but hosts were not happy about losing income. Airbnb then created a $250-million fund for hosts hurt by the economic collapse and added $10 million more as a relief fund for "super hosts." VRBO When The Times asked for reader feedback on how the pandemic had changed their travel plans, we received half a dozen responses from readers unhappy with experiences on Vrbo. "The vast majority of homeowners and property managers (more than 95%) have provided credits or refunds to travelers even outside their cancellation policies," said Melanie Fish, a Vrbo representative. "The policy isn't going to make everyone happy, and that's hard to take for a travel brand, since we're in the business of helping families find happy places." Homeowners are encouraged, in a variety of ways, to make refunds. Some took the encouragement to heart; others did not. Matt Kashani of San Diego had back-to-back Vrbo condo rentals on Kauai and very different experiences, he said. The first owner refunded Kashani's money. The second owner canceled the reservation, he said, and would not offer a refund. Vrbo eventually refunded Kashani's money for the second stay plus all fees. Janet Carson-Flamini didn't fare as well. She had a family trip planned to London and had already paid $3,000. "Even with Vrbo's guidelines to hosts to at least refund 50%, ours has been totally inflexible," she said in an email. At first, the host said the funds could be applied to a future trip. But, as Carson-Flamini noted, the place was booked through January 2022. "It's nuts," she said in an email. CREATING A PLAN BEFORE THERE'S A PROBLEM Edward Segal, who specializes in crisis management and is the author of the soon-to-be-released book "Crisis Ahead: 101 Ways to Prepare for and Bounce Back From Disasters, Scandals, and Other Emergencies," knows that every company will need help. "What we are seeing now underscores the importance for every company and organization, including those in the travel industry, to prepare and know how to properly manage a crisis situation," he said in an interview. But it also is important, he said, "to protect the people that helped make you a success." Giving credits instead of refunds "does not send a good message," he said. Companies are "essentially holding their money hostage, getting an interest-free loan." And, he said, "If a consumer has been treated badly by anyone in the travel industry, that can influence their opinion of the entire industry going forward." It's a piece of advice to remember as companies look ahead to recovery. -- Have a problem, question or travel dilemma? Write to travel@latimes.com. 
Apr 10, 2020	Even as China’s President Xi Jinping mobilized a “people’s war” against the coronavirus, Chinese warships were busy on another front: maintaining their pressure campaign in the South China Sea, where a buildup of military activity foreshadows a new U.S.-China cold war. Across the resource-rich waterway, China Coast Guard and paramilitary vessels have continued to harass fishing boats, military ships and oil and gas rigs belonging to smaller Southeast Asian states that reject Beijing’s sweeping claims over nearly the entire sea. Last month, the Chinese navy carried out combat drills with a fleet of submarines, fighter jets and fast-moving missile boats. The exercises occurred as a U.S. aircraft carrier in the region was sidelined thousands of miles away in Guam, its crew members and former commander sickened with COVID-19. The tussle in the South China Sea is driving a deeper wedge between China and the U.S. The Trump administration accuses Beijing of capitalizing on the pandemic by helping countries fight the coronavirus while the People’s Liberation Army tightens its grip on disputed islands and reefs, defying international rulings and territorial claims by neighboring countries. “There’s no apparent pause or reduction at all” in Chinese activity in the South China Sea, said Collin Koh, a maritime security expert at Nanyang Technological University in Singapore. “It appears to be business as usual for the PLA, and for that matter, the China Coast Guard as well.” But the coronavirus crisis has also highlighted the United States’ diminishing global leadership. As the isolationist, “America first” Trump administration is preoccupied at home with containing the world’s severest outbreak — with half a million infected and more than 18,000 dead — allies in Asia and around the world are accepting Chinese aid even as they bristle at Chinese violations of international norms. The pandemic “confirms their worst fears about us both — that the U.S. is withdrawing while China is going to put its own interests above those of its neighbors,” said Gregory B. Poling, director of the Asia Maritime Transparency Initiative at the Center for Strategic and International Studies. On one day last month, Chinese state media trumpeted more than a dozen reports of Beijing donating aid to battle the coronavirus: gloves to Italy, testing kits to Ethiopia, protective medical suits to South Korea. The same day, March 20, the official New China News Agency carried a report headlined, “New research stations come into operation on Nansha Islands,” describing the opening of two civilian labs to study the marine environment in the South China Sea. The announcement, using China’s name for what are more commonly known as the Spratly Islands, elided the bitter dispute surrounding the archipelago, where the Chinese military has created a series of artificial islands to house military outposts. The two research stations are located on Fiery Cross Reef and Subi Reef, each claimed by the Philippines and Vietnam, where China has dredged land to build runways, missile emplacements, radar towers and barracks that could house thousands of troops. Although the labs are described as civilian in nature, security analysts say China could use the research to step up exploration of deep-sea oil and gas, rare metals and other resources. Last month, a Chinese transport plane landed on Fiery Cross Reef, the sort of routine supply mission that often goes unnoticed in what Poling called “China’s low-level, day-to-day consolidation of the South China Sea.” The waterway, through which more than $3 trillion in goods transits every year, is one of the most contested regions of the world. Sitting atop large oil and gas reserves, it is the main sticking point in China’s relations with Southeast Asian countries, including half a dozen that hold competing island claims. Beijing’s aggressive actions there are at odds with the softer image it has tried to project since the coronavirus outbreak, which emerged in central China late last year and raced around the world. China was criticized for initially underreporting the severity of the outbreak, but has since held itself up as an indispensable power in helping contain the virus’ global spread. As China reports that COVID-19 cases are on the wane domestically, it has donated protective equipment to more than 120 countries, fired up factories to meet the global demand for ventilators and deployed medical experts to assist other nations. The Chinese leadership has rejected criticism that its assistance is politically motivated, saying that “it is never on its agenda to make aid a ploy to pursue influence.” The U.S. has increased aid as well, contributing an additional $274 million in emergency health and humanitarian assistance to countries worldwide, including $18 million in Southeast Asia. In this region, which is battling to get a new wave of infections under control, China’s humanitarian aid is welcome, Koh said. But governments also recognize that China’s maritime maneuvers have continued as rival claimants “have their hands full grappling with the coronavirus crisis,” he added. “There’ll be inevitably an impact on trust and how these governments view Beijing’s intentions,” Koh said. “China will have to tread water very carefully if it doesn’t wish to see its diplomatic gains from this coronavirus outreach offset by what it’s doing in the South China Sea.” The tensions spilled into view last week after a Chinese military vessel rammed and sank a Vietnamese fishing boat off the disputed Paracel Islands, the second such incident in less than a year. Vietnam lodged a formal protest, and the Trump administration accused China of “exploiting the distraction or vulnerability of other states to expand its unlawful claims in the South China Sea.” Beijing blamed the Vietnamese ship for fishing illegally in Chinese waters. Individually, the claimants can do little to counter China’s military might. The U.S. has been unable to alter the status quo in the South China Sea even after a much touted “pivot to Asia” under the Obama administration and Trump’s trade war against Beijing. The most important U.S. ally in the region, the Philippines, has failed to demand China adhere to a 2016 international ruling that denied Beijing’s sweeping claims over the South China Sea. Although the Philippines sided with Vietnam in the fishing boat incident, President Rodrigo Duterte has generally sought rapprochement with China and announced plans to cancel a major security pact with the U.S. that could unravel the decades-old alliance. The U.S. military’s ability to project force in the South China Sea — usually by conducting port calls and sailing warships on “freedom of navigation” missions — has also been weakened by the pandemic. The aircraft carrier Theodore Roosevelt had just concluded a visit to the Vietnamese port of Da Nang last month when sailors aboard were found to be infected with the virus. The ensuing fiasco — which culminated in the acting secretary of the Navy resigning after he criticized the ship’s commander, who was fired after speaking out about the risks to his crew — has grounded one of the key U.S. carriers in the region the Pentagon calls the Indo-Pacific. Countries are beginning to worry about Washington’s capacity to fulfill its security commitments as it grapples with the health and economic costs of the pandemic, according to a commentary published this week by the Lowy Institute, an Australian think tank. “Stricken warships, stalled deployments and Washington’s acute preoccupation with its own poorly handled humanitarian crisis will not reassure Indo-Pacific allies,” wrote the authors, Ashley Townshend and Jim Golby. For now, the pandemic appears likely to widen the U.S.-China divide while convincing other Asian countries that both powers are unreliable. Malaysia, for example, has been stuck in a months-long confrontation with Chinese military vessels near two offshore blocks where Malaysia’s state-owned Petronas is drilling for oil and gas. A China Coast Guard ship drew to within 0.3 of a nautical mile of the Petronas rig in January before pulling away, highlighting what the Center for Strategic and International Studies said is China’s determination to bully any country that attempts to develop new energy sources in the area. Last month, however, when China delivered a shipment of N95 masks, other protective gear and 200 ventilators to the Malaysian capital of Kuala Lumpur to help fight the coronavirus, New China News Agency reported that Malaysia’s foreign minister thanked Beijing by saying, “We really, truly know our friends in times of crisis.” “Southeast Asian countries are getting used to dealing with China in this way — having some local skirmishes on territorial issues, but having the larger trade and diplomatic relationship going on at the same time,” said Zack Cooper, a research fellow at the American Enterprise Institute. “These countries don’t have a lot of options on how to contest these claims,” he said. “The Chinese are confident that the status quo is stable in the South China Sea, and trending in their favor in the long term.” 
Apr 10, 2020	Another day amid the coronavirus pandemic means another set of new rules Angelenos must follow to help flatten the curve. Starting Friday, Los Angeles residents are required to wear a mask, bandanna or other type of covering over their mouths and noses when visiting essential businesses under an order from Mayor Eric Garcetti. Workers also must wear face coverings, which business owners must either provide or reimburse workers for buying. Garcetti’s order is the latest effort to help stop the spread of the coronavirus and provides some relief for essential workers. The order focuses on people who are in public spaces where they cannot always remain six feet from others. The call for people to wear face masks came a little too late, but better late than never, said Chunhuei Chi, director of the Center for Global Health at Oregon State University. He pointed to East Asian countries such as Japan and South Korea, where people have been wearing face masks since January, lowering the spread of coronavirus. Dr. Loren Miller, a physician and researcher at the Lundquist Institute in Torrance, said the topic of face masks can be confusing, even among healthcare workers. The purpose of masks isn’t to protect the person wearing them but to shield the transfer of saliva onto another person, potentially causing infection, he said. “If everyone wears a mask, we’re all protecting each other from each other,” Miller said. The two health experts explained what to look for in a mask and other precautions that should be taken when using face coverings.  Should I wear masks when I’m hanging out in my neighborhood? The short answer is yes, Miller said, because folks out for a stroll might not always be able to social distance for six feet when they come across other people. Another option for people without masks is to do the “vampire move” or “dab,” where you put your elbow over your mouth, he said. If a person coughs or sneezes, it’ll go into their elbow. Chi recommends wearing a mask only if you’ll be in close proximity to other people. “If you walk in your neighborhood or go bicycling — as long as of course the family member with you can keep a safe distance — you don’t need a mask,” he said. Health experts have also suggested to routinely wash your hands with soap and water or hand sanitizer before and after touching your face or face coverings. If I go for a run, should I wear a mask? It’s a good courtesy if runners can tolerate it, Miller said. In a place like Los Angeles, with trails, beaches and parks closed, it’s common to see people using sidewalks as their new exercise venue. In some cases, he said it might not always be feasible to stay at least six feet away from one another. Chi said the same principle applies as if you were strolling in your neighborhood. If you can keep a safe distance from others, runners don’t have to wear a mask. If the path isn’t wide enough to pass, Chi said, people can hold their breath until they’re in the clear. It’s one option he said he and his wife have used during their daily walks.  Should I wear a mask if I’m driving? Unless the person is a taxi driver or giving someone else a ride, Chi and Miller said there’s little purpose in wearing a mask. “The only time I can think of how it might be helpful is if someone was sneezing without a mask in the car,” Miller said. “They’re going to potentially contaminate the steering wheel and if that’s shared by other people, their hands will get contaminated and touch their hands, nose and mouth.” Chi said people should always wear masks when using public transportation or ride-share cars.  I’ve seen masks on pets. Should I be taking those precautions? Days after a tiger in New York tested positive for the coronavirus, owners are concerned their pets are susceptible to the disease. The Bronx Zoo tiger case is believed to be the first known instance of person-to-animal infection in the United States. There have been reports of a small number of pets outside the United States becoming infected after close contact with contagious people, including a Hong Kong dog that tested positive for a low level of the pathogen in February and early March. Miller and Chi said it may be too early to know how animals respond to the virus. “The thing is animals might be able to get infected with coronavirus, but even if they’re infected, we don’t know if they become sick from it or if they can transmit it,” Miller said. If people are concerned about their dog’s well-being during walks, Chi said they could use a muzzle. “If the dog has a tendency to munch on anything on the ground, it’s risky,” he said. “Even though its risk is much lower than humans’, pets could get it.”  What should I look for when buying a mask? With a dwindling supply of N95 masks for hospital workers, many good Samaritans across Los Angeles have taken it upon themselves to create makeshift masks. Chances are you’ve seen them popping up on social media in a variety of styles and colors. So what mask should you buy? Chi recommends purchasing those made of cotton or a blend of cotton and polyester. If buying isn’t an option, he suggests making masks out of pillowcases or cotton shirts. “It’s all about the material,” he said. “Cotton or a blend of cotton and polyester has very fine open lines. It leaves very small spaces in between.” Miller said the answer is a little more complicated. Surgical masks are the best, but because they’re in short supply, he said healthcare workers and immunocompromised people should be the only ones using them. “Cloth masks are very different in their ability to protect from COVID-19 because there’s so many different types of clothes and cotton and it depends on the density of the weave and the type of material,” he said. “The short answer is we really don’t know.” At this point, he suggests buying masks with material wide enough to securely cover the nose and mouth. He also recommends avoiding bandannas because they don’t fully cover the side of a person’s face. Once surgical masks get moist, Miller said their effectiveness goes down. If a makeshift face mask gets moist or is visibly soiled, he said, it’s time to switch to a clean one. To clean them, pop masks in the laundry or hand-wash them with soap and water. If feasible, grocery workers should have more than one pair to trade off and on during their shifts over the week. Otherwise, Chi said, they should wash them every night when they get home. 
Apr 10, 2020	In a grim global milestone, the worldwide death toll from the COVID-19 pandemic passed the 100,000 mark on Friday, with the United States on the brink of surpassing Italy as the nation with the highest number of fatalities. Worldwide, the number of confirmed deaths hit nearly 103,000 by Friday afternoon, according to a count maintained by Johns Hopkins University. The true death toll, however, is probably much higher, considering the handicaps of limited testing, different rules for counting the dead and incomplete reporting by some governments. The coronavirus has laid siege to healthcare systems, battered economies, emboldened nationalist leaders, exposed the intricacies and potential perils of an interconnected world and served as a reminder, like the plagues and natural disasters of past ages, of how vulnerable the planet is to mercurial unseen dangers. Since December, when health officials first identified the virus in Wuhan, the sprawling capital of China’s Hubei province, the deadly virus has quickly skipped to other Asian countries, where governments sought to limit its impact by imposing strict testing requirements, frequent temperature checks and social distancing measures. The efforts were successful in slowing the spread locally, but the virus had also begun stealthily hopscotching around the globe, with particularly devastating consequences in Italy, Spain and Iran. In Iran, so many victims died suddenly that Islamic end-of-life rituals were sometimes abandoned in place of mass burial pits, and in northern Italy doctors said they were making life-and-death rationing decisions unheard of outside of times of war. In the U.S., leaders in some states, including Washington and California, took early, strong steps to implement social distancing even as President Trump continued to downplay concerns about the deadliness of the virus. Limited supplies and coordination on the federal level have since left hospitals to scramble for ventilators, test kits, masks and other vital supplies, and in New York, the epicenter of the nation’s outbreak, emergency rooms have quickly filled toward surge capacity. Meanwhile, the hardest days, experts warn, appear to remain ahead. “This virus is moving with speed and velocity across the globe and it’s not going to let up for some time,” said Michael Mina, a professor of epidemiology at Harvard University, who emphasized that, given the nearly certain undercount, the 100,000-death threshold was actually met several days ago. “There will be darker days,” he predicted, “especially in underdeveloped parts of the world.” On Friday, the U.S. death toll stood at about 18,600, just behind Italy’s roughly 18,900, according to Johns Hopkins University. It was new deaths in the United States that pushed the worldwide death toll above the 100,000 mark. In New York, Gov. Andrew Cuomo reported 777 more deaths over the previous 24 hours, bringing the total there to 7,844, far exceeding any other state’s death toll. California’s number of fatalities hovered near 580. Black communities, nursing homes and prisons across the country have been especially devastated by the outbreak. Trump said Friday he would not move to reopen the country until it’s safe, but announced he’s forming an “Opening our Country” task force focused on the economy. “I want to get it open as soon as possible,” Trump said during Friday’s daily news briefing at the White House.“The facts are going to determine what I do.” As the startling scope of the economic devastation comes into sharper focus, the chief of the International Monetary Fund warned that the disease was steering the global economy toward what is sure to be the deepest recession since the Great Depression. The projection by IMF Managing Director Kristalina Georgieva came amid mounting concerns that the virus would soon explode across the world’s poorest nations — where frequent hand-washing and social distancing are often all but impossible — and inevitably return to countries recovering from outbreaks. A few European and Asian countries have started easing up on stay-at-home orders, which experts say risks a second wave of coronavirus infections that could prolong the global economic meltdown. The threat of contagion at Good Friday and Easter observances left public health authorities on edge. Kansas Gov. Laura Kelly, a Democrat, petitioned the state Supreme Court to stop Republican lawmakers from rescinding her ban on religious gatherings. In Los Angeles, parks that have been partially open for walking and jogging will shut down entirely on Sunday to discourage Easter outings where the virus could spread. In Italy, helicopters, drones and police patrols have been deployed to keep people in their homes over the holiday weekend. Police issued summonses Thursday to 10,000 people traveling for nonessential reasons. And in Paris, the fire-scarred Notre Dame Cathedral, normally packed on Good Friday, was nearly empty as a French archbishop led a televised Good Friday service. In Jerusalem, the chanting of a small group of clerics inside the Church of the Holy Sepulcher echoed faintly through the heavy wooden doors as a few people stopped and knelt outside to pray. The centuries-old church, built on the site where Christians believe Jesus was crucified, buried and rose from the dead, is usually packed. Later, four monks in brown robes and blue surgical masks prayed at the Stations of the Cross along the Via Dolorosa, the ancient route through the Old City where Jesus is believed to have carried the cross before his execution at the hands of the Romans. It runs past dozens of souvenir shops, cafes and hostels, nearly all of which were closed. During ordinary times, tens of thousands of pilgrims from around the world retrace Jesus’ steps in the Holy Week leading up to Easter. But this year, flights are grounded and religious sites in the Holy Land are closed as authorities try to prevent the spread of the virus, which has already infected about 1.7 million people worldwide. The shortage of testing for the virus means that, as with the death toll attributed to COVID-19, there is no doubt about a severe undercount of the total number of cases. While Latin America has thus far been spared the brunt of the pandemic, there is a widespread expectation throughout the region that the worse is yet to come. Governments from Mexico to Brazil are anticipating virus cases to peak later in April or May. Slightly fewer than 50,000 confirmed cases of the new coronavirus had been recorded in Mexico, Central America and South America, with about 1,900 fatalities — all much lower than in the United States. China , meanwhile, has reported about 3,300 deaths and South Korea just over 200, according the Johns Hopkins University tracker. An increase in new confirmed cases in the last few weeks, however, has shown that the fight against COVID-19 will take much longer than anticipated. Singapore, Vietnam and Japan are among many Asian countries that have had to step up distancing measures, close schools and impose more quarantines. There’s also growing concern that poorer countries with threadbare health systems such as Cambodia, Laos and Myanmar could be hiding the extent of their outbreaks. Lack of testing in the Philippines and Indonesia are also fueling fears that the death toll is set to rise exponentially. In Spain, more that 16,000 people have died, and in nearby France the number of dead reached about 13,200. In the United Kingdom, where British Prime Minister Boris Johnson recently left the intensive care unit of a London hospital after being treated for COVID-19, about 9,000 people have died. Meanwhile, Americans prepared for another weekend of isolation. States including Michigan, with about 1,300 dead, and Louisiana, with more than 750 dead, are bracing to see increased deaths in the weeks ahead. Back in New York, Gov. Cuomo on Friday called on Trump to invoke the Defense Production Act to take control of production by private laboratories of tests for virus antibodies, saying widespread testing is the key to reopening the economy. Without federal money and supervision, he said, the private laboratories developing tests in New York don’t have the capacity to produce enough for the millions of people who need them. “We need a tremendous, mind-boggling increase in volume quickly,” he said. “And I don’t believe just waiting for the private sector companies to come up to scale you’re going to see it in the time frame that you need to get it done.” Times staff writers Patrick J. McDonnell in Mexico City and David Pierson in Singapore contributed to this report. 
Apr 10, 2020	The COVID-19 pandemic has ignited a worldwide scramble for medical gear: masks, gowns, ventilators, testing kits, much of it made in China, which is attempting to recast its image as the source of the virus to the leader in the fight against it. But that narrative is threatened by a major problem: quality control. A growing list of foreign complaints about faulty medical gear and testing kits imported from China has upset Beijing’s designs. Within the last few weeks, scientists and health authorities in Spain, the Czech Republic, Slovakia, Turkey and Britain have complained of faulty antigen or antibody coronavirus tests purchased from Chinese companies — in some cases, costing these governments millions of dollars. Georgia has canceled a contract with the Chinese company that sent flawed test kits to Spain, and Malaysia has opted to buy testing kits from South Korea instead of China because of the Chinese tests’ reported low accuracy rate. Last week, the Netherlands asked to return 600,000 face masks purchased from China that had inadequate filters and fit incorrectly. On Tuesday, Finland tested a shipment of personal protective equipment, or PPE, from China and found the items unsuitable for hospital use. Australian border officials have also reportedly seized 800,000 faulty or counterfeit masks from China. The problem is worse at home. On March 12, officials at a State Council news briefing announced that authorities had seized more than 80 million counterfeit or faulty masks and 370,000 defective or fake disinfectants and other anti-coronavirus products in the prior month alone. In some cases, defective masks have been reported after buyers purchase them online as a donation to Wuhan and other cities, only for medical staff to discover they can’t use them. China is trying to rein in its subpar PPE manufacturers. Authorities have detained dozens of counterfeiters and threatened those producing poor quality medical products with life imprisonment. Beijing has also tightened export standards in recent days, requiring domestic certification as well as foreign licenses for medical products shipped abroad. Previously, exported medical products only had to have the certifications in receiving countries, such as the European Union’s CE certification, which could be easily counterfeited in China. But the desperation of states, nations, hospitals and individuals competing worldwide, shelling out millions of dollars to get medical gear as people die by the thousands each day, has created a scammer’s paradise. “It’s a complete mess,” said Dan Harris, a lawyer whose firm Harris Bricken has advised companies on sourcing from China for more than 15 years. He called the current situation “unprecedented,” especially as frenzied Chinese suppliers attempt to recoup losses after months of quarantine. “A year ago, Chinese companies were fine. Now they’re desperate,” Harris said. “A lot of them know they’re going to be bankrupt in a week. A lot are going to be bankrupt already. So they’re selling bad product, fake product” — and the whole world is buying those products, regardless of how they’re made. Many of those calling Harris’ firm for help are hospital purchasing managers who are under pressure from overwhelmed doctors asking, “Where the hell are the masks?” Then there are the middlemen, including experienced distributors and longtime sourcing agents who think it’s easy to shift into PPE. And a smattering of “crooks, who go to the hospital and say, ‘I can get you 5 million face masks’ … And they have no clue what they’re doing,” Harris said. Meanwhile in China, many factories have pivoted into PPE manufacturing under government encouragement, even though they lack capacity and quality control. “Everybody is jumping on this market and they have zero understanding of quality,” said Renaud Anjoran, a manufacturing supply chain auditor based in Hong Kong. “But these are high-risk items. If they don’t work, people might die.” It’s common for Chinese suppliers to export a product under one licensed company’s name, but to source their products from second, third or fourth factories, like a chain of Russian nesting dolls, with little to no traceability down the chain of supply. “In China, nothing is really black and white,” Anjoran said. “You have manufacturers selling you stuff they don’t really manufacture. They’re making it somewhere else, but you don’t know where.” There are many ways medical product exporters could get away with counterfeited or substandard goods even with the certification requirements, Anjoran said: Certificates can be faked. Certificates can be real, but altered to display another manufacturer’s name. Certificates can be valid, with goods made at the factory, but the manufacturer may not be checking the quality of its raw materials — especially the filter material in masks, the most important factor in protecting medical workers from the coronavirus. Testing filter material can take up to two weeks and cost more than $2,000. “You’ve got speed and greed,” Harris said. “It’s perfect for con artists.” Many of the newly established mask factories also operate in unhygienic conditions, with no process to keep the air clean, Anjoran said, based on his own auditing visits. “But this is not even on the radar of most buyers these days,” he said. “They’re like, ‘But did you see the masks were dirty? No? OK, who cares! It’s going to save lives. Don’t be picky.’” Testing kits also require careful buying. The World Health Organization has listed only two COVID-19 diagnostic tests for emergency use, both nucleic acid tests that use a slower, swab-based method to detect viral RNA. The faulty rapid test kits foreign governments bought from Chinese companies have all been antibody tests, which use blood samples to look for antibodies developed only a week or so into a person’s infection with the coronavirus, or antigen tests, which detect virus proteins. But both kinds of testing are relatively new and not replacements for the nucleic acid tests — notably the antibody test, which is fast and can catch mild or asymptomatic cases in people who’ve already recovered from the coronavirus, but cannot determine whether a person currently has the coronavirus. That’s why antibody tests should not be used for diagnosis, said Dale Fisher, chair of the WHO’s Global Outbreak Alert and Response Network. “At the moment, we’ve just got the PCR as a gold standard,” he said, referring to the nucleic acid tests. “Antibody tests are really for research, to help us understand the transmission dynamics.” Britain reportedly bought 3.5 million antibody tests from two Chinese companies, Guangzhou Wondfo Biotech Co. and Hangzhou AllTest Biotech Co. Only one of those, Wondfo, was on the Chinese National Medical Product Administration’s list of authorized test kits. Chinese national guidelines also state that antibody tests should only be used as a supplement to nucleic acid tests, not for “screening in general population,” and that they should not be used as the sole basis to diagnose or exclude infections with SARS-CoV-2, as the new coronavirus is called. The company that Spain bought faulty test kits from, Shenzhen Bioeasy Biotechnology Co., was also not on the list of nationally authorized suppliers. The Spanish government reportedly acquired the test kits through a middleman who produced documentation showing that Shenzhen Bioeasy had CE certification. Chinese diplomats have tried to distance the government from the companies selling faulty medical products, while also asserting that due diligence is the buyer’s responsibility. “We want to remind everyone to double-check the instructions for use to make sure what they purchase can serve their intended purposes and avoid making mistakes in a rush,” said Chinese Ministry of Foreign Affairs spokeswoman Hua Chunying at a recent news briefing. China is worried about low-quality medical products damaging its image. On April 6, customs authorities announced they’d confiscated more than 11 million unregistered medical products within one week, including 9.94 million masks, 144,000 protective gowns, more than a million testing kits and 24,000 infrared thermometers. Orders have meanwhile continued to roll in, with Germany beginning this week to ship millions of masks from China with the government’s help. The governors of New York and Massachusetts have worked with the Chinese government and internet company Tencent to facilitate PPE deliveries. The United States’ “Project Airbridge,” a public-private partnership led by President Trump’s advisor and son-in-law Jared Kushner, began chartering airlifted supplies from China this week. But the coronavirus has exposed the world’s dependence on China and China’s problems with quality control. Whether this experience will lead to further “decoupling” after the pandemic, with more countries seeking to diversify supply chains away from China, will depend in part on how China’s regulators perform. Special correspondent Meg Bernhard contributed to this report from Brussels. Times Beijing bureau staff Nicole Liu and Gaochao Zhang also contributed to this report. 
Apr 10, 2020	Oh Young-jun traces the outlines of superheroes. The stoop of a nurse's shoulders as she carries buckets brimming with biohazard waste. The tangle of a towel holding up hair dripping wet from a shower after hours in a hazmat suit. The momentary reprieve of a nurse sitting upright and nodding off in a desk chair, her hand propping up a face bandaged in spots where protective equipment has chafed her skin. Oh knows these details well. They are images that take shape during the days and nights of his shifts as a nurse in an intensive care unit at a hospital in Incheon, a South Korean port city about an hour west of Seoul.  Those hours have become more harrowing with the arrival of the novel coronavirus that's plaguing hospitals around the world. Earlier this year, Oh volunteered to be one of the nurses staffing an isolation ward for those stricken with COVID-19. He has since been caring for critically ill patients in cumbersome protective gear that has made unwieldy many of the tasks he once did with ease in his eight years as a nurse. And on his days off, the 34-year-old art school dropout-turned-nurse picks up his stylus and sketches intimate scenes of life and death as seen through his goggled eyes and felt through his gloved hands. His trench in this fight is removed from the front lines of the battle -- the hardest hit in South Korea was the city of Daegu and surrounding areas in the southeast of the country, where hospitals were overwhelmed by a surge of several thousands at the height of the country's outbreak in late February. Some of those patients were transferred to Oh's hospital to relieve hospitals at the epicenter. Among Oh's charges were a 93-year-old woman with dementia who was one of the country's oldest infected with the coronavirus, and a 57-year-old man with chronic renal failure who'd been receiving dialysis for 25 years before the virus ravaged his lungs. Caring for those patients has meant spending his days off away from friends and family, mostly cooped up in his apartment, for fear of spreading the virus. Hence, more time to draw. :: It was around the time of South Korea's last major epidemic that Oh began drawing scenes from his work as a nurse and posting them on social media. In early 2015, Oh was a couple of years out of nursing school and feeling settled in the rhythm of his work at Gachon University Gil Hospital. He decided to capture the day-to-day lives of nurses. In Korean television dramas and other media, nurses were often shown as overly feminine, subordinate, sexualized characters; menial assistants helping doctors rather than professionals in their own right. That was reflected in the way many patients and family members spoke to and treated nurses -- addressing them as "miss" or "you there," raining them with demands and abuse without the deference shown to physicians. He wanted people to see what he saw, the grueling hours, the humanity, the sacrifice, the hushed toll at shift's end. Oh had loved to draw since he was young but realized a couple of years into art school that few make it as successful full-time artists. He decided to follow in the footsteps of his childhood hero Florence Nightingale and enrolled in nursing school. Because he majored in Korean paintings and primarily focused on landscapes, drawing people and the intricate medical equipment populating the ICU took time to master. In sparse drawings, as if whispers on a page, he used rough strokes and few colors. He began chronicling a sporadic series titled "Nursing Story" on Facebook -- part work diary, part medical notes and part personal journal exploring the woes, joys and everything in between of life as a nurse. He portrayed uncontrollable patients with alcohol withdrawal delirium who wreak havoc at the hospital and need to be restrained. Young children peering through the doors of the ICU for a glimpse of their mother because kids younger than 13 aren't allowed to visit. Abuse from patients, working through nights, holidays and illnesses, and quiet cries in the laundry room where the whirring of machines mask the sobs. He quickly gained a following, comments flooding in from fellow nurses who saw their lives reflected in his drawings. They chimed in with their own stories. In May 2015, the Middle East respiratory syndrome, a deadly illness caused by another coronavirus, began spreading in South Korea. Many hospitals, including Oh's, weren't prepared to handle the outbreak, lacking isolation beds and protective equipment. A doctor was infected in Seoul, putting medical workers on edge. Oh's hospital asked for volunteers to staff a ward for patients showing symptoms of the virus. Oh was as scared as anyone. But as a young, single person living alone, he thought better him than other colleagues with families. He was the first to volunteer. Two others, a shift chief and a section head, said through tears they would step up too. "Wearing protective suits, N95 masks and goggles, enduring CO2 retention, moisture, sweat and dehydration -- MERS or not ... we nurses are always by the patient's side," he wrote in a post accompanying a drawing of a nurse walking down a darkened hallway in head-to-toe protective gear. When cases of the novel coronavirus began cropping up outside China this year, he didn't hesitate to volunteer to work in the isolation ward, emboldened by that experience. If anything, it felt like a welcome departure from his normal ICU routine. South Korea too was ready. Many hospitals had set up negative pressure isolation wards and separate departments to handle infectious disease outbreaks. Protective equipment, of which there had been a shortage in 2015, was in ready supply for medical professionals. Despite an early surge that made South Korea the largest cluster outside of China, the country appeared to get a handle on local transmissions that brought societies elsewhere to a halt and caused staggering numbers of deaths. :: In mid-March, Oh, who has a wry humor, warned his followers, whose numbers have swelled to some 85,000 between Facebook and Instagram, that he'd be posting more from his days off in isolation. "Apologies, you may get corona fatigue from frequent updates," he wrote. In his dispatches, he portrayed himself and others trying to insert an IV line with layers of gloves, nervously monitoring X-rays of a gravely ill patient's fogged-up lungs, rushing to intubate a patient from whom phlegm spewed "like rust-laden water from a water spout." To minimize the number of people going in and out of the isolation ward, nurses were having to take on many more tasks, including sterilizing surfaces and equipment, disposing of biohazard waste and catering to patients' every need, he wrote. "Nurses do all of it. They're remarkable beings," he wrote. "I'm not grumbling about this situation. It's all corona's fault." He knows nurses and other medical professionals elsewhere are fighting tougher battles, overwhelmed by large numbers of critically ill patients with limited ventilators and scant protective equipment, many of them becoming infected and, increasingly, dying. In South Korea, at least 241 medical workers had been infected with the coronavirus. A former colleague of Oh's who moved to the U.S. to work as a nurse there -- something many South Korean nurses aspire to because of better pay and working conditions -- told him of dire shortages of protective equipment at her hospital in Chicago. "It sounded like us during MERS -- pandemonium," he said in an interview. In South Korea's coronavirus fight, Oh's patients have brought a degree of hope. The 93-year-old patient with dementia and the 57-year-old long-term dialysis patient have, after much sweat and tears from Oh and his colleagues, recovered from COVID-19 and been discharged. South Korea's daily coronavirus infections this week dipped below 50 for the first time since late February, after surging by more than 900 a day at its peak. Oh knows from experience that there is always the next patient, the next crisis, the next epidemic. He goes on doing his part in his corner of the medical profession -- lately, long night shifts during which he refrains from water or caffeine because of the time it takes to shed his protective equipment to use the bathroom. When his shift is over, as the city whirs to life, he shuts his eyes and does his best to invite the sleep that never comes easily after years of switching from days to nights and back again. And on his days off, he sketches. Caption: PHOTO: OH YOUNG-JUN sketches scenes from his job as an ICU nurse treating the critically ill in South Korea. PHOTOGRAPHER:Oh Young-jun PHOTO:ICU NURSES have to carry buckets brimming with biohazard waste. PHOTOGRAPHER:Oh Young-jun PHOTO:OH YOUNG-JUN, who dropped out of art school to become a nurse, wanted to capture the day-to-day lives of nurses. PHOTOGRAPHER:Oh Young-jun PHOTO:NURSES don personal protective equipment as a precaution against the novel coronavirus in Incheon. PHOTOGRAPHER:Oh Young-jun 
Apr 9, 2020	As the coronavirus spreads around the world, U.S. officials who downplayed the risk have repeatedly blamed China’s fake data and deceptive practices for the outbreak. Secretary of State Michael R. Pompeo said in March that poor information from China has “put us behind the curve.” Last week, several House Republicans sent a letter to Pompeo stating that “misinformation from China over the past several months has severely crippled global action to combat the global pandemic.” China’s data very likely understate the true number of infections and deaths, and Chinese-style authoritarianism silenced early reports of the outbreak, costing China and the world valuable time to stop the coronavirus’ spread. While China’s reporting delays and obfuscations now make it a convenient scapegoat for inadequate preparation in the U.S., its numbers and actions made clear that the coronavirus was communicable and dangerous enough to overwhelm a country’s health system if not swiftly contained. The time will come for a full accounting, but the current obsession with China’s statistics denies the reality that some prudent governments — such as South Korea and Taiwan — recognized the seriousness of the situation in China months ago and took swift action to coordinate testing and tracing measures that protected their people. China’s own decisions in late January to prevent exit from and impose strict quarantines in Wuhan and Hubei province, likewise, signaled the dire threat. A classified U.S. intelligence report has concluded that China hid information about some infections and deaths, minimizing the apparent scale and lethality of the coronavirus outbreak. China sent a warning flare Feb. 12 when it reported more than 15,000 new cases based on clinical symptoms, indicating insufficient testing capabilities to keep up with the outbreak in Wuhan. More recent reports suggest that by the end of that month, Chinese authorities had found more than 43,000 asymptomatic cases among those quarantined, which were not included in official counts. Had China published more complete rates of infection earlier on, it is not obvious that such data alone would have convinced skeptics to take the coronavirus more seriously. While reports of larger numbers of infected people would have shown the virus’ infectiousness, reporting asymptomatic cases could also have reduced estimates of its lethality, supporting assertions that it’s like the flu. Until March 31, China’s official tally of “confirmed cases” did not include asymptomatic cases, which were rarely mentioned. One unfortunate consequence of this practice was the World Health Organization’s late February report that asymptomatic transmission was rare. China, like every other country facing a major outbreak, is missing many asymptomatic cases from its counts because most asymptomatic people have not been tested. There is still great uncertainty about the transmission of the virus, not just in China but across Europe, with some estimating that millions have already been infected in Britain, Spain and Italy. Estimates of low lethality in Germany, for example, reflect early action and more widespread detection of asymptomatic cases compared with the Spanish or Italian outbreaks, where case fatality is much higher. As for reported deaths, China’s official toll should serve as a minimal estimate; recent projections based on crematoriums running around the clock and the delivery of funeral urns suggest a higher number, but those indicators are not a reliable basis for determining the scale of undercounting. The difficulty of estimating the true death toll is not unique to China; France recently added more than 2,000 deaths to its totals that occurred in nursing homes rather than hospitals. Patterns of all-cause mortality data in Italy and Spain suggest that even their large tallies for deaths from COVID-19 are underestimates. Even if the numbers out of China were spuriously low, there was enough information to indicate that the coronavirus had the potential to become a devastating pandemic. After locking down Wuhan and most of Hubei province on Jan. 23, the Chinese authorities quarantined at-risk people before they tested positive or exhibited symptoms to reduce further spread. The government also promised free testing and treatment available nationwide and deployed enormous levels of resources, workers and medical equipment to the hardest-hit areas. The magnitude of the danger was abundantly clear two months ago from the numbers reported and actions taken in China. South Korea, Taiwan and Singapore all imposed swift measures to slow the outbreak even before the WHO declared an international public health emergency Jan. 30. Unfortunately, during this same time, political leaders in the United States were dithering and minimizing the severity of the crisis. Rather than follow the example of South Korea, Taiwan or Germany to get ahead of the curve, the Trump administration worried more about managing “the numbers” than the health of Americans. Jeremy L. Wallace, an associate professor of government at Cornell University, is the author of “Cities and Stability: Urbanization, Redistribution, and Regime Survival in China.” Jessica Chen Weiss, also an associate professor of government at Cornell, is the author of “Powerful Patriots: Nationalist Protest in China’s Foreign Relations .”
Apr 9, 2020	After “Parasite” won the Academy Award for best picture in February, South Korea dominated headlines. Two months later, this small cultural and economic powerhouse finds itself basking again in the American media spotlight — this time for its swift and effective response to the coronavirus outbreak. While reports in the U.S. have focused little on such places as Hong Kong and Taiwan, with their nine confirmed COVID-19-related deaths combined, South Korea has continued to receive outsize praise for its handling of the crisis, despite its Big Brother tactics, which have also been a factor in Singapore’s approach to COVID-19. The novel coronavirus struck terror in this conservative country in part because its wide-scale technological capabilities threaten those who visit LGBTQ clubs, mistresses, psychiatrists, cosmetic surgeons — all culturally shamed activities, though little of this is given much airtime here. So why do most Americans view South Korea as a bastion of liberal democratic values? I was adopted from South Korea in 1981 at 14 months old and raised by a white evangelical family who would tell me a movie like “Parasite” comes from the devil. Growing up, I never knew the reason I was adopted at all was that, in the 1950s, America was the parasite. The Korean War, the third most devastating war of the 20th century behind World Wars I and II, produced 100,000 mixed race children, all unwitting catalysts in the birth of international adoption: half-white abandoned children of American GIs and prostitutes from the camptowns that were officially condemned but quietly expanded by the U.S. military. Seventy years, three generations and 250,000 Korean “orphans” later, South Korea broke the pagoda ceiling with Bong Joon Ho’s “Parasite,” which became the first foreign-language film to win best picture since the academy’s inaugural Oscars ceremony in 1929. The film, which is now streaming on Hulu, also earned more than $250 million at the global box office. Should I celebrate? It was disorienting and disembodying to watch American culture, my culture, finally acknowledge a film — though not its actors — that came from a face like mine. It was even more dizzying to watch an Academy Award go to South Korea, the country that erases my existence as an adoptee even harder than the American media ignores Asians, unless we’re playing surgeons, convenience store owners, martial arts masters or Chinatown extras. “Parasite’s” main competitor for best picture was “1917,” an epic all-white throwback to one of the only two wars most white people care to remember. From an adoptee perspective, which is better? The movie about white people fighting a white war over 100 white years ago? Or a film revered by a country that erases its Asians made by a country that erases its adoptees? The booming postwar trade of international adoption in South Korea created and fed a market that served the combined interests of an occupying nation wanting to ignore the lives that its servicemen had fathered and a country economically devastated by the active fighting from 1950-1953. To say South Korea was poor after the fighting ended is an understatement of propagandic proportions. Some estimates cite that 10% to 20% of the population was massacred (this is without North Korea’s numbers), approaching the number of Jews killed in Nazi Germany. More bombs were dropped in Korea than in Germany and Japan combined during WWII; nearly twice as much napalm was sprayed there as in Vietnam. It is the war where we coined the term, “weapons of mass destruction.” And this is without the nuclear bomb President Truman considered dropping the minute the war started. Hiroshima, Nagasaki and Seoul. The main U.S. military base in the middle of Seoul was the only economy in the country for decades, and it shows. Landing at Incheon airport for the first time, I knew immediately that I wasn’t in China or Japan, not with all the neon crosses puncturing the skyline. No wonder a pivotal coronavirus outbreak happened in one of South Korea’s many Christian shadow-cults before it metastasized throughout the country. In 2006, 13 years before his “Parasite” triumph, Bong Joon Ho made another film called — wait for it — “The Host.” But instead of embarking on a class-conscious domestic critique, “The Host” calls out the American military and its collusion with the South Korean government. It centers on an amphibious monster that suddenly emerges out of the Han River, attacking an unsuspecting crowd, striking terror throughout Seoul. After a mass funeral for the victims, the government rounds up survivors to place in quarantine: The creature is also the host of a deadly, unknown virus. Except there is no virus: The “virus” serves as an excuse for the American military to release “Agent Yellow” into the atmosphere — a direct reference to Agent Orange, the toxic herbicide that the U.S. sprayed in Korea in the late 1960s (but didn’t admit using there until 2000). As our protagonists in “The Host” escape a conspiracy of hospitals, the police and South Korea’s Orwellian surveillance system, the U.S. military presence plays the unmistakable antagonist. Unlike “Parasite,” which features no white actors, “The Host” opens with one — its first scene takes place between an American military scientist (Scott Wilson) and his Korean assistant (Brian Lee), both wearing full scrubs in a dingy lab lit with all of the charm of a basement bunker. Wilson commands Lee to dump 200 bottles of “dirty formaldehyde” down the drain into the Han River despite Lee’s protests; the scene recalls a real-life ecological disaster that occurred in 2000, when the U.S. military dumped 20 gallons of formaldehyde into the Han, the source of drinking water for Seoul’s 12 million residents. The first monster we meet in “The Host” isn’t a CGI creature, it’s the U.S. military, the monster that creates “the monster.” South Korea still hosts nearly 30,000 American soldiers, and prostitution camps still exist to service these men, fueling its red-light districts. Americans call it the Forgotten War, but the Korean War is anything but forgotten in South Korea, which has made it the core of the country’s national identity, despite the fact that this war was never really between the two Koreas, but rather North Korea and the U.S. or, perhaps more accurately, the U.S. and China. Paranoia about this war is the explanation “Parasite” gives for the basement shelter in the chic residence at the heart of the film: “A lot of these rich people, they build bunkers and secret rooms in their homes,” the former housekeeper explains as she scans the secret, subterranean apartment. “You know, in case the North Koreans invade ….” South Korea rose from the ashes of its bombed-out past to rank as the world’s 12th largest economy by following Germany’s post-World War II lead, from the “Miracle on the Rhine” to the “Miracle on the Han.” But it wasn’t entirely a miracle. South Korea benefited greatly from not only the profits (tens of billions of dollars) gained through the selling of its infant underclass via international adoption but also the untold costs saved by never having to create any social welfare program to speak of. Korea currently ranks 34th among the 36 OECD countries in spending on social programs as a percentage of GDP, sitting between Turkey and Chile. With an economy thriving in the 21st century and technology from the 22nd century, South Korea’s social values are still smack in the middle of the 19th century. As recently as 2016, Bong was blacklisted along with 9,000 other artists. Abortion was decriminalized only last year, gay men are still being thrown in jail, there is still no way to force fathers to pay child support, sex ed guidelines suggest that victims are to blame for date rape and being drunk is a legal defense for rape. If Asians like me feel erased in the U.S., it is minor in comparison to the alienation of adoptees returning to Korea, where the natives are mostly unaware we exist and meeting us is usually the first time they’re hearing about it. And why would they know? We are here, a quarter-million of us, scattered across white Christian nations. We do not exist in their textbooks or their museums. Though Holt International — the Amazon of adoption agencies founded in 1956 by a right-wing evangelical — has a predominant presence in Seoul, few Seoulites think to ask why. Likewise, even the most cosmopolitan Westerners often fail to ask themselves why so many Koreans in America are adopted (one out of every 10). So how is an adopted Korean cinephile to feel when, knowing all of this, she sees South Korea score four major Oscars? When the country that sold her wins big in the country that bought her? When the country that doesn’t know she exists creates a groundbreaking work of art, a blend of Hitchcock and Kurosawa K-mashed into a cinematic genre-f—, and it receives film’s highest honor in the country that so rarely casts people who look like her? In a way, it doesn’t feel like anything. It’s like if China won. Who cares? What even is South Korea anyway? BTS? A hanbok ? An old Korean woman telling me I should get married while I stand there looking like a stereotypical lesbian in a country that erases gay people too? It feels like when I was a kid and something Korean happened, like the Olympics, and people looked at me as though I was supposed to feel some kinda way. And I really just don’t. Angry? Meh. Sad? I guess. It is, after all, another reminder that, in an existential sense, there is no country for adopted Koreans. After a moment of stillness, however, I do get the feels — exactly as I did three years ago when I learned that, decades earlier, Bryant Gumbel had spilled the Korean tea about adoption during the country’s greatest moment of pride: the 1988 Seoul Olympics. “Though the Koreans enjoy showing off their country to the world during these Games,” he stated over international airwaves, “there are some aspects of their society they’d prefer we not examine so closely, and one of those concerns the exportation of Korean orphans for adoption abroad.” In his two-minute report, he described adoption as “embarrassing, perhaps even a national shame.” The media, including the New York Times, published stories criticizing the commodification of children and, for the first time, international adoption was placed under a critical lens: The narrative shifted from agencies, governments and Western parents to adoptees, no longer the secret in Korea’s basement. There are now stories told by Korean adoptees over three continents in many languages, describing myriad lives that all begin the same way: We lose our mothers, our country, everything but our faces. And our voices, which communicate in different mediums: News & Documentary Emmy-nominated filmmaker Deann Borshay Liem, Belgian animator Jung Henin, Swedish graphic artist Lisa Wool-Rim Sjöblom and a growing community of Korean adoptee memoirists such as Jane Jeong Trenka, Nicole Chung, Jenny Heijun Wills and, soon, myself. So watching “Parasite” win the Oscar, I feel empowered and proud, but not for the reasons anyone might think. The truth is, when the light shines on South Korea, particularly from the constellation of American movie stars, it’s a moment for us adoptees to share the limelight, to be seen by the two powers and cultures that erase different parts of us. It’s a moment to show ourselves, our shared history. There is no South Korea without us, and yet we will never truly be Korean. But we can be American, or so we are told. We can be anything but the Korean face that never lets us forget that we came from a place that forgot us. In this, there is a lackluster redemption, like winning the popular vote but losing the election. It makes sense that Bong would end “Parasite” with a broken fantasy, an impossible dream from a broken boy’s broken brain. Adoptees, too, have a fantasy: That America will someday hold the South Korean government and private adoption agencies accountable for hiding information, changing our names so that our birth families can’t find us and shifting our birth dates to make us younger and more marketable; that the Korean government will stop with its empty gestures, like setting up an “adoptee outreach” department with no English speakers or offering DNA tests to adoptees overseas while banning Korean birth mothers from being tested. In a way, Bong feels more international than national, more like me than an actual Korean. A subversive outsider, a spiritual exile. Perhaps as we, like him, speak our truth to the world, we can find a place in it. Maybe someday the world’s hosts will realize they are just parasites by another name, and my native and adoptive countries will reckon with their past. And maybe, when the virus clears — leaving so many truths exposed — the real healing can begin. Mee-ok is a Boston-based essayist and poet who was raised in Morgan Hill, Calif.
Apr 9, 2020	As the coronavirus spreads around the world, U.S. officials who downplayed the risk have repeatedly blamed China's fake data and deceptive practices for the outbreak. Secretary of State Michael R. Pompeo said in March that poor information from China has "put us behind the curve." Last week, several House Republicans sent a letter to Pompeo stating that "misinformation from China over the past several months has severely crippled global action to combat the global pandemic." China's data very likely understate the true number of infections and deaths, and Chinese-style authoritarianism silenced early reports of the outbreak, costing China and the world valuable time to stop the coronavirus' spread. While China's reporting delays and obfuscations now make it a convenient scapegoat for inadequate preparation in the U.S., its numbers and actions made clear that the coronavirus was communicable and dangerous enough to overwhelm a country's health system if not swiftly contained.  The time will come for a full accounting, but the current obsession with China's statistics denies the reality that some prudent governments -- such as South Korea and Taiwan -- recognized the seriousness of the situation in China months ago and took swift action to coordinate testing and tracing measures that protected their people. China's own decisions in late January to prevent exit from and impose strict quarantines in Wuhan and Hubei province, likewise, signaled the dire threat. A classified U.S. intelligence report has concluded that China hid information about some infections and deaths, minimizing the apparent scale and lethality of the coronavirus outbreak. China sent a warning flare Feb. 12 when it reported more than 15,000 new cases based on clinical symptoms, indicating insufficient testing capabilities to keep up with the outbreak in Wuhan. More recent reports suggest that by the end of that month, Chinese authorities had found more than 43,000 asymptomatic cases among those quarantined, which were not included in official counts. Had China published more complete rates of infection earlier on, it is not obvious that such data alone would have convinced skeptics to take the coronavirus more seriously. While reports of larger numbers of infected people would have shown the virus' infectiousness, reporting asymptomatic cases could also have reduced estimates of its lethality, supporting assertions that it's like the flu. Until March 31, China's official tally of "confirmed cases" did not include asymptomatic cases, which were rarely mentioned. One unfortunate consequence of this practice was the World Health Organization's late February report that asymptomatic transmission was rare. China, like every other country facing a major outbreak, is missing many asymptomatic cases from its counts because most asymptomatic people have not been tested. There is still great uncertainty about the transmission of the virus, not just in China but across Europe, with some estimating that millions have already been infected in Britain, Spain and Italy. Estimates of low lethality in Germany, for example, reflect early action and more widespread detection of asymptomatic cases compared with the Spanish or Italian outbreaks, where case fatality is much higher. As for reported deaths, China's official toll should serve as a minimal estimate; recent projections based on crematoriums running around the clock and the delivery of funeral urns suggest a higher number, but those indicators are not a reliable basis for determining the scale of undercounting. The difficulty of estimating the true death toll is not unique to China; France recently added more than 2,000 deaths to its totals that occurred in nursing homes rather than hospitals. Patterns of all-cause mortality data in Italy and Spain suggest that even their large tallies for deaths from COVID-19 are underestimates. Even if the numbers out of China were spuriously low, there was enough information to indicate that the coronavirus had the potential to become a devastating pandemic. After locking down Wuhan and most of Hubei province on Jan. 23, the Chinese authorities quarantined at-risk people before they tested positive or exhibited symptoms to reduce further spread. The government also promised free testing and treatment available nationwide and deployed enormous levels of resources, workers and medical equipment to the hardest-hit areas. The magnitude of the danger was abundantly clear two months ago from the numbers reported and actions taken in China. South Korea, Taiwan and Singapore all imposed swift measures to slow the outbreak even before the WHO declared an international public health emergency Jan. 30. Unfortunately, during this same time, political leaders in the United States were dithering and minimizing the severity of the crisis. Rather than follow the example of South Korea, Taiwan or Germany to get ahead of the curve, the Trump administration worried more about managing "the numbers" than the health of Americans.  Credit: Jeremy L. Wallace, an associate professor of government at Cornell University, is the author of "Cities and Stability: Urbanization, Redistribution, and Regime Survival in China." Jessica Chen Weiss, also an associate professor of government atCornell, is the author of "Powerful Patriots: Nationalist Protest in China's Foreign Relations." 
Apr 9, 2020	Football has been on Larry Chang's mind the last few days. He cannot help thinking about his Baltimore Ravens and the return of games this fall. "I'm a huge NFL fan," he said, musing about the team's star quarterback. "I want to see Lamar Jackson back on the field." But as an infectious disease specialist at Johns Hopkins School of Medicine, in the city where the Ravens play, Chang asks an important question: "Is that realistic?"  There has been a lot of talk about the return of sports to a nation yearning for some hint of normalcy amid the COVID-19 pandemic. Major League Baseball has discussed quarantining all 30 of its teams in Arizona, keeping players, coaches and staff in a virus-free BioDome facsimile and holding games in empty ballparks. The UFC reportedly has scheduled bouts on tribal land in Central California, and its president, Dana White, has floated the idea of subsequent bouts on a sequestered island. Even President Trump has weighed in, envisioning packed grandstands in late summer, saying, "I want fans back in the arenas." But Chang and other public health experts fear resuming play would be a risky proposition if the outbreak persists or, as some expect, recedes during summer and reappears in fall. "I would be very nervous about having any sports, whether it's football or basketball or even baseball," said Dr. Richard Jackson, a former Centers for Disease Control and Prevention official and professor emeritus at UCLA's Fielding School of Public Health. Jackson dismisses the idea that pro athletes, young and fit, hold some kind of "get out of jail free card" when it comes to the coronavirus. "This is not just the plain-old flu," he says. :: Setting aside any qualms about sports in a time of pandemic -- the example it might set for a populace asked to shelter in place, the use of scarce testing resources on otherwise healthy, millionaire athletes -- fans might be tantalized by news that baseball has resumed in South Korea, where there is widespread testing and players are constantly checked for symptoms. In the U.S., where testing is far less prevalent, the process would be more complex. A league could gather all of its players, coaches and staff, testing everyone to ensure a virus-free community. Teams could live in designated hotels or dormitories, remaining isolated from the public, venturing outside only to practice and compete in sequestered ballparks. Games could be televised to a home-bound nation eager for diversion. Top league executives believe ratings could reach levels not seen since the pre-digital era. MLB officials have identified such a plan as "one potential option" for salvaging a season that was supposed to begin last month. They also added a disclaimer. "The health and safety of our employees, players, fans and the public at large are paramount, and we are not ready at this time to endorse any particular format for staging games in light of the rapidly changing public health situation caused by the coronavirus," MLB's statement read. Health experts say that plan represents a high-stakes gamble. "Even professional athletes who test negative for COVID-19 with regular testing could be false positives and could get sick," said Summer Johnson McGee, dean of the School of Health Sciences at the University of New Haven in Connecticut. The risk is amplified by the nature of athletic competition. There is no room for social distancing amid constant physical contact in football and basketball. Baseball has its tradition of players spitting and managers arguing, nose-to-nose, with umpires. "It's not just the games," Chang said. "Every practice is a high-risk transmission event." On a practical level, the Johns Hopkins doctor wonders about a player testing negative before kickoff, then showing symptoms of the virus the following morning. "Technically," he said, "all those people who played in the football game should be quarantined for 14 days." A single undetected case of the coronavirus could multiply into infections across the league. "The potential of illness or even death among elite athletes is something that professional sports leagues should not risk," McGee said. Though people who are young and fit appear more likely to be asymptomatic or recover from COVID-19 without serious consequence, there is still potential danger. Research of the Spanish flu of 1918 has shown that when a healthy immune system overreacts to infection, the resulting autoimmune disorders can be more harmful than the disease itself. "Sometimes the most strapping people are the ones who have the strongest immune response," UCLA's Jackson said. "It was immune response that killed so many people in 1918, not the virus." :: For all their concerns, experts see a couple of paths back to the playing field. The development of a reliable treatment would make COVID-19 both less dangerous and less onerous to the healthcare system. Just as useful, extensive serologic testing could identify players who possess antibodies to fight off the virus. "Professional athletes who have COVID-19 antibodies playing against other athletes with those antibodies would present zero risk," McGee said. Such testing could also trigger what Chang calls "a perverse incentive." A player who has immunity would become more valuable to his team; a third-stringer could vault into the starting lineup by way of the required antibodies. He could develop those antibodies by surviving the disease. "If I'm a player and I'm healthy, I might think about that," Chang said. "I might say, 'What the hell, let me get infected with coronavirus and I'll be one of the privileged few.' " But the allure of sport, especially now, could prompt leagues to continue searching for a way back. The money involved -- millions in player contracts, billions in broadcast rights -- only boosts the incentive. As a fan and a doctor, Chang understands the conflicting motivations. "There is really no way you can have sports without increasing the risk," he said. "But it may be that our society decides it's a risk worth taking." -- (BEGIN TEXT OF INFOBOX) Where sports stand MLB: Commissioner Rob Manfred recently said no option is off the table for starting the season, which would have opened March 26. One idea is to assemble all 30 teams in Arizona to play in a coronavirus-free collection of empty stadiums. NBA: Commissioner Adam Silver said no decision about resumption of play will happen until May. One topic of discussion has been to bring the league to Las Vegas to play in empty arenas. This would have been the final week of the season. NHL: Commissioner Gary Bettman acknowledged that it might not be possible for the league to finish the regular season and conduct the Stanley Cup playoffs as it has traditionally done. The postseason would have started Wednesday. NFL: In a memo sent to the 32 teams, Commissioner Roger Goodell outlined procedures for the April 23-25 draft, which will be held in a virtual format. The start of the regular season is scheduled for Sept. 10. MLS: All teams have already played two games, and the season has been suspended until May 10. WNBA: Commissioner Cathy Engelbert said the league will not open training camp April 26 as scheduled and will put on hold the May 6 opening of the season. The league will hold its draft remotely April 17. MMA: UFC will hold its next major show April 18, reportedly on tribal land in Central California. It will then move to an island in international waters for two months of competition. Caption: PHOTO: WITH NO FANS, the LG Twins of South Korea's KBO league play an intrasquad game in Seoul on Sunday. PHOTOGRAPHER:Chung Sung-Jun Getty Images 
Apr 9, 2020	Public health experts say information about the spread of the novel coronavirus through Texas and Florida in coming days could be crucial in predicting how many Americans are likely to die from the pandemic. The apparent effects of social distancing in three major hot spots -- Italy, New York and California -- have given scientists hope that the final U.S. death toll could be lower than White House projections of 100,000 to 240,000, which were based on a combination of models that administration officials have not fully explained. "I think we're just doing much better than those numbers," President Trump said during his daily White House briefing on Wednesday. He warned of "terrible days ahead" but said, as he has before, that there is a "light at the end of the tunnel."  The Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation at the University of Washington, which last week projected more than 90,000 American deaths from COVID-19, the disease caused by the coronavirus, lowered its estimate on Wednesday to 60,415 deaths in the period until Aug. 4. "All of the available information strongly suggests that social distancing policies are making a big difference," said Dr. Greg Roth, a clinical advisor to the team running the model. "We've seen the shape of the death curve in places like New York and Italy sharpen to a much sharper peak." At the White House with the president, his coronavirus reponse coordinator, Dr. Deborah Birx, similarly credited Americans for following federal guidelines to avoid public gatherings and stay at home. "We are impressed by the American people," said Birx, who only recently complained of a lack of compliance with social distancing admonitions. Robert R. Redfield, director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, agreed, saying, "What's been remarkable to watch here is how the American public has changed its behavior when it affects the vulnerable." But social distancing directives came late in Texas, Florida and some other Southern states, where hospitals also have less capacity. Big spikes in those states, especially if they occur together, could push fatalities higher if hospitals are overwhelmed and if older, more vulnerable patients, particularly in Florida, are stricken. The models used to predict sickness and death vary widely and are admittedly faulty, given that they rely on specific assumptions about what people and governments are doing to stop the contagion. The Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation -- one of the main sources the White House used to inform its numbers -- includes data from Wuhan, China, where the government imposed a strict lockdown, isolated infected people from their families and employed thousands of workers to identify and track infected people to quarantine them and monitor their contacts. Experts say a group of models offering a range of possibilities -- the approach used by meteorologists and marketers -- is more reliable than a single forecast. "We don't do this with hurricane predictions; we don't even do this with Netflix movie predictions," said Dylan George, vice president of the tech investment firm In-Q-Tel, who served as a senior White House advisor on biological threats under President Obama. The Trump administration has only committed to recommending Americans stay at home until April 30. The Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation assumes such measures will remain in effect for at least a month longer, and public health experts have not settled on a recommended timeline. As recently as mid-March, top Trump administration officials warned that Italy, where thousands of people were dying and hospitals were overwhelmed, was a worst-case scenario, urging Americans to wash hands and stay home to emulate the success of South Korea in combating the spread of the virus. But botched U.S. testing and a slow and uneven response by the Trump administration had by then already rendered the South Korean model impossible. Now Italy, the onetime cautionary tale, has become the goal. Over the weekend, Birx spoke of "hopeful signs in Italy and Spain, where we see, finally, new cases and deaths declining." "It's giving us hope of what our future could be," she added. Jeremy Konyndyk, who led the overseas Ebola response for the Obama administration, said the shift in rhetoric shows how "the goal posts have moved" in just a few weeks. But he said Italy would "be a welcome outcome" at this point, "given how bad things have gotten" in the United States. "We're going to have hot spots everywhere," he predicted. Public health experts believe Italy may be turning the tide. The country, with less than a fifth of the U.S. population, recorded more than 17,000 COVID-19 deaths as of Wednesday, which would translate to more than 90,000 deaths in the U.S. population. New York's disease cluster, the epicenter of the U.S. outbreak for weeks, is also showing signs of ebbing. San Francisco, another dense city with an early outbreak, also has seen better than expected results. But experts urge caution. "We really need to wait a week or two to see if that trend holds," said George of In-Q-Tel. "We can't jump the gun on this." Public health experts say the outbreaks in Italy and New York ultimately could look relatively benign. Italy has more hospital beds and doctors per capita than the United States. And even as New York's dense population and busy subway system helped the virus spread, the city has several advantages. New York has more large and well-resourced hospitals, and its governor was aggressive in imposing stay-at-home measures. Gov. Andrew Cuomo's updates, including his frequent pleas for help, have been broadcast nationally on a daily basis, putting pressure on the Trump administration and attracting physicians and supplies from around the country. If other hot spots develop simultaneously -- say, in Dallas, Miami and Phoenix -- it's not clear that they can expect the same level of help, especially if other states see spikes in patients at the same time. "Will 49 other governors be able to do what Cuomo has done?" asked Dr. Ashish Jha, who directs Harvard University's Global Health Institute. Florida, the nation's third most populous state, is one of the most vulnerable to the pandemic since elderly residents account for nearly a fourth of the population. Gov. Ron DeSantis, a Republican, only issued a statewide stay-at-home order last week, long after most other governors had acted. "We just hope it's not too late," said a senior executive at a large medical system in Florida, who asked not to be identified out of concern about panicking the hospital's community. The medical system has projected it will begin to run out of beds and ventilators by the second week of May, even after squeezing beds into every corner of the medical center over the next four weeks. At that point, physicians and hospital officials would be forced to decide which patients would get ventilators and which would die, a dilemma that a special ethics committee at the medical system is already beginning to discuss. "That's the kind of stuff we in hospitals never talk about," the hospital executive said. "The idea that people like us, our doctors and our nurses, have to consider that there may be thousands that we can't care for pulls on your soul. It's not who we are." If Floridians stay home and mitigate the spread of the virus, the state's medical system may not be swamped, however. More consistent social distancing could push off the peak demand for beds and ventilators until the third week of July. The effort to predict fatalities at the national level is also hampered by the lack of reliable government data and adequate testing, which makes it difficult to know how many Americans have been infected and what the true death rate is. Many people who died of COVID-19 were never tested, meaning they will not be reflected in the death toll. Other people who carry the virus show no symptoms and are also not counted. But if that number is high, it means more Americans could spread the disease once social distancing ends. -- Times staff writers Jaweed Kaleem in Miami and Chris Megerian in Washington contributed to this report. Caption: PHOTO: WORKERS move a resident's belongings Wednesday as all 84 patients are transferred out of the Magnolia Rehabilitation and Nursing Center, where at least 34 patients and five staffers have contracted COVID-19. PHOTOGRAPHER:Gina Ferazzi Los Angeles Times PHOTO:NURSING STUDENT Jacquelyn Augustine works at a drive-through coronavirus testing site in South Los Angeles on Wednesday. PHOTOGRAPHER:Christina House Los Angeles Times PHOTO:A PATIENT is moved from Magnolia Rehabilitation and Nursing Center in Riverside County, which has reported many coronavirus cases. PHOTOGRAPHER:Gina Ferazzi Los Angeles Times 
Apr 8, 2020	Football has been on Larry Chang’s mind the last few days. He cannot help thinking about his Baltimore Ravens and the return of games this fall. “I’m a huge NFL fan,” he said, musing about the team’s star quarterback. “I want to see Lamar Jackson back on the field.” But as an infectious disease specialist at Johns Hopkins School of Medicine, in the city where the Ravens play, Chang asks an important question: “Is that realistic?” There has been a lot of talk about the return of sports to a nation yearning for some hint of normalcy amid the coronavirus pandemic. Major League Baseball has discussed quarantining all 30 of its teams in Arizona, keeping players, coaches and staff in a virus-free BioDome facsimile and holding games in empty ballparks. The Ultimate Fighting Championship reportedly has scheduled bouts on tribal land in Central California, and its president, Dana White, has floated the idea of staging subsequent bouts on a sequestered island. Even President Trump has weighed in, envisioning packed grandstands in late summer, saying, “I want fans back in the arenas.” But Chang isn’t the only one who worries about resuming play, even with no spectators. He and other public health experts fear it would be a risky proposition if the outbreak persists or, as some expect, recedes during summer and reappears in fall. “I would be very nervous about having any sports, whether it’s football or basketball or even baseball,” said Dr. Richard Jackson, a former CDC official and professor emeritus at UCLA’s Fielding School of Public Health. Jackson dismisses the idea that professional athletes, young and fit, hold some kind of “get out of jail free card” when it comes to the coronavirus. “This is not just the plain-old flu,” he says. :: Setting aside any qualms about sports in a time of pandemic — the example it might set for a populace asked to shelter in place, the use of scarce testing resources on otherwise healthy, millionaire athletes — fans might be tantalized by recent news from South Korea. As widespread testing flattens the curve of reported cases in that country, pro baseball has resumed training and intrasquad scrimmages, with the Korean Baseball Organization’s 10 teams inching toward an opening day next month. Players are constantly checked for symptoms and body temperature. Stadiums remain shuttered. Even one reported case of COVID-19 could bring the experiment to an abrupt halt. In the U.S., where testing is far less prevalent, the process would be more complex. A league could gather all of its players, coaches and staff, testing everyone to ensure a virus-free community. Teams could live in designated hotels or dormitories, remaining isolated from the public, venturing outside only to practice and compete in sequestered ballparks. Games could be televised to a home-bound nation eager for diversion. Top league executives believe ratings could reach levels not seen since the pre-digital era. Major League Baseball officials have identified such a plan as “one potential option” for salvaging a season that was supposed to begin last month. They also added a disclaimer. “The health and safety of our employees, players, fans and the public at large are paramount, and we are not ready at this time to endorse any particular format for staging games in light of the rapidly changing public health situation caused by the coronavirus,” MLB’s statement read. In theory, the strategy could work if players adhered to extreme restrictions. In reality, health experts say, it represents a high-stakes gamble. “Even professional athletes who test negative for COVID-19 with regular testing could be false positives and could get sick,” said Summer Johnson McGee, dean of the School of Health Sciences at the University of New Haven in Connecticut. The risk is amplified by the nature of athletic competition. There is no room for social distancing amid constant physical contact in football and basketball. Baseball has its tradition of players spitting and managers arguing, nose-to-nose, with umpires. “It’s not just the games,” Chang said. “Every practice is a high-risk transmission event.” On a practical level, the Johns Hopkins doctor wonders about a player testing negative before kickoff, then showing symptoms of the virus the following morning. “Technically,” he said, “all those people who played in the football game should be quarantined for 14 days.” A single, undetected case of coronavirus could multiply into infections across the league. “The potential of illness or even death among elite athletes is something that professional sports leagues should not risk,” McGee said. Though people who are young and fit appear more likely to be asymptomatic or recover from COVID-19 without serious consequence, there is still potential danger. Research of the Spanish Flu of 1918 has shown that when a healthy immune system overreacts to infection, the resulting autoimmune disorders can be more harmful than the disease itself. “Sometimes the most strapping people are the ones who have the strongest immune response,” said Jackson of UCLA. “It was immune response that killed so many people in 1918, not the virus.” :: For all their concerns, experts see a couple of paths back to the playing field. The development of a reliable treatment would make COVID-19 both less dangerous and less onerous to the healthcare system. Just as useful, extensive serologic testing could identify players who possess antibodies to fight off the virus. “Professional athletes who have COVID-19 antibodies playing against other athletes with those antibodies would present zero risk,” McGee said. “This might limit rosters somewhat significantly, but at least games could resume for some teams.” Such testing could also trigger what Chang calls “a perverse incentive.” A player who has immunity would become more valuable to his team; a third-stringer could vault into the starting lineup by way of the required antibodies. He could develop those antibodies by surviving the disease. “If I’m a player and I’m healthy, I might think about that,” Chang said. “I might say, ‘What the hell, let me get infected with coronavirus and I’ll be one of the privileged few.’” The prospect frightens Jackson. “The damage this virus does to the lungs is substantial,” he said. “You’re not going to be running a 9.5-second dash after having pneumonia from coronavirus.” But the allure of sport, especially now, could prompt leagues to continue searching for a way back. The money involved — millions in player contracts, billions in broadcast rights — only boosts the incentive. More  As a fan and a doctor, Chang understands the conflicting motivations. “There is really no way you can have sports without increasing the risk,” he said. “But it may be that our society decides it’s a risk worth taking.” 
Apr 8, 2020	Public health experts say information about the spread of the novel coronavirus through Texas and Florida in coming days could be crucial in predicting how many Americans are likely to die from the pandemic. The apparent effects of social distancing in three major hot spots — Italy, New York and California — have given scientists hope that the final U.S. death toll could be lower than White House projections of 100,000 to 240,000, which were based on a combination of models that administration officials have not fully explained. “I think we’re just doing much better than those numbers,” President Trump said during his daily White House briefing on Wednesday. He warned of “terrible days ahead” but said, as he has before, that there is a “light at the end of the tunnel.” The Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation at the University of Washington, which last week projected more than 90,000 American deaths from COVID-19, the disease caused by the coronavirus, lowered its estimate on Wednesday to 60,415 deaths in the period until Aug. 4. “All of the available information strongly suggests that social distancing policies are making a big difference,” said Dr. Greg Roth, a clinical advisor to the team running the model. “We’ve seen the shape of the death curve in places like New York and Italy sharpen to a much sharper peak.” At the White House with the president, his coronavirus reponse coordinator, Dr. Deborah Birx, similarly credited Americans for following federal guidelines to avoid public gatherings and stay at home. “We are impressed by the American people,” said Birx, who only recently complained of a lack of compliance with social distancing admonitions. Robert R. Redfield, director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, agreed, saying, “What’s been remarkable to watch here is how the American public has changed its behavior when it affects the vulnerable.” But social distancing directives came late in Texas, Florida and some other Southern states, where hospitals also have less capacity. Big spikes in those states, especially if they occur together, could push fatalities higher if hospitals are overwhelmed and if older, more vulnerable patients, particularly in Florida, are stricken. The models used to predict sickness and death vary widely and are admittedly faulty, given that they rely on specific assumptions about what people and governments are doing to stop the contagion. The Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation — one of the main sources the White House used to inform its numbers — includes data from Wuhan, China, where the government imposed a strict lockdown, isolated infected people from their families and employed thousands of workers to identify and track infected people to quarantine them and monitor their contacts. Experts say a group of models offering a range of possibilities — the approach used by meteorologists and marketers — is more reliable than a single forecast. “We don’t do this with hurricane predictions; we don’t even do this with Netflix movie predictions,” said Dylan George, vice president of the tech investment firm In-Q-Tel, who served as a senior White House advisor on biological threats under President Obama. The Trump administration has only committed to recommending Americans stay at home until April 30. The Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation assumes such measures will remain in effect for at least a month longer, and public health experts have not settled on a recommended timeline. Newsletter Get our free Coronavirus Today newsletter Sign up for the latest news, best stories and what they mean for you, plus answers to your questions. Sign Me Up You may occasionally receive promotional content from the Los Angeles Times. As recently as mid-March, top Trump administration officials warned that Italy, where thousands of people were dying and hospitals were overwhelmed, was a worst-case scenario, urging Americans to wash hands and stay home to emulate the success of South Korea in combating the spread of the virus. But botched U.S. testing and a slow and uneven response by the Trump administration had by then already rendered the South Korean model impossible. Now Italy, the onetime cautionary tale, has become the goal. Over the weekend, Birx spoke of “hopeful signs in Italy and Spain, where we see, finally, new cases and deaths declining.” “It’s giving us hope of what our future could be,” she added. Jeremy Konyndyk, who led the overseas Ebola response for the Obama administration, said the shift in rhetoric shows how “the goal posts have moved” in just a few weeks. But he said Italy would “be a welcome outcome” at this point, “given how bad things have gotten” in the United States. “We’re going to have hot spots everywhere,” he predicted. Public health experts believe Italy may be turning the tide. The country, with less than a fifth of the U.S. population, recorded more than 17,000 COVID-19 deaths as of Wednesday, which would translate to more than 90,000 deaths in the U.S. population. New York’s disease cluster, the epicenter of the U.S. outbreak for weeks, is also showing signs of ebbing. San Francisco, another dense city with an early outbreak, also has seen better than expected results. But experts urge caution. “We really need to wait a week or two to see if that trend holds,” said George of In-Q-Tel. “We can’t jump the gun on this.” Public health experts say the outbreaks in Italy and New York ultimately could look relatively benign. Italy has more hospital beds and doctors per capita than the United States. And even as New York’s dense population and busy subway system helped the virus spread, the city has several advantages. New York has more large and well-resourced hospitals, and its governor was aggressive in imposing stay-at-home measures. Gov. Andrew Cuomo’s updates, including his frequent pleas for help, have been broadcast nationally on a daily basis, putting pressure on the Trump administration and attracting physicians and supplies from around the country. If other hot spots develop simultaneously — say, in Dallas, Miami and Phoenix — it’s not clear that they can expect the same level of help, especially if other states see spikes in patients at the same time. “Will 49 other governors be able to do what Cuomo has done?” asked Dr. Ashish Jha, who directs Harvard University’s Global Health Institute. Florida, the nation’s third most populous state, is one of the most vulnerable to the pandemic since elderly residents account for nearly a fourth of the population. Gov. Ron DeSantis, a Republican, only issued a statewide stay-at-home order last week, long after most other governors had acted. “We just hope it’s not too late,” said a senior executive at a large medical system in Florida, who asked not to be identified out of concern about panicking the hospital’s community. The medical system has projected it will begin to run out of beds and ventilators by the second week of May, even after squeezing beds into every corner of the medical center over the next four weeks. At that point, physicians and hospital officials would be forced to decide which patients would get ventilators and which would die, a dilemma that a special ethics committee at the medical system is already beginning to discuss. More coronavirus coverage  “That’s the kind of stuff we in hospitals never talk about,” the hospital executive said. “The idea that people like us, our doctors and our nurses, have to consider that there may be thousands that we can’t care for pulls on your soul. It’s not who we are.” If Floridians stay home and mitigate the spread of the virus, the state’s medical system may not be swamped, however. More consistent social distancing could push off the peak demand for beds and ventilators until the third week of July. The effort to predict fatalities at the national level is also hampered by the lack of reliable government data and adequate testing, which makes it difficult to know how many Americans have been infected and what the true death rate is. Many people who died of COVID-19 were never tested, meaning they will not be reflected in the death toll. Other people who carry the virus show no symptoms and are also not counted. But if that number is high, it means more Americans could spread the disease once social distancing ends. Times staff writer Jaweed Kaleem in Miami and Chris Megerian in Washington contributed to this report. 
Apr 8, 2020	Remember BBC Dad? You know, Robert E. Kelly, that poli-sci professor in South Korea who in 2017 was being interviewed remotely about the impeachment of then-South Korean President Park Geun-hye when his adorable 4-year-old daughter marched into his office with her baby brother hilariously rolling behind her? Remember how stricken their mother, Jung-a Kim, looked as she dashed in to haul them out? Remember how the video dominated news cycles for days, briefly sparking conversations about balancing work and family? Nevertheless, since in this country conversations about the difficulty of balancing work and family are ongoing and thus far fairly fruitless, BBC Dad was seen by most as a blooper supreme that made everyone on the planet laugh. No one’s laughing now. In the universal coronavirus-mandated stay-at-home office, you’re lucky if one of the 12 co-workers on your Zoom meeting gives you the heads-up before your own 4-year-old empties the fishbowl onto the floor behind you. Nowadays, every interview, Skype session and conference call is prefaced by the parental warnings — participants listing the number and ages of the children who are currently supposed to be doing schoolwork/watching TV/napping/being amused by another family member but, realistically, could interrupt at any moment. Just so everyone’s aware. Those of us fortunate to remain well during the COVID-19 pandemic have learned many new things about people we thought we already knew pretty well. Like, we are all stress-baking way too much. And refusing to acknowledge that no matter how young you are, overhead lighting is not your friend. (Seriously. I cannot stress the benefits of indirect lighting enough.) Those of us fortunate to remain employed in ways that require regular tele-contact have learned other things as well. Longtime co-workers are suddenly revealed to have a wide range of pets, for example, or an alarming number of snake plants; others have, shall we say, unexpected taste in art or a nearly endless collection of hooded sweatshirts (okay, that’s me — but honestly, you all should have known). Most important, it has also been revealed that many of us have children. Children who are not, as it turns out, theoretical or compartmentalizable. Children who exist as actual humans, outside the confines of adorable pictures — and are capable of disrupting work in ways far less manageable than the occasional request to leave early so as not to miss a parent/teacher conference. Here they are, these children, now banned from daycare, school and college, suddenly — and no doubt to some, shockingly — displaying measurable physical dimensions, and immeasurable physical needs, including a near-constant desire to be fed while showing you a really funny TikTok right now. Children, even the older ones, who need to express their frustration, especially now, in a highly unscheduled way. Children who just want show you the latest missive from their university and demand that you promise college will resume in the fall. Or tell you the dog got out again and should they get him? Or show you this very cool ginormous bug they just found, only wait ... it was right there a second ago, where did it go? Children who need to do all of these things and more even and especially if their mother or father is currently in a Zoom meeting. Suddenly the BBC Dad video seems less like a blooper and more like an unexpected tear in the Potemkin village we have built at the border of work and family. You know, the one that “proves” everything is just fine — nothing to see here, parents are perfectly capable of juggling two full-time jobs on their own! — so American businesses can pretend that there is no need for things like on-site daycare, flex time, telecommuting or extended parental leave. You know, the kinds of resources that virtually every other first-world nation has had for decades? “I’m really hoping that one of the silver linings of this thing is that we can all stop apologizing for having families,” a television producer and mother said to me recently. “I can’t tell you the number of times I’ve had to apologize for being interrupted even though I was working at night or on a weekend.” BBC Dad, if you remember, was mortified by his children’s on-camera incursion, and feared it would end his career as a go-to expert on South Korea. Instead, it had the opposite effect — he got even more on-camera gigs the following year and no one seemed to think he had less insight into that country’s politics because he also had young children. Kim took it on the chin for a bit, however. Many people immediately assumed — because Kelly is white and Kim is Asian — that she must be the nanny, while others were concerned at how panicked she looked as she attempted to corral her children. Concerned, it must be added, that she was personally being mistreated in some way, not that social pressures to keep work and family separated could, and do, create such palpable panic. In fact, it was the look on Kim’s face, rather than Kelly’s ability to remain calm that spoke to many, in a fairly unfunny way. Working mothers, and to an increasing extent working fathers, know that panic all too well — somehow one of the 85 balls in the air has fallen and everyone will now see that we are incapable of doing the impossible. When my younger daughter was just 3, I had to interview a very famous celebrity on a Sunday morning because that was the only time he could talk to me. So I locked myself in my bedroom. And when my daughter started pounding on the door, completely ignoring her father and yelling for me, I wedged myself under my bed in the hope that the mattress would act as soundproofing. It didn’t. “What the hell is wrong with that kid?” the (then-childless) celebrity growled, only partly in jest. “Nothing is wrong with that kid,” I should have said. “She is 3 and it is Sunday morning and she wants her mother. Like 3-year-olds do on a Sunday morning. You work in theater, you must be used to tantrums. Carry on.” Instead I apologized, profusely, and wiggled further under the bed. Now, any business that is able to remain open is also open to doing business any way it can be done, mostly from home. Homes that are shared by children, who are dealing with their own sequestration side effects and cannot reasonably be expected to pretend that mom is at her office when clearly she is in her bedroom, wearing a nice top over sweatpants and fiddling with the lamp so she doesn’t look 108 years old. A mom like that might very well need a snack during her “meeting” — and that snack might very well consist of Lucky Charms that then spill all over the bed, and how is that the Lucky Charms-proffering child’s fault? He was just trying to be nice. Newsletter Get our free Coronavirus Today newsletter Sign up for the latest news, best stories and what they mean for you, plus answers to your questions. Sign Me Up You may occasionally receive promotional content from the Los Angeles Times. And you know what? He was trying to be nice. And there is no reason, mid-pandemic or not, why business cannot be conducted while a person also mops up the fallout of a very large bowl of Lucky Charms. Or takes a minute to tell her college student daughter, now stuck at home, where the cheese grater is kept. (The same daughter who has a big sign on her door announcing the hours she is in Zoom class because, while it may be OK for a young-adult child to interrupt an interview with a question asked in hand gestures, the thought of her classmates getting the merest glimpse of an inquiring parent is too ghastly to contemplate.) It is OK for two things to be occurring at once because for working parents, at least two things are always occurring at once. The boss may not know it, but Mom has been doing this balancing act for years. Whether silently making a grocery list while Simpson from HR drones on in some required meeting or correcting homework during an 8 p.m. conference call, working parents have functioned this way for decades. The only difference is that now, everyone is seeing it live-streamed. So maybe, once this pandemic has passed and we emerge from isolation, we can all remember what we have learned: that being at work doesn’t mean you temporarily don’t have a family any more than being at home means that when you are there you never do any work. That workers need things like flex time, extended leave and subsidized family care. And if those resources are not going to be provided, well, businesses will just have to deal with the interruptions. Certainly this crisis has put our previous definitions of “interruption” in perspective — when a fear of illness and potential death is what’s keeping you from your place of work, ducking out of a Facetime conversation because your kid needs you to proofread an essay due at noon, which is five minutes from now, just doesn’t seem like that big of a deal. Because it isn’t. 
Apr 8, 2020	Americans in communities with higher smog levels are at greater risk of dying from COVID-19, according to a new study that suggests the health damage from the novel coronavirus has been worsened by long-term exposure to air pollution. Scientists at Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health analyzed data on more than 3,000 U.S. counties to link small increases in long-term exposure to fine-particle pollution to substantially higher death rates from the coronavirus. Researchers calculated long-term average levels of fine-particle pollution — lung-damaging soot also known as PM2.5 — from 2000 to 2016 and compared it to the more than 7,000 COVID-19 deaths that had occurred through April 4. They found that an increase of only one microgram per cubic meter of PM2.5 was associated with a 15% rise in the coronavirus death rate. Francesca Dominici, a professor of biostatistics at Harvard and coauthor of the study, said her team fast-tracked its research in response to the surge in coronavirus deaths out of a “moral obligation” to help inform the response to the health crisis. The scientists released their manuscript before publication, while it undergoes peer review, and made public their data and code, hoping that it can be used worldwide to help focus research and prevent deaths. Dominici said it was, to her knowledge, the first nationwide study to quantify the relationship between coronavirus death rates and exposure to one of the most widespread types of air pollution. She said she wanted to get the information out as soon as possible because it suggests health officials should pay closer attention to limiting the damage in the worst-polluted communities, including many in California, where people’s health has long suffered from poor air quality. “These are the places where we should really be careful about social distancing measures and they should be even more enforced,” she said. “If COVID infects you, because you have lungs that are already inflamed because you’ve been breathing polluted air for so long, you might experience a worse health outcome than somewhere else.” The findings come as the Trump administration plows ahead with major environmental rollbacks even as the coronavirus crisis widens. In recent weeks the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency finalized a major rollback of auto emission standards and announced a sweeping decision to suspend enforcement on a range of health and environmental protections in response to the pandemic. The Harvard scientists said their results “underscore the importance of continuing to enforce existing air pollution regulations to protect human health both during and after the COVID-19 crisis,” adding that “we anticipate a failure to do so can potentially increase the COVID-19 death toll and hospitalizations, further burdening our healthcare system and drawing resources away from COVID-19 patients.” Environmentalists and health groups said the study provides stark new evidence of the shortsightedness of weakening or delaying pollution safeguards during the pandemic. “These findings illustrate that far too many Americans are facing multiple threats to their lung health at once, and when taken together, these different threats to lung health impacts can amplify each other,” American Lung Assn. President Harold Wimmer said in a statement."We cannot afford to delay cleanup of dangerous air pollution. In fact, it is more important than ever.” Dominici said her research was sparked by observations that many of the same underlying health problems that increase risk of death from COVID-19, such as heart and lung disease, are also made worse by long-term exposure to air pollution. The researchers adjusted for other factors such as income, obesity and smoking that are also likely to increase risk of death. Newsletter Get our free Coronavirus Today newsletter Sign up for the latest news, best stories and what they mean for you, plus answers to your questions. Sign Me Up You may occasionally receive promotional content from the Los Angeles Times. The research team is automating its analysis to rerun as the pandemic continues, Dominici said, “unfortunately, as we expect the number of deaths to increase.” Many scientists have suspected that bad air makes people more susceptible to the coronavirus, based on past research into similar viruses that showed it increases people’s risk of contracting pneumonia and of developing more severe symptoms once they have it. Research into the SARS coronavirus outbreak in 2003 found that infected patients from regions with higher air pollution were 84% more likely to die than those in less polluted areas. The results from the Harvard study are “consistent with the limited data that we have on this family of viruses: that it could be a potentially important determinant of severity of the infection,” said Frank Gilliland, a professor of preventive medicine at USC who was not involved in the research. “We know that PM2.5 increases a spectrum of respiratory diseases ... so it wouldn’t be too surprising that it actually has adverse effects on COVID-19.” Gilliland emphasized the study should be interpreted with caution because it looked at data at the county, rather than the individual level, so the higher death rates in more polluted areas could also reflect other population characteristics unrelated to air pollution. More coronavirus coverage  “This is very early research, but it does suggest that people who live in high-pollution areas really need to follow the recommendations for social distancing and do as much as they can to avoid getting infected and infecting other people,” Gilliland said. Michael Jerrett, a professor of environmental health science at the UCLA Fielding School of Public Health who read the study, called it “a good first look” and “a potentially important finding given that so many Americans and people all over the world live in areas with unhealthy pollution levels.” “The main concern is with the likely huge uncertainty with the findings due to undercounting of the deaths in many places,” Jerrett said. “Because testing capacity is still very low, many deaths that were likely due to COVID have not been counted as such, and this has the potential to bias the results.” The study, he added, “merits replication in other areas, particularly in places like Germany and South Korea, where they have been testing a lot more than we have here.” 
Apr 8, 2020	If you cancel a travel-related reservation because of a pandemic, shouldn’t you get your money back? Easy and logical question to ask, but exquisitely hard to answer in this time of the coronavirus. Or is it? Let’s look at two vacation rental organizations that faced these hard questions as the world was becoming the equivalent of a slow-motion train wreck. Vrbo and Airbnb are different in their intent (or used to be). Vrbo (which grew out of the idea of vacation rental by owner and now is owned by Expedia) helps match vacationers with properties (cabins and cottages, houses and apartments, yurts and villas, including those over water). Those accommodations often are part of the fun of the vacation experience. Airbnb, meanwhile, grew out of the sharing economy as a way for owners to take rooms they weren’t using and turn them into cash. That spare room becomes a guest room for a visitor, who pays for an opportunity to stay somewhere less formal than a hotel and sometimes less expensive. Since its introduction at the outset of the Great Recession, Airbnb has grown to include higher-end properties and has become a powerhouse in the lodging industry. Besides the differences in dwellings they provide, the two companies have taken different paths with their customers as the coronavirus story has unfolded. Here’s a look at what has happened and what it means for the consumer. Airbnb “It’s not like we had a pandemic playbook,” said Chris Lehane, vice president, global policy and communications for Airbnb. But because Airbnb has properties in more than 220 countries and regions, its website noted, it has dealt with hurricanes and cities struck by terrorism, earthquakes and fires. And because it has properties in China, South Korea and Japan, the organization had experience with the novel coronavirus before it began to crest in the United States. The World Health Organization declared the coronavirus a pandemic March 11, and President Trump declared a national emergency March 13. On its website, Airbnb noted that those who were renting between March 14 and May 31 and had booked on or before March 14 would receive a refund. That may have pleased guests, but hosts were not happy about losing income. Airbnb then created a $250-million fund for hosts hurt by the economic collapse and added $10 million more as a relief fund for “super hosts,” who are the A-plus students if this were school. Hosts also have opened their homes to first responders, making as many 100,000 rooms available to them, Lehane said, noting that this initiative has come from hosts. Vrbo When The Times asked for reader feedback on how the pandemic had changed their travel plans, we received half a dozen responses from readers unhappy with experiences on Vrbo. “The vast majority of homeowners and property managers (more than 95%) have provided credits or refunds to travelers even outside their cancellation policies,” said Melanie Fish, a Vrbo representative. “The policy isn’t going to make everyone happy, and that’s hard to take for a travel brand, since we’re in the business of helping families find happy places. “Facing that conundrum, Vrbo’s leaders created a policy as fair as it could possibly be to the travelers who never thought they’d have to cancel outside of the refund window and also fair to the homeowners who can’t financially survive if they refund all their bookings all at once.” Homeowners are encouraged, in a variety of ways, to make refunds. Some took the encouragement to heart; others did not. Matt Kashani of San Diego had back-to-back Vrbo condo rentals on Kauai and very different experiences, he said. The first owner refunded Kashani’s money. The second owner canceled the reservation, he said, and would not offer a refund. Vrbo eventually refunded Kashani’s money for the second stay plus all fees. Janet Carson-Flamini didn’t fare as well. She had a family trip planned to London and had already paid $3,000. “Even with Vrbo’s guidelines to hosts to at least refund 50%, ours has been totally inflexible,” she said in an email. At first, the host said the funds could be applied to a future trip. But, as Carson-Flamini noted, the place was booked through January 2022. “It’s nuts,” she said in an email. It got even nuttier. She later received an email that said the management group had been “forced to file articles of dissolution” and that a manager had been appointed to “liquidate business affairs.” “Final numbers will be settled by 20 April 2020,” the email said. “If a refund is available to you, a check will be mailed by the first of May.” The entity handling the dissolution did not respond to a request for information from The Times. Vrbo also did not respond regarding the dissolution information. Creating a plan before there’s a problem Edward Segal, who specializes in crisis management and is the author of the soon-to-be-released book "Crisis Ahead: 101 Ways to Prepare for and Bounce Back From Disasters, Scandals, and Other Emergencies,” knows that every company will need help at some point. More on coronavirus’ impact on travel  “What we are seeing now underscores the importance for every company and organization, including those in the travel industry, to prepare and know how to properly manage a crisis situation,” he said in an interview. “Whether you are a major player or a bit player, you really need to have a crisis management plan in place, and if you didn’t have it before the pandemic, you certainly need it now. I’ve seen too many companies and organizations driving in the dark without headlights.” Having a path forward ensures that your company is protected, but it is important, he said, “to protect the people that helped make you a success.” Giving credits instead of refunds “does not send a good message,” he said. Companies are “essentially holding their money hostage, getting an interest-free loan.” And, he said, consumers will remember how they have been treated. “If a consumer has been treated badly by anyone in the travel industry, that can influence their opinion of the entire industry going forward.” It’s a piece of advice to remember as companies look ahead to recovery. Have a problem, question or travel dilemma? Write to travel@latimes.com. We regret we cannot answer every inquiry. 
Apr 8, 2020	President Trump describes the coronavirus crisis as a war and labels himself a "wartime president." What's lacking in Washington and many parts of the country, however, is a home-front strategy aimed at winning the war. That's the view of Harvey V. Fineberg, a former president of the Institute of Medicine (now the National Academy of Medicine) and dean of the Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health who is now president of the Palo Alto-based Gordon and Betty Moore Foundation. In an essay for the New England Journal of Medicine, Fineberg mapped out a strategy that could defeat the coronavirus and lead to a reopening of the U.S. economy in 10 weeks -- that is, by early June.  Fineberg's ideas aren't simple shortcuts. They require strong leadership and public sacrifice. "The aim is not to flatten the curve," he wrote, referring to the process of stemming the exponential growth of infections to avert a surge that overwhelms America's hospitals. "The goal is to crush the curve," as China did by imposing a draconian shutdown in Wuhan, the epicenter of its coronavirus emergency. "Most analyses of options and trade-offs assume that both the pandemic and the economic setback must play out over a period of many months for the pandemic and even longer for economic recovery," Fineberg wrote. Instead, he proposes an option that "simultaneously limits fatalities and gets the economy cranking again in a sustainable way. That choice begins with a forceful, focused campaign to eradicate COVID-19 in the United States." Fineberg's specific prescriptions are both uplifting and dispiriting. Uplifting because every element is at least theoretically within America's capabilities, though some would be easier to implement than others, in part because they require strong, consistent national leadership. Dispiriting because we've made almost no nationwide progress on any of them, and some seem well shy of the agenda of the Trump administration. That's certainly true of his Step 1: "Establish unified command." Fineberg isn't talking about an interagency coordinator, but a commander with the authority to "mobilize every civilian and military asset needed to win the war." This individual must not only channel presidential authority, but also muster the confidence of the American public. "All the things we're talking about would have clear lines of responsibility, timeline of execution and you'd get the job done as you would in a real war," Fineberg told me. "Even Lincoln had to find his Gen. Grant before he could win the Civil War," Fineberg said. Unfortunately, Trump is moving in the opposite direction. His management approach to the coronavirus crisis is to invest several officials with responsibility, serially and sometimes all at once. The job of managing the virus response has been held successively by Health and Human Services Secretary Alex Azar, Vice President Mike Pence and Trump's son-in-law, Jared Kushner. But turf battles have been raging. Over the weekend, Trump trade advisor Peter Navarro reportedly confronted infectious disease expert Dr. Anthony Fauci over the latter's warnings that there is no scientific support for the efficacy of Trump's favorite virus remedy, chloroquine. Several of Fineberg's suggestions correspond to the well-understood imperatives for dealing with any pandemic, but underscore the specific failings of the U.S. response. "The nation needs to gear up to perform millions of diagnostic tests" by the middle of this month, he advised, with testing of everyone with symptoms. "Without diagnostic tests, we cannot trace the scope of the outbreak." If the U.S. reaches that goal, it will be by only a hair. The White House asserted that about 1.8 million tests had been performed by Monday, with about 100,000 more being done each day. But on a per capita basis, that's still well behind South Korea and Germany, which have had far more success tracking the outbreak. Fineberg also points to the necessity of preparing hospitals for a surge in severely ill patients and providing ample supplies of personal protective equipment for every health worker "caring for patients and testing for infection.... We wouldn't send soldiers into battle without ballistic vests; health workers on the front lines of this war deserve no less." The spectacle of healthcare workers gowned in repurposed plastic trash bags and instructed about how to sterilize single-use masks for reuse all but defines the collapse of America's healthcare infrastructure in the face of COVID-19. Fineberg's most complicated suggestion is to differentiate the population into five groups and treat them accordingly: those known to be infected, those presumed infected (i.e., with symptoms but negative tests), those who have been exposed, those not known to have been exposed or infected, and those who have recovered and therefore are presumed to be immune. Among the first four groups, those with severe disease or who are at high risk should be hospitalized. Low-risk patients or those with mild forms of the disease should be cared for in infirmaries, in empty conventions centers or other sequestered locations, so they can't infect family members. Others who have been exposed should be quarantined in special centers for 14 days. That would allow for a staged process of reopening the economy. "If we implement radical testing strategies," Fineberg told me, "we will, for example, know who has had the infection and now has antibodies. Fineberg's approach resembles one being proposed by other experts. Former Food and Drug Administration Commissioners Scott Gottlieb and Mark McClellan, who both served under Republican presidents -- Trump and George W. Bush, respectively -- have offered a plan for gradual reopening of the economy by creating a regime of thorough testing and disease surveillance. Any such intrusive system would require credible leadership to "inspire and mobilize the public," Fineberg wrote. That leadership has emerged in some states and communities -- "we're getting it from [California Gov. Gavin] Newsom, [New York Gov. Andrew] Cuomo, and Mayor London Breed here in San Francisco," he told me. But not from Trump. "If you listen to the president, he sounds ambivalent," Fineberg said. "On the one hand, he is clearly accepting the severity of the threat, and speaks to the public very soberly. Yet in the same hour he will revert to this notion that 'you can't let the cure be worse than the disease.' "He's expressing the duality all of us feel: We want to get the economy working and we want to get rid of this virus. The case I'm making is that it's not a choice of one or the other. It's about a smart strategy to get us through both fronts of this war, the economic front and the biologic front." -- Keep up to date with Michael Hiltzik. Follow @hiltzikm on Twitter, see his Facebook page or email michael.hiltzik@latimes.com.
Apr 8, 2020	South Korea may be far ahead of the curve in containing the novel coronavirus, so much so that the 10-team Korean Baseball Organization is playing intrasquad games with an eye toward an early May start to the season. But the foundation on which the KBO hopes to build a season seems as unstable as it does in the U.S. "I don't know when the season will start, because one outbreak, and the KBO could be shut down," former Angels catcher Hank Conger said by phone Tuesday from Busan, South Korea, where the Huntington Beach native is in his first season as catching instructor for the KBO's Lotte Giants.  "They're so cautious with everything that I truly believe if one player on one team gets it, they could delay it for another month, and everything just falls apart. You know how easily it can spread inside a clubhouse." That KBO teams are on the field while every U.S. sports league is shut down is a testament to South Korea's successful efforts -- at least, compared with most other countries -- to mitigate the impact of COVID-19. Laboratories began preparing in February for the possibility of widespread transmissions. By early March, an average of 12,000 patients a day were tested, many at free, same-day mobile testing stations and the 50 or so drive-through clinics. "The biggest thing here, is when the virus broke out, the whole country put a pretty strict lockdown on everything," Conger said. "The government issues a daily text message to tell people that, 'Hey, there's an outbreak here, an outbreak there, try to stay inside as much as possible.' They were super proactive about it." The Giants were in Australia for spring training when the pandemic broke out in South Korea, delaying the team's return by two weeks, until mid-March. By then, all major public facilities were closed. Protective face masks were mandatory as Conger learned when he tried to open a bank account. "I forgot my mask because I came straight from the field with my translator," said Conger, who played with the Angels from 2010 to 2014. "I walked in, and everyone literally was staring at me, the workers, the people who were waiting in line for a bank teller. "One of the ladies came up and told my translator, 'Hey, I'm sorry but we're pretty strict right now, and he needs to wear a mask if he wants to enter the building.' So I had to walk a half mile back to the baseball field to get my mask." The start of the 144-game KBO season, originally scheduled for March 28, has been pushed back several times. The plan now is to begin a six-game exhibition season April 21 and the regular season in early May. The Giants, whose roster includes former major league pitchers Dan Straily and Adrian Sampson, have been practicing six days a week and playing three or four intrasquad games, which are streamed on YouTube. As they enter 26,800-seat, open-air Sajik Baseball Stadium, players and team employees walk through an infrared camera that measures body temperature. Players wore face masks for the first week, but most scrapped them in late March. "We were trying to be super cautious about everything, but a lot of guys were having a tough time breathing," Conger said. "It's a distraction, especially when you're at the plate and you can feel your breath bouncing back onto your face." KBO officials are discussing the possibility of opening the season without fans. Or they could limit the number of fans so they can socially distance themselves from one another. The Giants have one of the most passionate followings in the KBO, where fans often sing and chant, but Conger can't imagine folks packing the stadium anytime soon. "Even with temperature checks, that's a lot of people being right next to each other," said Conger, whose parents were born in Korea. "Especially with the Korean culture, how everyone's very cautious." There hasn't been a positive COVID-19 case yet among KBO players or employees, but each step toward the season and a return to something resembling normality still seems precarious. The start of the Nippon Professional Baseball season in Japan, scheduled for April 24, is on hold after three players tested positive. Could the KBO suffer the same fate? "At that point, do you have to test all the other players?" Conger said. "That's the biggest scare on everyone's mind now, if a player or a coach gets it. That's when I think a lot of stuff might fall apart." Caption: PHOTO: FORMER ANGELS catcher Hank Conger is an instructor with the KBO's Lotte Giants. PHOTOGRAPHER:Lisa Blumenfeld Getty Images
Apr 7, 2020	President Trump describes the coronavirus crisis as a war and labels himself a “wartime president.” What’s lacking in Washington and many parts of the country, however, is a home-front strategy aimed at winning the war. That’s the view of Harvey V. Fineberg, a former president of the Institute of Medicine (now the National Academy of Medicine) and dean of the Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health who is now president of the Palo Alto, Calif.-based Gordon and Betty Moore Foundation. In a recent essay for the New England Journal of Medicine, Fineberg mapped out a strategy that could defeat the novel coronavirus and lead to a reopening of the U.S. economy in 10 weeks — that is, by early June. All the things we’re talking about would have clear lines of responsibility, timeline of execution and you’d get the job done as you would in a real war. Dr. Harvey Fineberg Fineberg’s ideas aren’t simple shortcuts. They require strong leadership and public sacrifice. “The aim is not to flatten the curve,” he wrote, referring to the process of stemming the exponential growth of infections to avert a surge that overwhelms America’s hospitals. “The goal is to crush the curve,” as China did by imposing a draconian shutdown in Wuhan, the epicenter of its coronavirus emergency. “Most analyses of options and trade-offs assume that both the pandemic and the economic setback must play out over a period of many months for the pandemic and even longer for economic recovery,” Fineberg wrote. Instead, he proposes an option that “simultaneously limits fatalities and gets the economy cranking again in a sustainable way. That choice begins with a forceful, focused campaign to eradicate COVID-19 in the United States.” Fineberg’s specific prescriptions are both uplifting and dispiriting. Uplifting because every element is at least theoretically within America’s capabilities, though some would be easier to implement than others, in part because they require strong, consistent national leadership. Dispiriting because we’ve made almost no nationwide progress on any of them, and some seem well shy of the agenda of the Trump administration. That’s certainly true of his Step 1: “Establish unified command.” Fineberg isn’t talking about an interagency coordinator, but a commander with the authority to “mobilize every civilian and military asset needed to win the war.” This individual must not only channel presidential authority, but muster the confidence of the American public for the task. “All the things we’re talking about would have clear lines of responsibility, timeline of execution and you’d get the job done as you would in a real war,” Fineberg told me. “Even Lincoln had to find his Gen. Grant before he could win the Civil War,” Fineberg says. “I think the president would surprise his critics if he took this step. It’s still timely.” (Historical note: Lincoln didn’t appoint Ulysses S. Grant to command the Union Army until March 1864, three years after the war began. Grant brought the war to an end just over one year later.) Unfortunately, Trump is moving in the opposite direction. His management approach to the coronavirus crisis is to invest several officials with responsibility, serially and sometimes all at once. The job of managing the virus response has been held successively by Health and Human Services Secretary Alex Azar, Vice President Mike Pence and Trump’s son-in-law Jared Kushner. But turf battles have been raging. Over the weekend, Trump trade advisor Peter Navarro reportedly confronted infectious disease expert Anthony Fauci over the latter’s warnings that there is no scientific support for the efficacy of Trump’s favorite virus remedy, chloroquine. This battle between Navarro’s total lack of expertise and Fauci’s decades of experience underscores the diffusion of authority at the top of the federal government. Several of Fineberg’s suggestions correspond to the well-understood imperatives for dealing with any pandemic, but underscore the specific failings of the U.S. response. “The nation needs to gear up to perform millions of diagnostic tests” by the middle of this month, he advised, with testing of everyone with symptoms. “Without diagnostic tests, we cannot trace the scope of the outbreak.” If the U.S. reaches that goal, it will be by only a hair. The White House asserted that about 1.8 million tests had been performed by Monday, with about 100,000 more being done each day. But on a per-capita basis, that’s still well behind South Korea and Germany, which have had far more success tracking the outbreak. Fineberg also points to the necessity of preparing hospitals for a surge in severely ill patients and providing ample supplies of personal protective equipment for every health worker “caring for patients and testing for infection. ... We wouldn’t send soldiers into battle without ballistic vests; health workers on the front lines of this war deserve no less.” The spectacle of healthcare workers gowned in repurposed plastic trash bags and instructed about how to sterilize single-use masks for reuse all but defines the collapse of America’s healthcare infrastructure in the face of COVID-19. A report just issued by the inspector general of Health and Human Services documented the scale of this failure. It cited hospitals’ complaints of severe shortages of testing supplies, long waits for results, widespread shortages of protective equipment and blockages in the supply chains for replenishment, and conflicting guidance from government agencies on which elective procedures to delay, use of PPE and getting supplies from the national stockpile. Typically, Trump dismissed the report, asserting untruthfully that it was prepared by Obama appointees; in fact the report was supervised by a career official who has worked for the government through two Democratic and two Republican administrations, including Trump’s. Fineberg’s most complicated suggestion is to differentiate the population into five groups and treat them accordingly: those known to be infected, those presumed infected (i.e., with symptoms but negative tests), those who have been exposed, those not known to have been exposed or infected, and those who have recovered and therefore are presumed to be immune. Among the first four groups, those with severe disease or who are at high risk should be hospitalized. Low-risk patients or those with mild forms of the disease should be cared for in infirmaries in empty conventions centers or other sequestered locations, so they can’t infect family members. Others who have been exposed should be quarantined in special centers for 14 days. That would allow for a staged process of reopening the economy. “If we implement radical testing strategies,” Fineberg told me, “we will, for example, know who has had the infection and now has antibodies. “We don’t know for sure how large the group of asymptomatics are, but it’s possible that we could try in selected and controlled ways to get things moving again in select communities if we do it intelligently,” remaining on the lookout for any recurrence of the infection and being ready to damp down at a moment’s notice when it looks like it could reoccur. Fineberg’s approach resembles one being proposed by other experts. Former Food and Drug Administration commissioners Scott Gottlieb and Mark McClennan, who both served under Republican presidents — Trump and George W. Bush, respectively — have offered a plan for gradual reopening of the economy by creating a regime of thorough testing and disease surveillance. “There is no time to lose,” they wrote, according to Politico. “Building these capabilities now will accelerate our ability to assure the public’s safety — the foundation for a sustainable and secure approach to reopening our communities.” Any such intrusive system would require credible leadership to “inspire and mobilize the public,” Fineberg wrote. That leadership has emerged in some states and communities — “we’re getting it from [California Gov. Gavin] Newsom, [New York Gov. Andrew] Cuomo, and Mayor London Breed here in San Francisco,” he told me. But not from Trump. “If you listen to the president, he sounds ambivalent,” Fineberg says. “On the one hand, he is clearly accepting the severity of the threat, and speaks to the public very soberly. Yet in the same hour he will revert to this notion that ‘you can’t let the cure be worse than the disease.’ “He’s expressing the duality all of us feel: We want to get the economy working and we want to get rid of this virus. The case I’m making is that it’s not a choice of one or the other. It’s about a smart strategy to get us through both fronts of this war, the economic front and the biologic front.” 
Apr 7, 2020	The idea that the Korean Baseball Organization can provide a path for Major League Baseball in navigating the tricky logistics of jump-starting a season would have more merit if the league had firm footing. South Korea may be far ahead of the curve in containing the novel coronavirus, so much so that the 10-team KBO is currently playing intrasquad games with an eye toward an early May start to the season. But the foundation on which the KBO hopes to build a season seems as unstable as it does in the U.S. “I don’t know when the season will start, because one outbreak, and the KBO could be shut down,” former Angels catcher Hank Conger said by phone Tuesday from Busan, South Korea, where the Huntington Beach native is in his first season as catching instructor for the KBO’s Lotte Giants. “They’re so cautious with everything that I truly believe if one player on one team gets it, they could delay it for another month, and everything just falls apart. You know how easily it can spread inside a clubhouse.” That KBO teams are on the field while every U.S. sports league is shut down is a testament to South Korea’s successful efforts — at least, compared to most other countries — to mitigate the impact of COVID-19. A network of laboratories in the country began preparing in February for the possibility of widespread transmissions. By early March, an average of 12,000 patients were tested a day, many at free, same-day mobile testing stations and the 50 or so drive-through clinics set up across the country. As of Tuesday, South Korea had confirmed more than 10,000 coronavirus patients and 192 deaths after having tested more than 350,000 people in two months. Early detection, isolation and treatment have translated into a mortality rate of less than 1%, compared with more than 3% worldwide. The country, with a population of 51 million, reported fewer than 50 new coronavirus cases Sunday and Monday, the lowest daily upticks since infections began surging Feb. 21. At the peak, Feb. 29, more than 900 new cases were reported in one day. In the U.S., with more than six times the population of South Korea, close to 400,000 infections have been reported and nearly 13,000 people have died as of Tuesday. “The biggest thing here, is when the virus broke out, the whole country put a pretty strict lock-down on everything,” Conger said. “The government issues a daily text message to tell people that, ‘Hey, there’s an outbreak here, an outbreak there, try to stay inside as much as possible.’ They were super proactive about it.” The Giants were in Australia for spring training when the pandemic broke out in South Korea, delaying the team’s return by two weeks, until mid-March. By then, all major public facilities, including schools and gyms, were closed. People were advised to avoid public gatherings. Strict social distancing measures were put in place. Protective face masks were mandatory as Conger learned when he tried to open a Korean bank account. “I forgot my mask because I came straight from the field with my translator,” said Conger, who played with the Angels from 2010-2014 and retired after 2016. “I walked in, and everyone literally was staring at me, the workers, the people who were waiting in line for a bank teller. “One of the ladies came up and told my translator, ‘Hey, I’m sorry but we’re pretty strict right now, and he needs to wear a mask if he wants to enter the building.’ So I had to walk a half mile back to the baseball field to get my mask.” The start of the 144-game KBO season, originally scheduled for March 28, has been pushed back several times. The plan now is to begin a six-game exhibition season April 21 and the regular season in early May. The Giants, whose roster includes two former major league pitchers — Dan Straily and Adrian Sampson — have been practicing six days a week and playing three or four intrasquad games, which are streamed on YouTube. As they enter 26,800-seat, open-air Sajik Baseball Stadium, players and team employees walk through an infrared camera that measures body temperature. When a Giants player had a slight fever March 24, practice was canceled and the rest of the team was sent home to self-isolate. An immediate test on the player for COVID-19 was negative. Players and coaches wore face masks for the first week of workouts and games, but most scrapped them in late-March. “We were trying to be super cautious about everything, but a lot of guys were having a tough time breathing,” Conger said. “It’s a distraction, especially when you’re at the plate and you can feel your breath bouncing back onto your face.” KBO officials are discussing the possibility of opening the season without fans. Or they could limit the number of fans so they can socially distance themselves from one another. The Giants have one of the most passionate followings in the KBO, where fans often sing and chant throughout games, but Conger can’t imagine folks from this port city of 3.5 million packing the stadium anytime soon. “Even with temperature checks, that’s a lot of people being right next to each other,” said Conger, whose parents were born in Korea. “Especially with the Korean culture, how everyone’s very cautious.” There hasn’t been a positive COVID-19 case yet among KBO players or employees, but each step toward the season and a return to something resembling normalcy still seems precarious. The start of the Nippon Professional Baseball season in Japan, scheduled for April 24, is now on hold after three players on the Hanshin Tigers tested positive. Could the KBO suffer the same fate with a positive test? “At that point, do you have to test all the other players?” Conger said. “Because you don’t really know how long that guy had it. That’s the biggest scare on everyone’s mind now, if a player or a coach gets it. That’s when I think a lot of stuff might fall apart.” 
Apr 5, 2020	If the country is to be believed, North Korea is one of maybe a dozen nations not yet invaded by a deadly virus that has spread across the globe from remote islands in the South Pacific to outposts nestled high in the Pyrenees or the Greater Himalayas. North Korea's assertion would mean that despite sharing a nearly 900-mile border with China, one tens of thousands have crossed to escape or navigated as part of a robust smuggling trade, the isolated nation has managed to block a mercurial virus that has upended richer and more powerful countries. The U.S., its longtime existential foe, has more than a quarter of a million confirmed cases of the coronavirus. China, its erstwhile backer and most important trading partner, has more than 80,000.  North Korea's official coronavirus count is zero. The tightly controlled country has boasted to its people that international organizations and public health experts were marveling at its success in keeping the virus at bay. As recently as last week, a state health official rebuffed suspicions that the country was being less than forthcoming about its coronavirus situation, telling foreign reporters in Pyongyang that not a single person had come down with COVID-19 thus far. The lack of free media and scant independent monitoring make it nearly impossible to vet the official account. Yet many outside observers and officials have questioned the country's claim, alleging the government of Kim Jong Un may be suppressing information or willfully blind to potential local outbreaks because it lacks the capacity to conduct widespread diagnostic testing. With a poorly equipped medical system ravaged by sanctions in recent years, the country has struggled with a population susceptible to infection, widespread malnutrition and inadequate sanitation. An outbreak of the coronavirus may be an impending disaster, former North Korean health professionals and outside experts say. "You can't trust North Korean statistics," said Choi Jung-hun, who worked for a decade as a physician in North Korea before escaping in 2011. "The epidemic really plainly shows the nature of the North Korean regime. ... The regime's face saving is more important than citizens' health or life." In fact, North Korea was one of the first countries in the world to take swift action as the coronavirus began spreading in China. It closed its borders to foreign tourists in January, around the same time China imposed travel restrictions in Wuhan. It imposed strict, lengthy quarantines on foreign diplomats and canceled virtually all international flights. More than 10,000 of its citizens were placed under isolation or travel restrictions as measures against the virus. Nagi Shafik, a public health advisor and a former project manager for the World Health Organization in North Korea, said the early drastic steps indicated how cognizant the government was of the threat that an epidemic could pose to its stability. "They don't have medicine," he said. "They don't have reagents to diagnose cases. They don't have protective equipment. If I were them, I would do the same thing, this is the only thing I have. To close borders with China, this is the lifeline for them. It shows you how desperate they were." But as much as North Korea's authoritarian system is able to impose severe restrictions on its citizens' movements, the virus is likely to make it into the country at some point if it hasn't already, he said. "Sooner or later something will spill over," said Shafik, who last visited the country in 2019 to consult on a humanitarian mission. "Whatever you try, everywhere in the world, some people go through the borders without being noticed." Choi, the doctor who now works as a research professor at South Korea's Korea University, said even though North Korea was plagued with infectious diseases, its capacity to conduct laboratory tests to diagnose them was minimal during his years of working there. When an illness began spreading in the country's northern region around 2006, officials mistook it for scarlet fever for more than two months before finding out that it was, in fact, measles, he recalled. In the absence of testing, patients would die from symptoms matching an infectious disease without doctors ever getting confirmation of what the person was sick with, according to Choi. Many patients simply turned to antibiotics across the board, creating drug-resistant strains of tuberculosis or typhus, he said. "It's not like there's proper treatment even if people are diagnosed," Choi said. "The basic infrastructure like electricity and water isn't a guarantee even at medical clinics. Medical supplies and equipment are antiquated." In mid-February, North Korea quietly reached out to international organizations and nonprofits requesting assistance such as diagnostic test kits, protective gear and equipment, including ventilators and oxygenators. Russia in late February sent 1,500 coronavirus test kits to North Korea at its request, according to the Russian Foreign Ministry. Groups including Doctors Without Borders, International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent and the World Health Organization obtained humanitarian exemptions from the U.N. committee overseeing sanctions to send in coronavirus-related relief supplies. Since some of the outside supplies have arrived, the country has been conducting about 60 tests a day for the coronavirus, having completed about 1,000 as of last week, according to a person familiar with humanitarian efforts in North Korea who asked not to be named so as not to jeopardize their work in the country. That's a far cry from the widespread testing that's being done in places like South Korea -- which has tested more than 420,000 as of last week -- to get a full picture of how the virus is spreading. Even more dire than the virus' potential impact might be the economic repercussions of sealing the border. Many North Koreans heavily rely on a network of unofficial markets, much of which is supplied by trade from China. For months before the coronavirus outbreak, many working on humanitarian assistance to North Korea had warned of food shortages in the country exacerbated by drought and international sanctions imposed in response to its weapons tests. "This was a massive decision, with huge implications not just for the people but for the state economy," said Kee B. Park, a consultant for the WHO and lecturer at Harvard Medical School who frequently travels to North Korea. "You might think it's overreacting in a way, but they really understand the idea of breaking the transmission chain." Caption: PHOTO: A FACTORY WORKER in Pyongyang makes protective masks in February. North Korea says not a single person in the country has been infected with the coronavirus despite a nearly 900-mile border with China. PHOTOGRAPHER:Kim Won-Jin AFP/Getty Images
Apr 4, 2020	If the country is to be believed, North Korea is one of maybe a dozen nations not yet invaded by a deadly virus that has spread across the globe from remote islands in the South Pacific to outposts nestled high in the Pyrenees or the Greater Himalayas. North Korea’s assertion would mean that despite sharing a nearly 900-mile border with China, one tens of thousands have crossed to escape or navigated as part of a robust smuggling trade, the isolated nation has managed to block a mercurial virus that has upended richer and more powerful countries. The U.S., its longtime existential foe, has more than a quarter of a million confirmed cases of the coronavirus. China, its erstwhile backer and most important trading partner, has more than 80,000. North Korea’s official coronavirus count is zero. The tightly controlled country has boasted to its people that international organizations and public health experts were marveling at its success in keeping the virus at bay. As recently as this week, a state health official rebuffed suspicions that the country was being less than forthcoming about its coronavirus situation, telling foreign reporters in Pyongyang that not a single person had come down with COVID-19 thus far. The lack of free media and scant independent monitoring make it nearly impossible to vet the official account. Yet many outside observers and officials have questioned the country’s claim, alleging the regime of Kim Jong Un may be suppressing information or willfully blind to potential local outbreaks because it lacks the capacity to conduct widespread diagnostic testing. With a poorly equipped medical system ravaged by sanctions in recent years, the country has struggled with a population susceptible to infection, widespread malnutrition and inadequate sanitation. An outbreak of the coronavirus may be an impending disaster, former North Korean health professionals and outside experts say. “You can’t trust North Korean statistics,” said Choi Jung-hun, who worked for a decade as a physician in North Korea before escaping in 2011. “The epidemic really plainly shows the nature of the North Korean regime. ... The regime’s face saving is more important than citizens’ health or life.” In fact, North Korea was one of the first countries in the world to take swift action as the coronavirus began spreading in China. It closed its borders to foreign tourists in January, around the same time China imposed travel restrictions in Wuhan. It imposed strict, lengthy quarantines on foreign diplomats and canceled virtually all international flights. More than 10,000 of its citizens were placed under isolation or travel restrictions as measures against the virus. Nagi Shafik, a public health advisor and a former project manager for the World Health Organization in North Korea, said the early drastic steps indicated how cognizant the government was of the threat that an epidemic could pose to its stability. “They don’t have medicine,” he said. “They don’t have reagents to diagnose cases. They don’t have protective equipment. If I were them, I would do the same thing, this is the only thing I have. To close borders with China, this is the lifeline for them. It shows you how desperate they were.” But as much as North Korea’s authoritarian system is able to impose severe restrictions on its citizens’ movements, the virus is likely to make it into the country at some point if it hasn’t already, he said. “Sooner or later something will spill over,” said Shafik, who last visited the country in 2019 to consult on a humanitarian mission. “Whatever you try, everywhere in the world, some people go through the borders without being noticed.” Choi, the North Korean doctor who now works as a research professor at South Korea’s Korea University, said even though North Korea was plagued with infectious diseases, its capacity to conduct laboratory tests to diagnose them was minimal during his years of working there. When an illness began spreading in the country’s northern region around 2006, officials mistook it for scarlet fever for more than two months before finding out that it was, in fact, measles, he recalled. In the absence of testing, patients would die from symptoms matching an infectious disease without doctors ever getting confirmation of what the person was sick with, according to Choi. Many patients simply turned to antibiotics across the board, creating drug-resistant strains of tuberculosis or typhus, he said. “It’s not like there’s proper treatment even if people are diagnosed,” Choi said. “The basic infrastructure like electricity and water isn’t a guarantee even at medical clinics. Medical supplies and equipment are antiquated.” In mid-February, North Korea quietly reached out to international organizations and nonprofits requesting assistance such as diagnostic test kits, protective gear and equipment, including ventilators and oxygenators. Russia in late February sent 1,500 coronavirus test kits to North Korea at its request, according to the Russian Foreign Ministry. Groups including Médecins Sans Frontières, International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent and the World Health Organization obtained humanitarian exemptions from the U.N. committee overseeing sanctions to send in coronavirus-related relief supplies. Since some of the outside supplies have arrived, the country has been conducting about 60 tests a day for the coronavirus, having completed about 1,000 as of this week, according to a person familiar with humanitarian efforts in North Korea who asked not to be named so as not to jeopardize their work in the country. That’s a far cry from the widespread testing that’s being done in places like South Korea — which has tested more than 420,000 as of this week — to get a full picture on how the virus is spreading. Even more dire than the virus’ potential impact might be the economic repercussions of sealing the border. Many North Koreans heavily rely on a network of unofficial markets, much of which is supplied by trade from China. For months before the coronavirus outbreak, many working on humanitarian assistance to North Korea had warned of food shortages in the country exacerbated by drought and international sanctions imposed in response to its weapons tests. “This was a massive decision, with huge implications not just for the people but for the state economy,” said Kee B. Park, a consultant for the WHO and lecturer at Harvard Medical School who frequently travels to North Korea. “You might think it’s overreacting in a way, but they really understand the idea of breaking the transmission chain.”
Apr 3, 2020	Amid the confusion from Washington, D.C., to Sacramento and parts in between, one thing has become abundantly clear in the era of COVID-19: The mask is having a moment. On Thursday, President Trump announced that the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention would soon issue new guidelines, softening an earlier anti-mask stance. This came 33 days after the U.S. surgeon general tweeted that masks “are NOT effective in preventing general public from catching #Coronavirus.” Gov. Gavin Newsom hewed to a similar path at a noon coronavirus briefing. He stopped short of telling Californians that they have to wear face coverings whenever they leave their homes, but he didn’t discourage use of the increasingly ubiquitous masks either. “We believe, and we put out guidelines, that if individuals want to have face coverings, that that is a good thing and a preferable thing,” Newsom said, “in addition to the physical distancing and the stay-at-home order.” Once the protective head gear of choice for Asian immigrants and tourists, masks have popped up on shoppers at Walmart and Costco, on Justin Bieber and Selena Gomez, on the girl next door and maybe even your grandparents. BuzzFeed.com and the New York Times Style section have published celebrity selfie galleries. Masks are silencing sneezes from coast to coast. The science is far from settled about the level of protection they provide. Still, concerned citizens are churning out DIY masks in retirement communities, suburban ranch houses and artist studios, using patterns found online or shared via email. They are giving their creations to friends and family members, donating them to first responders and helping fill an enormous protective equipment gap in the U.S. healthcare system. And when the coronavirus finally departs our shores, the pandemic could leave behind a permanent reminder: the mask as an everyday accessory of American life. “We may be moving gently at this point toward the Asian culture where it’s more a usual thing to wear masks to prevent the transmission of viruses,” said Dr. William Schaffner, professor of preventive medicine and infectious diseases at Vanderbilt University. Even after the coronavirus crisis ends, “it wouldn’t surprise me if we don’t encourage this some in the near term.” The problem, of course, is where to find them. The president may be encouraging the public to wear masks, but he hasn’t provided any shopping guides. They are a rare and precious commodity. And that’s where Bibi Sheonarine comes in. Three days before the first COVID-19 death was reported in California, the 66-year-old real estate broker decided to start making cloth masks from her Upland home. First, she measured her face — ear to ear, nose to lower chin. Then she measured her husband’s face. He’s 73. She cut rectangles out of a bolt of cream-colored corduroy that she’d planned to use to make clothes for war-ravaged Syrians. She stitched elastic bands to the ends — and voila. The mask was done. “It took me 10 minutes,” she said. “I made a simple video tutorial so others could make them, even a child.” By March 27, she’d made 459 of them. Some went to local hospitals, others to family members in New York. And she realized that just maybe she and her neighbors could make a dent in the mask shortage. So she took to Facebook and Nextdoor, recruiting other crafty volunteers. Nearly a week has passed, and more than 70 seamstresses in the Upland area have pitched in, cutting fabric or sewing. Sheonarine placed a bin filled with sewing kits on her porch; each contains instructions and enough fabric and elastic bands to make 25 masks. Eager mask-makers pick them up every day. Sheonarine spends 20 hours or so each day on this potentially lifesaving project. She created a spreadsheet to organize the corps of volunteers, which grows in number every day. Recently a woman texted that her husband could cut the fabric for her with a laser, which would speed the process considerably. “I was elated,” she said. “I wrote to her: ‘Laser, laser laser! Come over now!’” The project has taken over Sheonarine’s house, in addition to her daily life. Her dining room is filled with rolls of yarn and fabric. An iron rests on the table. She figures she has about 1,000 yards of fabric at home, some printed with flowers, others with bears and stripes. “I feel like a mini-Amazon,” she said. “Filling orders, picking up orders. But I feel good. People need them.” Maybe they do. Maybe they don’t. It depends on who those people are, where they are, what kind of masks they plan to use and what they hope those masks will do. Summer Johnson McGee, dean of the University of New Haven’s School of Health Sciences, said there is still a lack of research analyzing the effectiveness of using masks to slow the spread of the coronavirus. But she doesn’t see how wearing one can hurt. “What do we have to lose?” she said. “Masks may prevent some transmission, which is better than not trying to prevent transmission at all.” McGee said the initial reluctance among public health officials to push the general public to wear masks stemmed from wanting to make sure there were enough for healthcare workers, who are at the greatest risk of being infected by the virus. But recent studies suggest that at least 12% to 20% of people who test positive for COVID-19 are asymptomatic and may be spreading the virus without realizing it. “Given that we may not know who is carrying the virus and spreading it, we need to try to do whatever we can to prevent spread, including the use of cloth masks,” McGee said. Chunhuei Chi, director of the Center for Global Health at Oregon State University, said government leaders who have called for people to don masks when leaving their homes may also have been influenced by the slow growth of coronavirus infections in East Asian places such as Taiwan, Japan, South Korea and Singapore, where wearing masks is common. “They got their first cases much earlier than Europe and the U.S., but if you look at the total number of cases, they have been growing very slowly,” Chi said. “Wearing masks is one way that has allowed them to slow the number of cases.” Chi said there is a lot of discussion among public health researchers as to why even homemade and surgical masks, which are not fine enough to filter out virus particles, are preventing the spread of the disease. Masks can help protect a healthy person from getting infected by blocking droplets containing the virus from entering the mucus membranes in the mouth or nose. They can also prevent asymptomatic people from passing on the virus unknowingly. More coronavirus coverage  “I highly recommend that people wear makeshift masks,” Chi said. “If you have a surgical mask, wear it, but even a cotton mask is very adequate for people to use.” Health officials in the San Francisco Bay Area take that viewpoint to heart. On Thursday, the San Mateo County Joint Information Center recommended that residents of the region “cover their nose and mouth with cloth when leaving home for essential travel such as doctor appointments, grocery shopping or pharmacy visits.” Still, Vanderbilt’s Schaffner has a rather large caveat. His wife found an old supply of masks they’d bought years ago during a previous viral epidemic. They’re sharing those with family members and using them when they go to the grocery store. If he didn’t have one, he said, he’d probably use a scarf. “What’s the downside to asking people to put on masks or wrap their faces with a shawl?” he asked. “It may make some people think they’re bulletproof. Some bozo out there will say, ‘Let’s put on our bandannas and have a poker party tonight.’ “That’s what we call, in my family, ‘d-u-m dumb,’” he said. Times staff writers Rong-Gong Lin II, Taryn Luna and David Lauter contributed to this report.
Apr 3, 2020	On Jan. 20, South Korea and the United States both reported their first confirmed cases of the novel coronavirus. While President Moon Jae-in of South Korea acted with ingenuity, dispatch and courage, President Trump delayed, denied and lied. As of Wednesday night, South Korea reported 169 total deaths, and the numbers seem to be leveling off.  You know where this goes. As of Wednesday night, the U.S. reported more than 5,000 deaths, with a potentially terrifying surge in fatalities still to come. And thus we get Trump's latest wretched failure to lead. But this time he seems to have been animated by more than his addled psyche. A work of sophistry by the libertarian legal professor Richard A. Epstein, which was widely circulated by Trumpites, helped to justify the administration's equivocation and denial. The federal government's response to the virus, in other words, has been driven by the usual Trumpworld up-is-down madness. Only this time it comes with a luxe academic sheen. According to the Washington Post, Trumpites began sharing "Coronavirus Perspective," Epstein's first blog post on the matter, just over two weeks ago, when it appeared on the website of the conservative Hoover Institution, where Epstein is a senior fellow. Epstein's first post -- along with two others, "Coronavirus Overreaction" and "The Grim Cost of Lockdowns"-- evidently told Trumpites what they wanted to hear: That the virus had been overhyped by liberals trying to crush personal freedoms. "Progressives think they can run everyone's lives through central planning," he groused in the second post, with all the brio of a new reader of "Atlas Shrugged." He also claimed it would kill only the weak and elderly people the economy could afford to lose. And that the flu-like bug would soon lose steam. But Epstein also got truly rash, projecting that in the U.S. the coronavirus would cause only 500 deaths. With little explanation, and just as reality was proving him wrong, he revised his tally to 5,000. Wrong again. Dr. Anthony Fauci, director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, projects the total at 100,000 and 240,000, if we're lucky. Epstein described that first faulty calculation as "a public relations gaffe." A lot of Epstein's factual assertions were challenged by journalist Isaac Chotiner, citing various virus and infectious disease experts, in a Q&A in the New Yorker, and also by the data scientist Rex Douglass, whose methodical dismantling of Epstein's arguments went online Monday. Douglass, of the Center for Peace and Security Studies at UC San Diego, faults Epstein not just for errors but for intellectual dishonesty: cherry-picking data, avoiding specificity, using doublespeak, and showing indifference to the truth. And yet Trump's recent helter-skelter propaganda has regularly contained echoes of Epstein's bad faith. When Trump condemned a disciplined stay-at-home response to the virus as "overreaction," and wanted Americans to get back to business as usual by April 12 -- those moves could have been derived straight from Epstein's work. I hope Epstein's posts go down in history in much the same way as another landmark of pseudoscience: The 1998 paper in the august medical journal Lancet by Andrew Wakefield. This is the article that falsely connected vaccinations with developmental disorders in children. Wakefield's paper, since retracted by the Lancet, gave ballast to the dangerous anti-vaccination movement, which contributed to a resurgence of measles; Epstein's work seems to have informed at least some of the Trump's administration's fateful coronavirus missteps, adding to the pandemic's dangers and increasing the toll of sickness and death. And yet Epstein calls an inexcusable mistake a public relations gaffe. And there's the crux. Why did a legal scholar at a solemn think tank dish out something he would later excuse as PR? What about the accuracy, honesty and the consequences of his claims? Maybe it's a consequence of the internet bandstand, the notion that everyone has a right to take the mic on any subject and win an audience. Maybe Epstein found the possibility of socking it to pearl-clutching lib overreactors impossible to resist. After all, when you say dangerous Trumpite stuff like "back to work by Easter!" you get to make people mad; you get to run with the devil. Maybe it feels manly. Like many conservative intellectuals, Epstein likes to think of himself as a "contrarian," an ivory-tower troll. Douglass convincingly identifies the kernel of Epstein's intellectual misconduct in that pose. "Contrarianism is not a search for truth, it's a search for political influence," Douglass writes. "Performative controversy, fake horse races, hypotheses that don't follow from theory are immediate red flags the author doesn't actually care what the right answer is." Indeed. The Hoover Institution should retract Epstein's dangerous posts, which constitute disinformation. They are a public-health hazard. Trollish posturing has no place in serious intellectual work, let alone in the formation of White House policy. -- @page88
Apr 3, 2020	Amid the confusion from Washington, D.C., to Sacramento and parts in between, one thing has become abundantly clear in the era of COVID-19: The mask is having a moment. On Thursday, President Trump announced that the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention would soon issue new guidelines, softening an earlier anti-mask stance. This came 33 days after the U.S. surgeon general tweeted that masks "are NOT effective in preventing general public from catching #Coronavirus." Gov. Gavin Newsom hewed to a similar path at a noon coronavirus briefing. He stopped short of telling Californians that they have to wear face coverings whenever they leave their homes, but he didn't discourage use of the increasingly ubiquitous masks either.  "We believe, and we put out guidelines, that if individuals want to have face coverings, that that is a good thing and a preferable thing," Newsom said, "in addition to the physical distancing and the stay-at-home order." Once the protective head gear of choice for Asian immigrants and tourists, masks have popped up on shoppers at Walmart and Costco, on Justin Bieber and Selena Gomez, on the girl next door and maybe even your grandparents. BuzzFeed.com and the New York Times Style section have published celebrity selfie galleries. Masks are silencing sneezes from coast to coast. The science is far from settled about the level of protection they provide. Still, concerned citizens are churning out DIY masks in retirement communities, suburban ranch houses and artist studios, using patterns found online or shared via email. They are giving their creations to friends and family members, donating them to first responders and helping fill an enormous protective equipment gap in the U.S. healthcare system. And when the coronavirus finally departs our shores, the pandemic could leave behind a permanent reminder: the mask as an everyday accessory of American life. "We may be moving gently at this point toward the Asian culture where it's more a usual thing to wear masks to prevent the transmission of viruses," said Dr. William Schaffner, professor of preventive medicine and infectious diseases at Vanderbilt University. Even after the coronavirus crisis ends, "it wouldn't surprise me if we don't encourage this some in the near term." The problem, of course, is where to find them. The president may be encouraging the public to wear masks, but he hasn't provided any shopping guides. They are a rare commodity. And that's where Bibi Sheonarine comes in. Three days before the first COVID-19 death was reported in California, the 66-year-old real estate broker decided to start making cloth masks from her Upland home. First, she measured her face -- ear to ear, nose to lower chin. Then she measured her husband's face. He's 73. She cut rectangles out of a bolt of cream-colored corduroy that she'd planned to use to make clothes for war-ravaged Syrians. She stitched elastic bands to the ends -- and voila. The mask was done. "It took me 10 minutes," she said. "I made a simple video tutorial so others could make them, even a child." By March 27, she'd made 459 of them. Some went to local hospitals, others to family members in New York. And she realized that just maybe she and her neighbors could make a dent in the mask shortage. So she took to Facebook and Nextdoor, recruiting other crafty volunteers. Nearly a week has passed, and more than 70 seamstresses in the Upland area have pitched in, cutting fabric or sewing. Sheonarine placed a bin filled with sewing kits on her porch; each contains instructions and enough fabric and elastic bands to make 25 masks. Eager mask-makers pick them up every day. Sheonarine spends 20 hours or so each day on this potentially lifesaving project. She created a spreadsheet to organize the corps of volunteers, which grows in number every day. Recently a woman texted that her husband could cut the fabric for her with a laser, which would speed the process considerably. "I was elated," she said. "I wrote to her: 'Laser, laser laser! Come over now!' " The project has taken over Sheonarine's house, in addition to her daily life. Her dining room is filled with rolls of yarn and fabric. An iron rests on the table. She figures she has about 1,000 yards of fabric at home, some printed with flowers, others with bears and stripes. "I feel like a mini-Amazon," she said. "Filling orders, picking up orders. But I feel good. People need them." Summer Johnson McGee, dean of the University of New Haven's School of Health Sciences, said there is still a lack of research analyzing the effectiveness of using masks to slow the spread of the coronavirus. But she doesn't see how wearing one can hurt. "What do we have to lose?" she said. "Masks may prevent some transmission, which is better than not trying to prevent transmission at all." McGee said the initial reluctance among public health officials to push the general public to wear masks stemmed from wanting to make sure there were enough for healthcare workers, who are at the greatest risk of being infected by the virus. But recent studies suggest that at least 12% to 20% of people who test positive for COVID-19 are asymptomatic and may be spreading the virus without realizing it. "Given that we may not know who is carrying the virus and spreading it, we need to try to do whatever we can to prevent spread, including the use of cloth masks," McGee said. Chunhuei Chi, director of the Center for Global Health at Oregon State University, said government leaders who have called for people to don masks when leaving their homes may also have been influenced by the slow growth of coronavirus infections in East Asian places such as Taiwan, Japan, South Korea and Singapore, where wearing masks is common. "They got their first cases much earlier than Europe and the U.S., but if you look at the total number of cases, they have been growing very slowly," Chi said. "Wearing masks is one way that has allowed them to slow the number of cases." Chi said there is a lot of discussion among public health researchers as to why even homemade and surgical masks, which are not fine enough to filter out virus particles, are preventing the spread of the disease. Masks can help protect a healthy person from getting infected by blocking droplets containing the virus from entering the mucus membranes in the mouth or nose. They can also prevent asymptomatic people from passing on the virus unknowingly. "I highly recommend that people wear makeshift masks," Chi said. "If you have a surgical mask, wear it, but even a cotton mask is very adequate for people to use." Health officials in the San Francisco Bay Area take that viewpoint to heart. On Thursday, the San Mateo County Joint Information Center recommended that residents of the region "cover their nose and mouth with cloth when leaving home for essential travel such as doctor appointments, grocery shopping or pharmacy visits." Still, Vanderbilt's Schaffner has a rather large caveat. His wife found an old supply of masks they'd bought years ago during a previous viral epidemic. They're sharing those with family and using them when they go to the grocery store. If he didn't have one, he said, he'd probably use a scarf. "What's the downside to asking people to put on masks or wrap their faces with a shawl?" he asked. "It may make some people think they're bulletproof. Some bozo out there will say, 'Let's put on our bandannas and have a poker party tonight.' "That's what we call, in my family, 'd-u-m dumb,' " he said. -- Times staff writers Rong-Gong Lin II, Taryn Luna and David Lauter contributed to this report. Caption: PHOTO: BIBI SHEONARINE, a 66-year-old real estate broker in Upland, spends most of each day sewing dozens of cloth masks for donation. PHOTOGRAPHER:Irfan Khan Los Angeles Times PHOTO:(no caption) PHOTOGRAPHER:Irfan Khan Los Angeles Times PHOTO:EMILY BERRY and friend Gavin Kelley walk on Venice Beach on March 27. PHOTOGRAPHER:Mel Melcon Los Angeles Times 
Apr 2, 2020	On Jan. 20, South Korea and the United States both reported their first confirmed cases of the novel coronavirus. While President Moon Jae-in of South Korea acted with ingenuity, dispatch and courage, President Trump delayed, denied and lied. As of Wednesday night, South Korea reported 169 total deaths, and the numbers seem to be leveling off. You know where this goes. As of Wednesday night, the U.S. reported more than 5,000 deaths, with a potentially terrifying surge in fatalities still to come. And thus we get Trump’s latest wretched failure to lead. But this time he seems to have been animated by more than his addled psyche. A work of sophistry by the libertarian legal professor Richard A. Epstein, which was widely circulated by Trumpites, helped to justify the administration’s equivocation and denial. The federal government’s response to the virus, in other words, has been driven by the usual Trumpworld up-is-down madness. Only this time it comes with a luxe academic sheen. According to the Washington Post, Trumpites began sharing “Coronavirus Perspective,” Epstein’s first blog post on the matter, just over two weeks ago, when it appeared on the website of the conservative Hoover Institution, where Epstein is a senior fellow. Epstein’s first post — along with two others, “Coronavirus Overreaction” and “The Grim Cost of Lockdowns”— evidently told Trumpites what they wanted to hear: That the virus had been overhyped by liberals trying to crush personal freedoms. “Progressives think they can run everyone’s lives through central planning,” he groused in the second post, with all the brio of a new reader of “Atlas Shrugged.” He also claimed it would kill only the weak and elderly people the economy could afford to lose. And that the flu-like bug would soon lose steam. But Epstein also got truly rash, projecting that in the U.S. the coronavirus would cause only 500 deaths. With little explanation, and just as reality was proving him wrong, he revised his tally to 5,000. Wrong again. Dr. Anthony Fauci, director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, projects the total at 100,000 and 240,000, if we’re lucky . Epstein described that first faulty calculation as “a public-relations gaffe.” A lot of Epstein’s factual assertions were challenged by journalist Isaac Chotiner, citing various virus and infectious disease experts, in a Q and A in the New Yorker, and also by the data scientist Rex Douglass, whose methodical dismantling of Epstein’s arguments went online Monday. Douglass, of the Center for Peace and Security Studies at UC San Diego, faults Epstein not just for errors but for intellectual dishonesty: cherry-picking data, avoiding specificity, using doublespeak, and showing indifference to the truth. And yet Trump’s recent helter-skelter propaganda has regularly contained echoes of Epstein’s bad faith. When Trump condemned a disciplined stay-at-home response to the virus as “overreaction,” and wanted Americans to get back to business as usual by April 12 — those moves could have been derived straight from Epstein’s work. I hope Epstein’s posts go down in history in much the same way as another landmark of pseudoscience: The 1998 paper in the august medical journal Lancet by Andrew Wakefield. This is the article that falsely connected vaccinations with developmental disorders in children. Wakefield’s paper, since retracted by the Lancet, gave ballast to the dangerous anti-vaccination movement, which contributed to a resurgence of measles; Epstein’s work seems to have informed at least some of the Trump’s administration’s fateful coronavirus missteps, adding to the pandemic’s dangers and increasing the toll of sickness and death. And yet Epstein calls an inexcusable mistake a public-relations gaffe. And there’s the crux. Why did a legal scholar at a solemn think tank dish out something he would later excuse as PR? What about the accuracy, honesty and the consequences of his claims? Maybe it’s a consequence of the internet bandstand, the notion that everyone has a right to take the mic on any subject and win an audience. Maybe Epstein found the possibility of socking it to pearl-clutching lib over-reactors impossible to resist. After all, when you say dangerous Trumpite stuff like “back to work by Easter!” you get to make people mad; you get to run with the devil. Maybe it feels manly. Like many conservative intellectuals, Epstein likes to think of himself as a “contrarian,” an ivory-tower troll. Douglass convincingly identifies the kernel of Epstein’s intellectual misconduct in that pose. “Contrarianism is not a search for truth, it’s a search for political influence,” Douglass writes. “Performative controversy, fake horse races, hypotheses that don’t follow from theory are immediate red flags the author doesn’t actually care what the right answer is.” Indeed. The Hoover Institution should retract Epstein’s dangerous posts, which constitute disinformation. They are a public-health hazard. Trollish posturing has no place in serious intellectual work, let alone in the formation of White House policy. @page88 
Apr 2, 2020	As projections of the coronavirus death toll soar, forecasts for the ensuing economic carnage have also quickly turned much darker -- both for the depth and duration of the damage. Where only days ago, economists were following President Trump's lead in saying the U.S. economy would be back on track relatively quickly, a growing number now say the downturn will probably exceed the Great Recession of 2008-09. U.S. economic output, which has grown without interruption for a record 10 1/2 years, could fall as much as 9% in 2020 -- more than three times the sharpest drop during the Great Recession, according to some predictions. At the height of the Great Depression in 1932, the economy shrank a record 12.9%.  "This is the dilemma of the disease and of the economy. To limit and control the disease you basically have to kill the economy. It's a trade-off," said Nariman Behravesh, chief economist at IHS Markit. The research firm doesn't see an economic return to pre-pandemic levels for two to three years. Janet Yellen, a former chairwoman of the Federal Reserve and now a distinguished fellow at the Brookings Institution, echoed the growing skepticism over what Trump and others have said would be a quick economic rebound once the virus subsides. Pointing to how long it took to recover from past crises, she said it's common for economic growth to remain on a lower track for years, not months. "If firms are really damaged and cut back their investment spending on R&D dramatically, or workers become deskilled or lose productive connections to firms, those things can have long-lasting effects," Yellen said during an online conference this week. Global supply chains, which when they were functioning well had raised productivity and profits for many companies, are now facing significant disruptions, and there is a broad reconsideration of these economic linkages that could further slow growth, she said. The current Fed leader, Jerome H. Powell, acknowledged the grim outlook while trying to remain optimistic about a relatively quick recovery. "You may well see significant rises in unemployment and significant declines in economic activity, but there can also be a good rebound on the other side of that," he said in a rare television appearance last week. "It will really depend on the spread of the virus. The virus is going to dictate the timetable here," he said. Powell's remark about the coronavirus calling the shots reflects a new awareness in Washington and beyond that the medical threat is far more serious than many originally suggested and that comparing COVID-19 to seasonal flu was dangerously misleading. Within that scientific reality, medical experts and economists agree that the best hope for the least and shortest damage is a painful but tight adherence to the strategy of social distancing. That is, choking back physical contact between individuals and groups -- using lockdowns and the mandatory closing of restaurants, bars, sports and entertainment venues and other places where more than a handful of people come together at one time. The economic effects of social distancing -- and the far greater potential cost of not embracing it -- are reflected in the increasingly dark economic forecasts. The American economy, as measured by real gross domestic product, grew at a 2.3% rate last year -- a moderate but still impressive pace given the much slower performance in other advanced nations. That upbeat performance has almost certainly ended already, though official numbers are just beginning to be reported. IHS Markit's Behravesh foresees a U.S. contraction of 5.4% this year. Just a month earlier, in February, IHS had forecast an expansion of 2% for the year. Nomura Securities has an even grimmer outlook: a 9% decline in U.S. output. That's because except for government spending, every major category of economic activity is expected to fall off sharply, including business investments, trade and especially consumer spending for services. In recent days only a couple of hundred thousand air travelers a day have been moving through security checkpoints, compared with 3.6 million a year ago, said Mark Zandi of Moody's Analytics, citing government statistics. Business closures have led to an unprecedented burst of layoffs. Jobless benefit claims during the week that ended March 21 soared to more than 3.2 million, five times the previous record high -- and millions more filed for unemployment benefits last week. Economists expect the nation's jobless rate, which most recently had been at a half-century low of 3.5%, to surge in coming months. Goldman Sachs expects unemployment to soar to 15% by midyear. How quickly might the economy get back on its feet from the tremendous body blows? The U.S. can't expect the kind of fast return seen in South Korea, which moved much faster and more decisively to do massive testing in February and targeted groups shutting down the economy. Americans have also lost valuable time in embracing the draconian quarantine and lockdown measures of Singapore or China in Hubei province, where the pandemic began and which now -- after two months of lockdowns and travel bans -- is beginning to stir back to life. One detailed forecast that was less bleak than some came from an analysis by Zandi and his team at Moody's Analytics, which sees new COVID-19 infections peaking in May and abating significantly by July. "If the virus and the medical response roughly follow this script, then businesses should be largely reopened by the third quarter of this year, resulting in a double-digit bounce in real GDP growth," with about half of those losing their jobs quickly returning to work, Zandi wrote. But then it'll get tougher: "Even though the virus will have receded, an economic slog will continue with weak job growth and persistently high unemployment as worries that the virus will flare up again stymie travel, trade and business expansion," he said. Significant uncertainties may restrain business spending, with energy investments in particular tanking along with crude oil prices, as well as lead to a protracted increase in unemployment. Consumers, whose spending accounts for 70% of economic activity, may also hesitate for months before returning to pre-pandemic activity and spending habits. After the 9/11 terrorist attacks, Behravesh said, it took 2 1/2 years for airline traffic to come to previous levels. Consumer confidence already has started to erode, by some measures falling deeper than after 9/11 and the Great Recession. And experts expect that many investors and households will choose to sock away money to rebuild savings and retirement nest eggs. Even as Goldman Sachs marked down U.S. output to fall by a whopping 34% at an annual rate in the current quarter, the firm raised its forecast for the third quarter largely because of aggressive action by the Fed and the federal government. Caption: PHOTO: TO FIGHT the virus, "you basically have to kill the economy," one expert says. Above, Long Beach stores. PHOTOGRAPHER:Luis Sinco Los Angeles Times
Apr 1, 2020	As projections of the coronavirus death toll soar, forecasts for the ensuing economic carnage have also quickly turned much darker — both for the depth and duration of the damage. Where only days ago, economists were following President Trump’s lead in saying the U.S. economy would be back on track relatively quickly, a growing number now say the downturn will probably exceed the Great Recession of 2008-09. U.S. economic output, which has grown without interruption for a record 10½ years, could fall as much as 9% in 2020 — more than three times the sharpest drop during the Great Recession, according to some predictions. At the height of the Great Depression in 1932, the economy shrank a record 12.9%. “This is the dilemma of the disease and of the economy. To limit and control the disease you basically have to kill the economy. It’s a trade-off,” said Nariman Behravesh, chief economist at IHS Markit. The research firm doesn’t see an economic return to pre-pandemic levels for two to three years. Janet Yellen, a former chairwoman of the Federal Reserve and now a distinguished fellow at the Brookings Institution, echoed the growing skepticism over what Trump and others have said would be a quick economic rebound once the virus subsides. Pointing to how long it took to recover from past crises, she said it’s common for economic growth to remain on a lower track for years, not months. Newsletter Get our free Coronavirus Today newsletter Sign up for the latest news, best stories and what they mean for you, plus answers to your questions. Sign Me Up You may occasionally receive promotional content from the Los Angeles Times. “If firms are really damaged and cut back their investment spending on R&D dramatically, or workers become deskilled or lose productive connections to firms, those things can have long-lasting effects,” Yellen said during an online conference this week. Global supply chains, which when they were functioning well had raised productivity and profits for many companies, are now facing significant disruptions, and there is a broad reconsideration of these economic linkages that could further slow growth, she said. The current Fed leader, Jerome H. Powell, acknowledged the grim outlook while trying to remain optimistic about a relatively quick recovery. “You may well see significant rises in unemployment and significant declines in economic activity, but there can also be a good rebound on the other side of that,” he said in a rare television appearance last week. “It will really depend on the spread of the virus. The virus is going to dictate the timetable here,” he said. Powell’s remark about the coronavirus calling the shots reflects a new awareness in Washington and beyond that the medical threat is far more serious than many originally suggested and that comparing COVID-19 to seasonal flu was dangerously misleading. Within that scientific reality, medical experts and economists agree that the best hope for the least and shortest damage is a painful but tight adherence to the strategy of social distancing. That is, choking back physical contact between individuals and groups — using lockdowns and the mandatory closing of restaurants, bars, sports and entertainment venues and other places where more than a handful of people come together at one time. The economic effects of social distancing — and the far greater potential cost of not embracing it — are reflected in the increasingly dark economic forecasts. Several dozen prominent economists across the ideological spectrum, in a poll by the University of Chicago, were virtually unanimous in agreeing that there will be greater economic damage if lockdowns were abandoned while “the likelihood of a resurgence in infections remains high.” The American economy, as measured by real gross domestic product, grew at a 2.3% rate last year — a moderate but still impressive pace given the much slower performance in other advanced nations. That upbeat performance has almost certainly ended already, though official numbers are just beginning to be reported. IHS Markit’s Behravesh foresees a U.S. contraction of 5.4% this year. Just a month earlier, in February, IHS had forecast an expansion of 2% for the year. Nomura Securities has an even grimmer outlook: a 9% decline in U.S. output. That’s because except for government spending, every major category of economic activity is expected to fall off sharply, including business investments, trade and especially consumer spending for services. In recent days only a couple of hundred thousand daily air travelers have been moving through security checkpoints, compared with 3.6 million a year ago, said Mark Zandi of Moody’s Analytics, citing government statistics. Open Table, the restaurant reservation system, is seeing practically zero bookings at restaurants in big cities such as Los Angeles, Chicago and New York, he noted. What You Can Do About Coronavirus  Business closures have led to an unprecedented burst of layoffs. Jobless benefit claims during the week that ended March 21 soared to more than 3.2 million, five times the previous record high — and millions more filed for unemployment benefits last week. Economists expect the nation’s jobless rate, which most recently had been at a half-century low of 3.5%, to surge in coming months. Goldman Sachs expects unemployment to soar to 15% by midyear. How quickly might the economy get back on its feet from the tremendous body blows? The U.S. can’t expect the kind of fast return seen in South Korea, which moved much faster and more decisively to do massive testing in February and targeted groups shutting down the economy. Americans have also lost valuable time in embracing the draconian quarantine and lockdown measures of Singapore or China in Hubei province, where the pandemic began and which now — after two months of lockdowns and travel bans — is beginning to stir back to life. One detailed forecast that was less bleak than some came from an analysis by Zandi and his team at Moody’s Analytics, which sees new COVID-19 infections peaking in May and abating significantly by July. “If the virus and the medical response roughly follow this script, then businesses should be largely reopened by the third quarter of this year, resulting in a double-digit bounce in real GDP growth,” with about half of those losing their jobs quickly returning to work, Zandi wrote. But then it’ll get tougher: “Even though the virus will have receded, an economic slog will continue with weak job growth and persistently high unemployment as worries that the virus will flare up again stymie travel, trade and business expansion,” he said. Significant uncertainties may restrain business spending, with energy investments in particular tanking along with crude oil prices, as well as lead to a protracted increase in unemployment. “When uncertainty rises, employers may choose to wait and see before filling new positions, contributing to higher unemployment,” economists at the San Francisco Fed said. Consumers, whose spending accounts for 70% of economic activity, may also hesitate for months before returning to pre-pandemic activity and spending habits. After the 9/11 terrorist attacks, Behravesh said, it took 2½ years for airline traffic to come to previous levels. Consumer confidence already has started to erode, by some measures falling deeper than after 9/11 and the Great Recession. And experts expect that many investors and households will choose to sock away money to rebuild savings and retirement nest eggs. Even as Goldman Sachs marked down U.S. output to fall by a whopping 34% at an annual rate in the current quarter, the investment banking firm raised its forecast for the third quarter largely because of aggressive action by the Fed and the federal government. The fast and strong response with monetary and fiscal stimulus in the United States and elsewhere could limit the damage and help many businesses and households avoid bankruptcies, enabling them to recover more quickly once the economy reopens. The $2-trillion coronavirus relief package that Trump signed into law Friday will provide direct payments of $1,200 to many individual taxpayers and vastly expands unemployment insurance benefits for jobless workers and those whose hours have been cut. What’s more, the aid package sets aside about $350 billion for loans to small employers that could be converted to grants if they hold on to their workforce, and billions more to support loans to big companies, including hard-hit airlines, that are conditioned on maintaining certain payroll levels. How quickly all that financial aid can be delivered, and how long it will remain sufficient, are questions most economists have barely begun to consider.
Apr 1, 2020	The patient was at risk. A fever somewhere above 101. Hypoxia, shortness of breath. And two critical check marks for risk: advanced age and a compromised immune system. In the eyes of the medical staff, the cause could be bacterial, but odds were that a virus had found its way to the most receptive cells and hijacked their RNA. One became two, two became thousands, filling the lungs. Another ILI, an influenza-like illness. The patient, who had just arrived in the emergency department of the Ronald Reagan UCLA Medical Center in Westwood, had to be treated. But treatment required precaution, and precaution required testing. Three months since the novel coronavirus and COVID-19 appeared on the world’s stage, few modern illnesses have proved to be as contagious. Since the first case — a viral pneumonia reported in China on Dec. 8 — was reported, the World Health Organization has recorded nearly 575,000 cases and nearly 26,500 deaths in 201 countries. For an illness with no vaccine and limited treatment, testing and isolation are the best methods for stopping the spread, and even though the virus’ genome was sequenced within a month of that first case, testing in the United States has lagged, hindered by cumbersome bureaucracies, shortages and antiquated practices. For Omai Garner, who directs clinical microbiology testing for UCLA Health, laboratories like his are central for ending this pandemic. Their protocol, initially developed in the 1980s, has been on the front line of viral diagnostic testing for almost two decades. Of the viruses that Garner has encountered, the coronavirus is one of the most sinister, a Trojan horse disguising itself in symptoms of the flu. The next few weeks are critical, he said, to get an accurate picture of where we are in this outbreak: “What you will hear from most healthcare professionals is we have no idea.” He is skeptical of a new test, fast-tracked by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration and coming on the market next week, that promises greater convenience and faster results. Neither he nor his colleagues, he said, have been able to compare its results with their own. “We need to do a lot more inquiry before we know how effective it will be,” he said, “because it is not based on the established standard for infectious disease diagnoses.” In a series of phone interviews last week, Garner shared details about the testing protocol that his laboratory followed in its analysis of one possible COVID-19 case. :: The emergency room moved quickly. The mood that afternoon — just days after the city and county began shutting down nonessential activities — was calm yet wary. The number of walk-ins had dropped; the ambulance bay was quiet. An eerie sense of idleness had set in. Treating this patient was a trained reflex of isolating, monitoring, administering sodium chloride and ordering battery of exams. But the medical staff couldn’t help but wonder what lay ahead of them. They knew about Italy, the triage in those hospitals, and they were hearing of a flood of patients swamping hospitals in New York. The door to the treatment room slid open and closed. Distant voices grew loud, then soft again. A nurse in blue scrubs, face shield, mask and gloves held a plastic bag. With an easy tug, the seam tore open. A swab and test tube filled with a pink-tinged solution were placed on a sterile tray. The same collection kit is used for the scores of pathogens — influenza, gonorrhea, whooping cough — that need identification for treatment. The patient lay alone; new policy prohibited visitors. The nurse explained the procedure, then guided the bristly swab — a lance-like Q-tip — through a nostril, farther and farther, until it reached the back of the throat near the adenoids where viruses often take hold amid the warm and moist tissue. Pain shot through the patient, trying to breathe through a gauze of congestion. Eyes welled with tears. The nurse extracted the swab — covered with a film of mucus, rich with the cells of the patient and a possible virus — and placed it into the accompanying test tube. The gooey extraction loosened amid a solution of salt, carbohydrates and antibiotics designed to preserve the viability of the virus for the hours ahead. A white label covered the tube, identifying the specimen with a series of numbers beginning with 20SA-83. Placed in a biohazard bag, it flew by pneumatic tube to the basement, where it was placed in cooler bag, stored at 40 degrees to deter bacteria and fungus from growing. Garner’s laboratory was a mile away. :: Garner, 41, always knew he would be a virologist. Growing up near Milwaukee, he was drawn to the worlds under a microscope, but not until the 1995 movie “Outbreak” did he see his future. “To a young African American teenager, the idea that Cuba Gooding Jr. was in this movie playing a hero in a suit, studying the Ebola and fighting it, well, I was hooked,” he said. “I wanted to be the one fighting the apocalypse.” Years later, his understanding of viruses grew more nuanced. Less a scourge of humanity, they had a simple beauty: adaptable to their environment, flexible in their evolution and vital to the human species. “If you look at the human genome, large segments of our DNA come from viruses,” he said. “We are human because of our interactions with viruses.” That afternoon, Garner stopped by the lab. Long hours during the week — typically 7 a.m. to 5 p.m. — meant shorter hours on the weekend. Standing in his office on the fourth floor before heading downstairs to the lab, he glanced out the window toward the Getty Center and the Santa Monica Mountains. Here we are in the midst of an unprecedented crisis, a threat to so many people, he thought, the look of the sky doesn’t change. Outside, a van drove up the driveway to the lab’s second floor receiving area. The building on San Vicente Boulevard in Brentwood is undistinguished. In better times, a restaurant on the ground level serves Italian. The van’s rear doors swung open. A medical courier carried four soft cooler bags containing 200 specimens into the lab. Just three months ago, Garner first heard of a “mystery virus,” an “unknown infection,” spreading in China, but he didn’t give it a second thought. Viral outbreaks from unidentified pathogens happen all the time; a new one didn’t raise any immediate alarms. At the time he was focused more on his wife and their first child, born Jan. 5. But a week later his phone rang. A lab colleague, Shangxin Yang, was concerned. He knew people near the city of Wuhan. “This is going to be bad,” Yang said. :: Garner marked the date — Jan. 15 — when he first heard the phrase “novel coronavirus” and put two assistant directors and his senior specialists to work. The UCLA Medical Center had long been the first stop for sick travelers arriving at Los Angeles International Airport, and the airport at the time was one of three in the country screening for the virus. He wanted to develop testing in his laboratory and not depend on others. He had the machinery, mothballed for research, that he could dust off, and he worried that the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention would not be able to accommodate the number of cases that he expected to see. The CDC was requiring collection kits be tested in Atlanta, a slow and cumbersome process. Then there was a shortage of collection kits, and when the FDA finally allowed other laboratories to do their own testing, only a few had the compatible equipment (and most of that was manufactured in Germany and China). Garner was also concerned that the CDC criteria for screening were too narrow. “South Korea was having active cases,” he said, “but if someone traveled from South Korea and had the right symptoms, they didn’t get tested.” Column One The clincher, though, was the test itself. “The CDC designed a beautiful test,” Garner said, “but it was a little over-elegant.” Its flaw, he explained, was in requiring the presence of three viral genomic markers for a positive result. When health agencies around the country began running trials in late January, they found only two of the markers. This defect led the CDC to revise and eventually drop one of the markers. Two would be enough, but by then it was Feb. 28. Critical time had been lost. “When trying to get ahead of the curve of the outbreak, we were already well behind,” Garner said. “It is unfortunate what happened. We lost six to eight weeks for widespread testing.” :: Within two hours of the patient arriving at the emergency room, the specimen inside No. 20SA-83 had reached Garner’s lab, and Carlos Azucena, a clinical laboratory scientist, started the protocol. He guided his gloved hands under the glass partition of a bio-safety cabinet, slipping through a soft seal of ventilated air designed to keep pathogens from escaping into the room. Working slowly, he made sure the air barrier remained intact. He placed No. 20SA-83 on a vortex spinner. The pinkish solution whirled and churned. He transferred it from the test tube into a small vial and lowered it into a Styrofoam rack. He soon had eight prepared specimens. A small black disc, no larger than a CD, lay in front of him. It had eight pie-shaped compartments and looked like a fortune wheel. He opened a flap over one of the compartments, revealing two shallow wells. Using the calibrated pipette, he drew out 50 microliters — just a drop — from No. 20SA-83 and released it into one well. He turned to another set of vials, containing a reagent, the enzymes and chemical markers specially designed to reveal the presence of the coronavirus. He drew out a drop and placed it in the other well. After filling the eight compartments and closing their flaps, he removed the disc from the cabinet and inserted it into a thermocycler, a hooded gray machine just slightly larger than a pressure cooker. Azucena closed the lid, and the disc began spinning, reaching nearly 1,600 rpm. The temperature inside rose to more than 200 degrees Fahrenheit. For 90 minutes, these two extremes pitted specimen with reagent in a modulated sequence known as a polymerase chain reaction. The film of mucus, once covering the tip of the swab and containing the patient’s cells, began to break apart. Their RNA converted into a single strand of DNA, awash with the enzymes and chemical markers that would target the coronavirus, and, if present, emit an impulse of light as it bonded, a brief and measurable florescence. “In its beauty, it is hard to understand the impact of the PCR [polymerase chain reaction],” Garner said. “It is like the Rosetta stone, showing us how to read the information inside a cell.” As the thermocycler completed the test, Azucena reviewed the results. :: The next day at 7 a.m., Garner opened the daily report from the laboratory. In the previous 24 hours, his team had conducted 150 tests; a week before, just 30 tests. The increase was unprecedented, but he trusted the methodology. The company that formulated the reagent was headquartered near Milan, and the outbreak in northern Italy guaranteed experience with the virus. His eyes paused on No. 20SA-83. Another positive. By then, he guessed, the patient was in isolation in the hospital. The attending physician, who received this news within minutes of Azucena’s review, could have begun antiviral treatments. The hospital could screen its healthcare workers and provide its infectious disease specialists with another data point in charting the progression of the virus in the community. Since ramping up testing, his laboratory had found that 10% of the tests among people with moderate to severe illness were positive. The rise or fall of this number is the best indication whether social isolation is slowing the spread. “This is the canary in the coal mine for how bad things are getting,” he said. He only wishes more laboratories had this capability. “Everyone should be doing this,” he said. 
Apr 1, 2020	It’s not as big a leap as you might think, from writing a best-seller about a zombie war to lecturing at the Modern War Institute at West Point. There are all kinds of wars -- including the one we are waging now, against a viral enemy. Max Brooks’ novel “World War Z: An Oral History of the Zombie War” holds as much statecraft and medical science as it does gore and horror, which is why he’s spoken at the Naval War College and holds a fellowship with the Atlantic Council. Human shortsightedness is a deep theme in his books, including the new one due out next month: “Devolution: A Firsthand Account of the Rainier Sasquatch Massacre” -- more methodical research piggybacked with a horror story. Brooks’ sense of humor may have come from his father, the writer and actor Mel Brooks -- the two of them did a witty viral video on social distancing in the age of coronavirus -- but his fascination with science was a gift from his mother, the actress Anne Bancroft, who loved learning about science and passed that along to her son. ***** How did you become so knowledgeable that you lecture at West Point and the Naval College? I do a ton of research on all my books, and I want all my stories to have a fictional threat, but a real solution. And that involves, for every hour of writing I do, I spend between 10 and 100 hours researching. In “World War Z,” while the zombies were fake, there was no wonder... The solutions had to do with real military technology and tactics. Therefore, the military took an interest in my books. We’ve had scenarios and solutions and responses for crises like this in place for a long time. But nobody’s thrown the switch on them. We have spent decades and dollars preparing for something like this. And right here on my desk -- I’m looking at it right now -- is the biological incident annex to the response and recovery Federal Interagency Operations Plans -- sitting right here! Line 15, Page 35, it talks about protective gears like masks. And it talks about the Defense Production Act. So anyone who says we had no idea this was coming is either an idiot or a liar or both. We know that we can do this because we prepared before. My father was a Civil Defense volunteer; in the basement of our city hall we had supplies. We were ready for the commies to come after us, inadequate as it may have been. We were all ready for this. And since the end of the Cold War, we’ve been dismantling all these systems because they cost money and we don’t want to spend the money and we don’t want to spend the time. And we’ve also been attacking institutions for decades. And unfortunately, people are dying because of it. Do we seem more eager to prepare for and respond to a shooting war than a war like this? Oh, yeah, of course we do, because we don’t have to stretch our imaginations. We can see an enemy. We can imagine a bomb. So things that go boom are a lot easier to prep for than something microscopic. And yet and everyone needs to hear this: Germs have killed more human beings than all the wars in history. Why don’t we take that seriously? Because we can’t see it? Because, oh, microbes, you know, who cares about microbes anymore? We’ve got this licked. That’s exactly right. We did care about it. We cared about it for decades. Public health was our No. 1 concern because germs killed or crippled a large percentage of our population every year. And then we won. After World War II, we came up with antibiotics and with myriad vaccines. And as a result, now, even the majority of America’s grandparents have grown up vaccinated and don’t have the same gut fear of microbes the way the Greatest Generation did. What about the people you’ve worked with, who put the plans in place and who are not seeing the stuff implemented -- how are they reacting? As far as I know, there’s deep frustration, but there’s also been deep frustration for decades. We might have the most historically unqualified captain of our ship of state, but the ship of state has been rusting underneath us for some time. And I watch these dedicated professionals working way too many hours for way too little money, trying to prepare us for disasters. And all they get for it is budget cuts and being ignored by our leaders and now being vilified as the deep state. These are the keepers of the flame. And this is all they’ve been doing, trying to get us ready. And by the way, sounding the alarm for decades and most importantly, sounding the alarm for months. Anyone who still believes that we that we had no idea this was coming and that we were unprepared and that the system somehow was not designed for this needs to Google and download the National Response Framework. That’s another difference that separates us from China. Our emergency plans are public and our public officials wanted to be disseminated among the individual citizens. Nobody’s hiding anything. They want us to learn because they want us to help. If you live in China or Iran, you’re a helpless passenger, whereas in America, you’re an active participant. I would expect these preparedness studies and plans are not just about logistics and supplies, but also include the psychological aspects, what Americans will accept, what they won’t. And this is one of the greatest facts that we need to get through right now. Nationalizing our efforts will not make us Venezuela. For decades, armies of lawyers have been working tirelessly to make sure that we do not become a dictatorship in a crisis. That is exactly why we have these plans. All of these plans, all of these exercises are done in order to ensure our rights as well as our lives. But what are the psychological ripples out from these events? Well, you know, I wrote “World War Z,” basing it on the history of plagues. And it doesn’t matter which country you go through or what time you’re living in. There tend to be basic cycles. You first go through denial: I can’t get it. There’s something about me that makes me above it. And then there’s a tipping point where usually some famous people get it. Suddenly we tip over from denial to panic. And the panic usually is directly linked to how much preparation was done beforehand and also how ready societies are to deal with any crisis. The Israelis are much better equipped and psychologically prepared than we are. As far as I know, there’s been no panic buying in Israel because they know they’re surrounded by enemies and they know to come together. Same thing in South Korea, even Japan. Japan understands they’re on a crowded chain of islands with limited resources. So there’s been no panic there, whereas the United States -- nobody does “losing your s--" better than the USA. Well, we’ve only had, I think, two [hostile] incursions into the continental United States -- the War of 1812 and 9/11. But we always get sucker-punched. Pearl Harbor, 9/11, but also Sputnik, where we were driving big cars and rolling around with Hula-Hoops and then suddenly, oh, my God, the commies put a satellite in space right above our heads! I lived through a plague. I lived through AIDS, where we went from denial to panic. But then we did something that Americans are also really good at doing. Americans are great at adapting to crisis. I dare anyone to find a society in human history that can pull itself together and reinvent itself like America. And we did it. We replaced free love with safe sex. We changed our cultural practices. We understood that this was an “everyperson’s” disease and not just a “them” disease. And while it was too late to bring the dead back, we stopped AIDS from wiping us out. But was it Churchill, or Abba Eban, who said you can depend on Americans to do the right thing -- after they’ve exhausted every other possibility? I think that was Churchill. And it’s true, we are always we’re always the last to the fight, but we’re the best at finishing it. We were always rabid individualists and yet somehow we came together. We stopped the Kaiser, we stopped Hitler. We stopped the Communists and we stopped AIDS. We can do this. This is a very American thing. We’re not tied to a thousand years of history and culture. We don’t have countless generations crying from the grave to say, Americans can’t do that. Think about it: We’re the only country in the world where our last president literally could have been a slave of our first president. Show me another culture that’s made that much social progress in that short a time. We have an amazing life in this country that was born in blood by generations before us, and it’s about damn time we stopped taking that for granted. Tell me about the video you did with your father in terms of safe distancing from him, and your joke about how you don’t want to kill off a whole generation of comedy genius. You know, this is the key to any sort of crisis management and to imparting any kind of public safety is you’ve got to make it personal. Looking at charts and facts and figures and dry press conferences do not have the same personal impact as a son worrying about killing his father. And so I wanted to personalize this by doing a video with my dad. So I called my dad and asked him if I could come over, and he said yes. And that video was real. He was on one side of the window. I was on the other side. I haven’t hugged him since this crisis started, and I won’t. It’s not just about you getting sick. It’s who you can get sick. And so far, 15 and a half million people have seen this video. Now, whether those views translate into action. I don’t know. Part of the of the planning that you’ve seen and that you’ve researched -- does it also include disinformation and people trying to game what we know and what we don’t know? Oh, there are professionals right now working on what the military calls the gray zone. I’ve got a report right here on my desk from the Modern War Institute at West Point, of which I am a senior nonresident fellow. And this active duty Army officer wrote a very detailed report about how the Russians use misinformation to either create a crisis or to exploit a crisis, which I’m sure they will do now. If we do a comprehensive analysis of misinformation, we will see that the Kremlin is trying to fan the flames in the United States, because what better way to kick America off the world stage than to have a pandemic at home? I don’t understand why the White House is not reacting in the correct manner. I’m not in the White House. I don’t know who’s whispering in the president’s ear. I don’t know whether it is ignorance or willful ignorance or greed or simply listening to the wrong people. But I can tell you, this state by state, county by county response is only going to prolong the outbreak and get more people killed. He said no one knew this would happen. No one has seen or anticipated anything like this. We know that’s untrue. We absolutely know that’s untrue. We do. But the question is, does he? Well, that we don’t know. Did he simply not know? Is this the fault of his cowardly enablers who were too terrified to try and tell him the truth? Or was he told the truth and simply chose not to believe it? We don’t know. And we shouldn’t speculate because there’s no time for that. What we know is that we’re not doing enough and we need to ramp up our response before more people die. Because the real threat, the real deaths are not just going to come from coronavirus. For every one person who dies of coronavirus, how many people are going to die of other problems because they simply can’t get into a choked hospital? How many people with cancer? How many people with emergency births? How many people with accidents? Some of us who prepared for earthquakes feel a little bit ahead of the curve with this. I had masks. I had hand sanitizers. I’ve got gloves and all sorts of things that people laugh at me for carrying around in the car. I am constantly surprised that my fellow Angelenos are panic-buying anything, because an earthquake kit should be in every home. And an earthquake kit should be much more extensive than a pandemic kit, because at least in a pandemic, the lights are on in, the water is running. But in an earthquake, I have everything I need to literally camp out on my lawn if my house falls down. And hopefully, this crisis will teach all of us to be prepared. What’s the difference between preparedness and the survivalism that we associate with wacky political extremism? I think we need to be very clear on preparedness versus prepper culture, because when people try to call me a prepper, I always say no, no, no. Because prepping just by its nature sort of hints at irrational paranoia with maybe a little side helping of anti-Semitism. Disaster prepping -- that sort of, oh, God, I need I need 1,000 pounds of lentil and 1,000 rounds for an assault rifle -- is counterproductive. It’s wasteful, and it also could get somebody killed. Good preparedness means common sense. Keeping in your home what you need, according to what the bona fide professionals tell you is necessary. If you could flip one switch to change the direction we’re heading in on this virus, what would it be? National lockdown. Nothing else will suffice at this point. You have to lock down the entire country. You cannot go state by state, county by county. The virus doesn’t care. The virus is not going to stop at a state or county line. The virus is attacking the United States, and the states must act in a united fashion. We must practice social distancing from sea to shining sea. And while the American people are doing their part, our leadership must do its part. It must federalize the response. It must enact the Defense Production Act. It must centralize and coordinate the private sector so we cannot just ramp up production of what we need; we can make sure those tools get to the right people before it’s too late. Why do people read apocalypse fiction and watch apocalyptic movies? I think there’s a bunch of reasons. I don’t want to speak for anybody else but myself. I think some people feel safe and bored and just want a thrill. I think some people use it wisely to explore the possibilities of what could go wrong. And therefore, I think the onus is on the artists to be truthful, because you can be entertaining and exciting and still be 100% accurate. The movie “Contagion” was completely accurate. And yet it was really exciting to watch. You don’t have to make stuff up. And you don’t have to exaggerate, because in apocalyptic fiction, the real crises are really scary. And your new book, “Devolution,” which is coming out in May, takes it in a different direction. Well, devolution doesn’t deal with pandemic. It deals with natural disaster. It is the story of what happens when a group of very highly educated, well-paid intellectuals are suddenly confronted with having to fight for their survival. Now, if I wrote this as an essay, I would either scare people away or bore them to death. So what do I do? I wrote a Bigfoot story. So it’s a fun, exciting tale of Sasquatch terror. But underneath it are the real lessons of what we must all do to prepare for a disaster. It’s the message of what happens when we build a society based on comfort at the expense of resilience, which we had been racing toward since the end of the Cold War. We’ve been slowly dismantling all the safeguards that have kept us healthy and alive. And you see this in the tech sector: Move fast and break things, with absolutely no regard for what could go wrong. You see that pale, wide-eyed Mark Zuckerberg staring at Congress with absolutely no concept whatsoever that he and his company might have had a hand in cracking our democracy. No idea. Because at no point did any of these techies ever think what could go wrong. You see it now with driverless cars. The No. 1 tool of the terrorist is driving a car into a crowd. And anything “network” can be hacked. Are these driverless cars being built with a manual kill switch, or are we about to just flood our roads with rolling guided missiles? I don’t know. We cannot be Luddites and we cannot be against progress, but it must be smart, safe progress. And that’s what I’m trying to get through in “Devolution,” where these people have built a society without any thought of what could go wrong. Did you -- I read this book when I was a kid, like a million times -- read “Microbe Hunters.” Oh, my God, that was my mother’s favorite book! One of the reasons that I know all about this is because my mother was a closet scientist. And the world didn’t care. The world wanted Mrs. Robinson. They didn’t care that she was brilliant and inquisitive and curious. But she cared. And so, when I was a little boy, she would read to me from “Microbe Hunters.” I learned about [microbiology pioneer] Leeuwenhoek the same time I learned about Bugs Bunny. That was my childhood. 
Apr 1, 2020	Correction: Coronavirus testing: In Section A on April 1, a photo caption with a story on the coronavirus testing process identified Mikkiel Cheng as a UCLA clinical lab technician. Cheng's title is clinical lab scientist. The patient was at risk. A fever somewhere above 101. Hypoxia, shortness of breath. And two critical check marks for risk: advanced age and a compromised immune system. In the eyes of the medical staff, the cause could be bacterial, but odds were that a virus had found its way to the most receptive cells and hijacked their RNA. One became two, two became thousands, filling the lungs.  Another ILI, an influenza-like illness. The patient, who had just arrived in the emergency department of the Ronald Reagan UCLA Medical Center in Westwood, had to be treated. But treatment required precaution, and precaution required testing. More than three months since the novel coronavirus and COVID-19 appeared on the world's stage, few modern illnesses have proved to be as contagious. Since the first case -- a viral pneumonia reported in China on Dec. 8 -- was reported, the World Health Organization has recorded more than 859,000 cases and more than 42,000 deaths in 180 countries. For an illness with no vaccine and limited treatment, testing and isolation are the best methods for stopping the spread, and even though the virus' genome was sequenced within a month of that first case, testing in the United States has lagged, hindered by cumbersome bureaucracies, shortages and antiquated practices. For Omai Garner, who directs clinical microbiology testing for UCLA Health, laboratories like his are central for ending this pandemic. Their protocol, initially developed in the 1980s, has been on the front line of viral diagnostic testing for almost two decades. Of the viruses that Garner has encountered, the coronavirus is one of the most sinister, a Trojan horse disguising itself in symptoms of the flu. The next few weeks are critical, he said, to get an accurate picture of where we are in this outbreak: "What you will hear from most healthcare professionals is we have no idea." He is skeptical of a new test, fast-tracked by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration and coming on the market next week, that promises greater convenience and faster results. Neither he nor his colleagues, he said, have been able to compare its results with their own. "We need to do a lot more inquiry before we know how effective it will be," he said, "because it is not based on the established standard for infectious disease diagnoses." In a series of phone interviews last week, Garner shared details about the testing protocol that his laboratory followed in its analysis of one possible COVID-19 case. :: The emergency room moved quickly. The mood that afternoon -- just days after the city and county began shutting down nonessential activities -- was calm yet wary. The number of walk-ins had dropped; the ambulance bay was quiet. An eerie sense of idleness had set in. Treating this patient was a trained reflex of isolating, monitoring, administering sodium chloride and ordering battery of exams. But the medical staff couldn't help but wonder what lay ahead of them. They knew about Italy, the triage in those hospitals, and they were hearing of a flood of patients swamping hospitals in New York. The door to the treatment room slid open and closed. Distant voices grew loud, then soft again. A nurse in blue scrubs, face shield, mask and gloves held a plastic bag. With an easy tug, the seam tore open. A swab and test tube filled with a pink-tinged solution were placed on a sterile tray. The same collection kit is used for the scores of pathogens -- influenza, gonorrhea, whooping cough -- that need identification for treatment. The patient lay alone; new policy prohibited visitors. The nurse explained the procedure, then guided the bristly swab -- a lance-like Q-tip -- through a nostril, farther and farther, until it reached the back of the throat near the adenoids where viruses often take hold amid the warm and moist tissue. Pain shot through the patient, trying to breathe through a gauze of congestion. Eyes welled with tears. The nurse extracted the swab -- covered with a film of mucus, rich with the cells of the patient and a possible virus -- and placed it into the accompanying test tube. The gooey extraction loosened amid a solution of salt, carbohydrates and antibiotics designed to preserve the viability of the virus for the hours ahead. A white label covered the tube, identifying the specimen with a series of numbers beginning with 20SA-83. Placed in a biohazard bag, it flew by pneumatic tube to the basement, where it was placed in a cooler bag, stored at 40 degrees to deter bacteria and fungus from growing. Garner's laboratory was a mile away. :: Garner, 41, always knew he would be a virologist. Growing up near Milwaukee, he was drawn to the worlds under a microscope, but not until the 1995 movie "Outbreak" did he see his future. "To a young African American teenager, the idea that Cuba Gooding Jr. was in this movie playing a hero in a suit, studying the Ebola and fighting it, well, I was hooked," he said. "I wanted to be the one fighting the apocalypse." Years later, his understanding of viruses grew more nuanced. Less a scourge of humanity, they had a beauty: adaptable to their environment, flexible in their evolution and vital to the human species. "If you look at the human genome, large segments of our DNA come from viruses," he said. "We are human because of our interactions with viruses." That afternoon, Garner stopped by the lab. Long hours during the week -- typically 7 a.m. to 5 p.m. -- meant shorter hours on the weekend. Standing in his office on the fourth floor before heading downstairs to the lab, he glanced out the window toward the Getty Center and the Santa Monica Mountains. Here we are in the midst of an unprecedented crisis, a threat to so many people, he thought, and the look of the sky doesn't change. Outside, a van drove up the driveway to the lab's second-floor receiving area. The building on San Vicente Boulevard in Brentwood is undistinguished. In better times, a restaurant on the ground level serves Italian. The van's rear doors swung open. A medical courier carried four soft cooler bags containing 200 specimens into the lab. Just three months ago, Garner first heard of a "mystery virus," an "unknown infection," spreading in China, but he didn't give it a second thought. Viral outbreaks from unidentified pathogens happen all the time; a new one didn't raise any immediate alarms. At the time he was focused more on his wife and their first child, born Jan. 5. But a week later his phone rang. A lab colleague, Shangxin Yang, was concerned. He knew people near the city of Wuhan. "This is going to be bad," Yang said. :: Garner marked the date -- Jan. 15 -- when he first heard the phrase "novel coronavirus" and put two assistant directors and his senior specialists to work. The UCLA Medical Center had long been the first stop for sick travelers arriving at Los Angeles International Airport, and the airport at the time was one of three in the country screening for the virus. He wanted to develop testing in his laboratory and not depend on others. He had the machinery, mothballed for research, that he could dust off, and he worried that the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention would not be able to accommodate the number of cases that he expected to see. The CDC was requiring collection kits be tested in Atlanta, a slow and cumbersome process. Then there was a shortage of collection kits, and when the FDA finally allowed other laboratories to do their own testing, only a few had the compatible equipment (and most of that was manufactured in Germany and China). Garner was also concerned that the CDC criteria for screening were too narrow. "South Korea was having active cases," he said, "but if someone traveled from South Korea and had the right symptoms, they didn't get tested." The clincher, though, was the test itself. "The CDC designed a beautiful test," Garner said, "but it was a little over-elegant." Its flaw, he explained, was in requiring the presence of three viral genomic markers for a positive result. When health agencies around the country began running trials in late January, they found only two of the markers. This defect led the CDC to revise and eventually drop one of the markers. Two would be enough, but by then it was Feb. 28. Critical time had been lost. "When trying to get ahead of the curve of the outbreak, we were already well behind," Garner said. "It is unfortunate what happened. We lost six to eight weeks for widespread testing." :: Within two hours of the patient arriving at the emergency room, the specimen inside No. 20SA-83 had reached Garner's lab, and Carlos Azucena, a clinical laboratory scientist, started the protocol. He guided his gloved hands under the glass partition of a bio-safety cabinet, slipping through a soft seal of ventilated air designed to keep pathogens from escaping into the room. Working slowly, he made sure the air barrier remained intact. He placed No. 20SA-83 on a vortex spinner. The pinkish solution whirled and churned. He transferred it from the test tube into a small vial and lowered it into a Styrofoam rack. He soon had eight prepared specimens. A small black disc, no larger than a CD, lay in front of him. It had eight pie-shaped compartments and looked like a fortune wheel. He opened a flap over one of the compartments, revealing two shallow wells. Using the calibrated pipette, he drew out 50 microliters -- just a drop -- from No. 20SA-83 and released it into one well. He turned to another set of vials, containing a reagent, the enzymes and chemical markers specially designed to reveal the presence of the coronavirus. He drew out a drop and placed it in the other well. After filling the eight compartments and closing their flaps, he removed the disc from the cabinet and inserted it into a thermo-cycler, a hooded gray machine just slightly larger than a pressure cooker. Azucena closed the lid, and the disc began spinning, reaching nearly 1,600 rpm. The temperature inside rose to more than 200 degrees Fahrenheit. For 90 minutes, these two extremes pitted specimen with reagent in a modulated sequence known as a polymerase chain reaction. The film of mucus, once covering the tip of the swab and containing the patient's cells, began to break apart. Their RNA converted into a single strand of DNA, awash with the enzymes and chemical markers that would target the coronavirus, and, if present, emit an impulse of light as it bonded, a brief and measurable florescence. "In its beauty, it is hard to understand the impact of the PCR [polymerase chain reaction]," Garner said. "It is like the Rosetta stone, showing us how to read the information inside a cell." As the thermocycler completed the test, Azucena reviewed the results. :: The next day at 7 a.m., Garner opened the daily report from the laboratory. In the previous 24 hours, his team had conducted 150 tests; a week before, just 30 tests. The increase was unprecedented, but he trusted the methodology. The company that formulated the reagent was headquartered near Milan, Italy, and the outbreak in northern Italy guaranteed experience with the virus. His eyes paused on No. 20SA-83. Another positive. By then, he guessed, the patient was in isolation in the hospital. The attending physician, who received this news within minutes of Azucena's review, could have begun antiviral treatments. The hospital could screen its healthcare workers and provide its infectious disease specialists with another data point in charting the progression of the virus in the community. Since ramping up testing, his laboratory had found that 10% of the tests among people with moderate to severe illness were positive. The rise or fall of this number is the best indication whether social isolation is slowing the spread. "This is the canary in the coal mine for how bad things are getting," he said. He only wishes more laboratories had this capability. "Everyone should be doing this," he said. Caption: PHOTO: UCLA clinical lab technician Mikkiel Cheng checks the time left on a thermocycler, part of the testing protocol for the hospital. The device helps in determining whether a swab sample contains the novel coronavirus. PHOTOGRAPHER:Brian van der Brug Los Angeles Times PHOTO:UCLA'S clinical laboratory ramped up to test for the coronavirus by using machinery that was designed for research but had been sitting idle. PHOTOGRAPHER:Brian van der Brug Los Angeles Times PHOTO:OMAI GARNER, who directs clinical microbiology testing for UCLA Health, says the 1995 film "Outbreak" helped inspire him in his career path. "I wanted to be the one fighting the apocalypse," he says. PHOTOGRAPHER:Brian van der Brug Los Angeles Times PHOTO:UCLA'S clinical lab facilities have been on the front line of viral diagnostic testing for years. PHOTOGRAPHER:Brian van der Brug Los Angeles Times 
Apr 1, 2020	The coronavirus outbreak has pushed the airline industry into strange territory. For American Airlines, that means -- for the first time in 36 years -- flying two cargo-only flights from the U.S. to Germany. The two round-trip flights last month of a Boeing 777-300 from Fort Worth to Frankfurt were a sign of desperate times for an industry that has seen passenger demand drop by as much as 90% on some routes since the crisis began. American Airlines, the world's largest carrier, isn't the only airline trying to find new revenue streams. Other major operators, including Delta Air Lines and United Airlines, have launched new cargo-only service while dramatically cutting domestic and international passenger flights.  "Challenging times call for creative solutions, and a team of people across the airline has been working nonstop to arrange cargo-only flight options for our customers," Rick Elieson, president of cargo for American Airlines, said in a statement. Southwest Airlines, the nation's largest low-cost carrier, announced Tuesday that it is offering cargo-only flights for the first time in the company's nearly 50-year history, although the airline has yet to launch specific routes. "We're facing one of the most unprecedented times in our industry and it's up to us to create new and innovative ways to continue serving our customers, including those who are moving cargo throughout the United States," the Dallas carrier said in an online post. The cargo push isn't limited to U.S. airlines. Scandinavian Airlines, known as SAS, and Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates-based Etihad Airways said they were expanding their cargo operations using passenger planes in response to the steep drop in air travel demand. Since March 13, Korean Air Lines has been flying A330-300 passenger planes with cargo only as often as five times a week between locations in South Korea, Vietnam and China. The addition of such cargo-only flights several times a week isn't enough to make up for the devastating drop in passenger demand that has sent the industry reeling. A recovery could take as long as seven months, with passenger revenue dropping more than 40% and costing the world's carriers $252 billion in losses in 2020, according to a forecast by the International Air Transport Assn., a trade group for the world's airlines. Still, converting some passenger flights to cargo makes sense, especially because many airlines are continuing to pay the salaries of some of their pilots and fuel prices have dropped significantly in the last month, according to industry experts. "They are trying to be creative and make the best of a bad situation," said Seth Kaplan, an aviation analyst and host of an airline-themed podcast. The $2.2-trillion coronavirus relief package signed into law last week requires that airlines that want to tap into more than $50 billion of it keep paying employees' salaries and maintain service to all destinations served as of March 1 "to the extent reasonable and practicable," according to the legislation. But demand for air travel has dropped so dramatically that some airline executives are now considering appealing to the U.S. Department of Transportation to allow the carriers to consolidate their flights so that they aren't required to fly planes carrying only a handful of passengers, according to a report by CNBC. Before the coronavirus outbreak, traditional U.S. airlines generated less than 5% of their overall revenue from transporting cargo in the belly of their planes. Most of an airline's revenue has come from airfares and charges for services such as checking luggage or providing food and drinks. When passenger demand plummeted over the last month, airlines cut capacity as much as 90% on international routes and more than 50% on domestic routes. That created a shortage of passenger planes carrying cargo in the hold. On Monday, Delta said it restarted regularly scheduled flights from China with cargo-only flights between Shanghai and Detroit, carrying 49 tons of medical supplies. "Operating regularly scheduled cargo flights means suppliers in China can get these supplies to hospitals and healthcare facilities across the U.S. within hours, not the days or weeks it would take via cargo ship," Shawn Cole, vice president of Delta cargo, said in a statement. In the previous week, Delta flew several cargo-only flights, including a flight from Dublin, Ireland, to Atlanta, carrying more than 32,000 pounds of pharmaceutical supplies in a widebody Airbus A350. Delta also flew cargo-only flights between Chicago and Amsterdam and between Los Angeles and Sydney, Australia. United said that it launched a minimum of 40 weekly cargo-only flights last week, including flights from Los Angeles International Airport to Hong Kong, between London and Shanghai as well as flights from Chicago, Newark, N.J., and Houston to Amsterdam, London, Germany, Hong Kong and Shanghai. The planes carried freight and mail, among other cargo. On Saturday, United flew a cargo-only B777-300 charter flight to transport nearly 100,000 pounds of food to American troops in Guam. "They are trying to make lemonade, as the saying goes," Kaplan said of U.S. carriers. Caption: PHOTO: ADDING cargo-only flights several times a week isn't enough to make up for the loss of passengers. Above, American Airlines crew chief Edgar Segura pulls freight from a flight from Beijing at LAX in 2018. PHOTOGRAPHER:Brian van der Brug Los Angeles Times
Mar 31, 2020	The coronavirus outbreak has pushed the airline industry into strange territory. For American Airlines, that means — for the first time in 36 years — flying two cargo-only flights from the U.S. to Germany. The two round-trip flights earlier this month of a Boeing 777-300 from Fort Worth to Frankfurt were a sign of desperate times for an industry that has seen passenger demand drop by up to 90% on some routes since the crisis began. American Airlines, the world’s largest carrier, isn’t the only airline trying to find new revenue streams. Other major operators, including Delta and United, have launched new cargo-only service while dramatically cutting domestic and international passenger flights. “Challenging times call for creative solutions, and a team of people across the airline has been working nonstop to arrange cargo-only flight options for our customers,” Rick Elieson, president of cargo for American Airlines, said in a statement. Southwest Airlines, the nation’s largest low-cost carrier, announced Tuesday that it is offering cargo-only flights for the first time in the company’s nearly 50-year history, although the airline has yet to launch specific routes. “We’re facing one of the most unprecedented times in our industry and it’s up to us to create new and innovative ways to continue serving our customers, including those who are moving cargo throughout the United States,” the Dallas-based carrier said in an online post Tuesday. The cargo push isn’t limited to U.S. airlines. Scandinavian Airlines, known as SAS, and Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates-based Etihad Airways said they are expanding their cargo operations using passenger planes in response to the steep drop in air travel demand. Since March 13, Korean Air has been flying A330-300 passenger planes with cargo only up to five times a week between locations in South Korea, Vietnam and China. The addition of such cargo-only flights several times a week isn’t enough to make up for the devastating drop in passenger demand that has sent the industry reeling. A recovery could take up to seven months, with passenger revenue dropping more than 40% and costing the world’s carriers $252 billion in losses in 2020, according to a forecast by the International Air Transport Assn., a trade group for the world’s airlines. Still, converting some passenger flights to cargo only makes sense, especially because many airlines are continuing to pay the salaries of some of their pilots and fuel prices have dropped significantly in the past month, according to industry experts. “They are trying to be creative and make the best of a bad situation,” said Seth Kaplan, an aviation analyst and host of an airline-themed podcast. The $2.2-trillion coronavirus relief package signed into law last week requires that airlines that want to tap into more than $50 billion of it keep paying employees salaries and maintain service to all destinations served as of March 1 “to the extent reasonable and practicable,” according to the legislation. But demand for air travel has dropped so dramatically that some airline executives are now considering appealing to the U.S. Department of Transportation to allow the carriers to consolidate their flights so that they aren’t required to fly planes carrying only a handful of passengers, according to a report by CNBC. Coronavirus Economy Before the coronavirus outbreak, traditional U.S. airlines generated less than 5% of their overall revenue from transporting cargo in the belly of their planes. Most of an airlines’ revenue has come from air fares and charges for services such as checking luggage or providing food and drinks. When passenger demand plummeted over the last month, airlines cut capacity up to 90% on international routes and more than 50% on domestic routes. That created a shortage of passenger planes carrying cargo in the hold. On Monday, Delta Air Lines said it restarted regularly scheduled flights from China with cargo-only flights between Shanghai and Detroit, carrying 49 tons of medical supplies. “Operating regularly scheduled cargo flights means suppliers in China can get these supplies to hospitals and healthcare facilities across the U.S. within hours, not the days or weeks it would take via cargo ship,” Shawn Cole, vice president of Delta cargo, said in a statement. In the previous week, Delta flew several cargo-only flights, including a flight from Dublin, Ireland, to Atlanta, carrying more than 32,000 pounds of pharmaceutical supplies in a widebody Airbus A350. Delta also flew cargo-only flights between Chicago and Amsterdam and between Los Angeles and Sydney, Australia. United Airlines said that it launched a minimum of 40 weekly cargo-only flights last week, including flights from Los Angeles International Airport to Hong Kong, London and Shanghai as well as flights from Chicago, Newark, N.J., and Houston to Amsterdam, London, Germany, Hong Kong and Shanghai. The planes carried freight and mail, among other cargo. On Saturday, United flew a cargo-only B777-300 charter flight to transport nearly 100,000 pounds of food to U.S. troops in Guam. “They are trying to make lemonade, as the saying goes,” Kaplan said of U.S. carriers.
Mar 31, 2020	Goodbye Elton John, hello James Corden. Twenty-four hours after the “Rocket Man” legend hosted a coronavirus benefit on television Sunday night, Corden got in on the action Monday with his own socially distanced prime-time special, “Homefest.” Anchoring the hourlong show from what he said was his garage, the host of CBS’ “Late Late Show” presented remote musical performances by acts including Billie Eilish, who sang her ballad “Everything I Wanted” while cuddling two puppies on her lap, and Andrea Bocelli, who belted his signature song, “Con te partirò,” from his home in hard-hit Italy. But “Homefest’s” main attraction, at least to judge by the reaction on social media, was undeniably BTS, the K-pop boy band evidently quarantining as a group in South Korea. Delightfully dressed down in a stylish array of hoodies and sweatpants, the seven-member outfit — which recently announced the postponement of a North American tour scheduled to launch next month — advised fans to keep socially distancing before running through its song “Boy With Luv” in what appeared to be a rehearsal space. Watch BTS’ performance below.  People: Corden, James  Company / organization: Name: Homefest; NAICS: 442299  Title: Watch BTS perform from quarantine on James Corden's 'Homefest' special  Publication title: Los Angeles Times (Online); Los Angeles  Publication year: 2020  Publication date: Mar 31, 2020  Section: entertainment-arts  Publisher: Los Angeles Times Com munications LLC  Place of publication: Los Angeles  Country of publication: United States, Los Angeles  Publication subject: General Interest Periodicals--United States  Source type: Blogs, Podcasts, & Websites  Language of publication: English  Document type: News  ProQuest document ID: 2384642898  Document URL: http://search.proquest.com.ssl.access.yonsei.ac.kr:8080/docview/2384642898?accountid=15179  Copyright: Copyright Los Angeles Times Communications LLC Mar 31, 2020  Last updated: 2020-04-01  Database: Los Angeles Times  ____________________________________________________________  Social distancing may have helped California slow the virus and avoid New York's fate  Author: Lin, Rong-Gong, II; Karlamangla, Soumya; Greene, Sean; Rainey, James  Publication info: Los Angeles Times (Online) , Los Angeles: Los Angeles Times Communications LLC. Mar 31, 2020.  http://search.proquest.com.ssl.access.yonsei.ac.kr:8080/docview/2384642665?accountid=15179  Abstract: None available.  Links: http://US2ST5WU6Z.search.serialssolutions.com/directLink?&amp;atitle=Social+distancing+may+have+helped+California+slow+the+virus+and+avoid+New+York%27s+fate&amp;author=Lin%2C+Rong-Gong%2C+II%3BKarlamangla%2C+Soumya%3BGreene%2C+Sean%3BRainey%2C+James&amp;issn=&amp;title=Los+Angeles+Times+%28Online%29&amp;volume=&amp;issue=&amp;date=2020-03-31&amp;spage=&amp;id=doi:&amp;sid=ProQ_ss&amp;genre=article  Full text: For California and Washington, the coronavirus triggers came early. They pushed the two Western states to social distancing measures earlier than the rest of the country. In the San Francisco Bay Area, the warning came while the Grand Princess cruise ship, carrying infected crew and passengers, lurked outside the Golden Gate. As the coronavirus cases spread in Silicon Valley, health officers as early as March 5 urged employers to consider allowing more employees to work from home, and companies to cancel large gatherings and nonessential travel. By the time the ship docked in Oakland on March 9, the BART transit system had seen a 24% drop in ridership compared with a typical Monday in February. Ridership was down 75% a week later, the same day the Bay Area issued the nation’s first coronavirus shelter-in-place order. In Seattle, the early deaths at a suburban nursing home at the end of February shocked many into action. By the first week of March, major tech companies were telling employees to work from home and local officials urged them to do so. The coronavirus continues to spread rapidly in both places, but so far at a rate slower than in the country’s other hot spots such as New York, New Jersey, Michigan and Louisiana. To be sure, the epidemic still could get dramatically worse on the West Coast. A San Francisco nursing home with more than 700 beds is contending with an outbreak that has infected two patients and nine staff members. There are signs of the contagion at 11 Los Angeles County nursing homes, too. But experts are looking to California and Washington for signs that social distancing is making a difference. With all eyes on the sharply rising curves showing the dramatic rise in cases, “if and when it flattens, you’ll see it here first,” said Dr. George Rutherford, an epidemiologist and infectious disease expert at UC San Francisco. The implementation of the shelter-in-place orders in the Bay Area “happened closer to the introduction of the virus, so you haven’t had as many generations of transmission. So there are fewer cases per capita in the population,” Rutherford said. While cautioning that there’s no way to predict the future, it’s plausible the Bay Area’s early action will allow it to avoid a New York-style surge in cases, he added. Dr. Robert Kim-Farley, an epidemiologist at UCLA, said the numbers of hospitalizations and deaths provide a more accurate indicator of the outbreak’s trajectory than the number of cases identified through uneven testing. On Thursday, the total number of deaths in L.A. County nearly doubled in a single day. “I will anticipate that we will continue to see increased in hospitalizations and deaths, but I think we should be able to see some leveling off of those numbers in a couple of weeks because of the physical distancing measures,” Kim-Farley said. Indeed, Gov. Gavin Newsom said Monday that the number of patients hospitalized with COVID-19 had doubled over the course of four days — and the number in intensive care units had nearly tripled. After a person is infected with the coronavirus, it can take two to 14 days for symptoms — commonly fever, cough and shortness of breath — to appear. Then, in cases where the illness becomes severe, it usually takes an additional eight to 15 days for a patient to require treatment in an intensive care unit. That means it can take weeks for the effects of stay-at-home orders become evident. And there are a number of things that can still go wrong for California. The state does not know how many people are flouting the order to stay at home as much as possible and keep at least six feet away from others, said Dr. Otto Yang, an infectious disease expert at UCLA Medical Center, where coronavirus cases have climbed sharply in the last couple of weeks. A few news accounts suggest that some Californians are skeptical about the threat from the virus and the need for physical distancing. The lack of widespread testing can also mask how many people are actually infected and passing the virus around, Yang said. The true number “is going to determine how much hospital resources are going to be needed,” he said. The Bay Area stunned the nation on March 16 when health officers in six counties jointly ordered residents to shelter in place to curb the spread of the coronavirus, officially known as SARS-CoV-2. Eleven other California counties soon joined the order, and on March 19 it was expanded statewide by Newsom. New York state, by contrast, issued a stay-at-home order on March 20, and made it effective on March 22. California’s earlier, aggressive stay-at-home order is one reason why a model published by the University of Washington’s Institute of Health Metrics and Evaluation suggests that New York state will see its worst day of the epidemic in early April, and that it will be dramatically worse than California’s worst day. The report projects the peak of hospitalizations and deaths in California to come in late April. “Given what we’ve been seeing in California, we are expecting the peak of the epidemic — the intensity of it — to be lower than in New York,” said Dr. Chris Murray, professor and director of the Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation and the author of the report. “That means the surge in the hospitals will be smaller.” Officials advising President Trump said their model of the pandemic mirrors the University of Washington projections. But other experts have raised doubts about the conclusions. Newsletter Get our free Coronavirus Today newsletter Sign up for the latest news, best stories and what they mean for you, plus answers to your questions. Sign Me Up You may occasionally receive promotional content from the Los Angeles Times. Nicholas Jewell, a biostatistics researcher at UC Berkeley, said he is “very skeptical” about the work. He said it makes a number of assumptions that remain to be proved — including about the death rate in Wuhan, China, where the disease originated, and in one region of Italy hard hit by the coronavirus. The University of Washington projections changed from Friday to Monday, as the researchers fed new data into their computer simulation. On Monday, it showed that California would most likely be hit with 4,306 deaths, compared with the 6,109 forecast last week. For New York, the projected death total rose considerably — from 10,243 to 15,546. Those sharp shifts were another factor giving Jewell pause. “I am not saying their answer is wrong,” Jewell said. “I am just saying we shouldn’t put too much confidence in it yet.” More coverage on coronavirus in California  A University of Washington biology professor also raised questions about the projections, saying they represent a “best case” model that appears to assume a degree of social distancing equivalent to that achieved in Wuhan. “It’s not obvious to me, especially in states without control orders, that we will get anything like the shutdown we saw in Wuhan,” said Carl T. Bergstrom, an expert in mathematical and computational biology. Besides the later stay-at-home order for New York, other potential factors for that state’s sharp rise in cases include New York City’s population density and crowded mass transit system, Murray said. Unlike the U.S., where tests have been in short supply, Asian cities had the advantages of being able to test for the virus widely, isolating the infected, finding their close contacts, and quarantining those who may have been infected. Wide availability of tests in South Korea also gave health officials the ability to spot outbreaks before they emerged, allowing authorities to keep those with the potential to spread the virus away from uninfected people. Models projecting the course of an epidemic can be controversial. The modeling is only as good as the data it is based on, and California is at disadvantage because of the lack of available tests, Barbara Ferrer, Los Angeles County’s public health director, said Friday. Still, Ferrer said she thinks it is plausible that case numbers will continue to increase for three more weeks in L.A. County. Cases could continue to double every four to six days for weeks, given the rapid rise that has been seen so far in the region. “Given what we know ... we’re likely to have a lot of people here that are going to be infected,” she said. Dr. Grant Colfax, the director of public health in San Francisco, said it’s still too early to tell whether the rise in COVID-19 cases is slowing down. “I simply do not know if our aggressive actions early on ... have had the intended effect,” he said. “I certainly am hoping and praying that that is the case. We still need the data to confirm that.” In the meantime, doctors at UCSF Medical Center are using the time to prepare. “Every single day that goes by, we have an opportunity to get more ventilators, to re-purpose more clinical space, to open up isolation wards, to learn from our colleagues on the East Coast,” said Dr. Jahan Fahimi, medical director of the hospital’s emergency department. “So even when the surge comes … we now have the ability to meet more demand.” Lin reported from Millbrae, Karlamangla from Los Angeles, Greene from Thousand Oaks and Rainey from South Pasadena. 
Mar 31, 2020	For California and Washington, the coronavirus triggers came early. They pushed the two Western states to social distancing measures earlier than the rest of the country. In the San Francisco Bay Area, the warning came while the Grand Princess cruise ship, carrying infected crew and passengers, lurked outside the Golden Gate. As the coronavirus cases spread in Silicon Valley, health officers as early as March 5 urged employers to consider allowing more employees to work from home, and companies to cancel large gatherings and nonessential travel. By the time the ship docked in Oakland on March 9, the BART transit system had seen a 24% drop in ridership compared with a typical Monday in February. Ridership was down 75% a week later, the same day the Bay Area issued the nation's first coronavirus shelter-in-place order.  In Seattle, the early deaths at a suburban nursing home at the end of February shocked many into action. By the first week of March, major tech companies were telling employees to work from home, and local officials urged them to do so. The coronavirus continues to spread rapidly in both places, but so far at a rate slower than in the country's other hot spots such as New York, New Jersey, Michigan and Louisiana. To be sure, the epidemic still could get dramatically worse on the West Coast. A San Francisco nursing home with more than 700 beds is contending with an outbreak that has infected two patients and nine staff members. There are signs of the contagion at 11 Los Angeles County nursing homes too. But experts are looking to California and Washington for signs that social distancing is making a difference. With all eyes on the sharply rising curves showing the dramatic increase in cases, "if and when it flattens, you'll see it here first," said Dr. George Rutherford, an epidemiologist and infectious disease expert at UC San Francisco. The implementation of the shelter-in-place orders in the Bay Area "happened closer to the introduction of the virus, so you haven't had as many generations of transmission. So there are fewer cases per capita in the population," Rutherford said. While cautioning that there's no way to predict the future, it's plausible the Bay Area's early action will allow it to avoid a New York-style surge in cases, he added. Dr. Robert Kim-Farley, an epidemiologist at UCLA, said the numbers of hospitalizations and deaths provide a more accurate indicator of the outbreak's trajectory than the number of cases identified through uneven testing. On Thursday, the total number of deaths in L.A. County nearly doubled in a single day. "I will anticipate that we will continue to see increases in hospitalizations and deaths, but I think we should be able to see some leveling off of those numbers in a couple of weeks because of the physical distancing measures," Kim-Farley said. Indeed, Gov. Gavin Newsom said Monday that the number of patients hospitalized with COVID-19 had doubled over the course of four days -- and the number in intensive care units had nearly tripled. After a person is infected with the coronavirus, it can take two to 14 days for symptoms -- commonly fever, cough and shortness of breath -- to appear. Then, in cases where the illness becomes severe, it usually takes an additional eight to 15 days for a patient to require treatment in an intensive care unit. That means it can take weeks for the effects of stay-at-home orders to become evident. And there are a number of things that can still go wrong for California. The state does not know how many people are flouting the order to stay at home as much as possible and keep at least six feet away from others, said Dr. Otto Yang, an infectious disease expert at UCLA Medical Center, where coronavirus cases have climbed sharply in the last couple of weeks. A few news accounts suggest that some Californians are skeptical about the threat from the virus and the need for physical distancing. The lack of widespread testing can also mask how many people are actually infected and passing the virus around, Yang said. The true number "is going to determine how much hospital resources are going to be needed," he said. The Bay Area stunned the nation on March 16 when health officers in six counties jointly ordered residents to shelter in place to curb the spread of the coronavirus, officially known as SARS-CoV-2. Eleven other California counties soon joined the order, and on March 19 it was expanded statewide by Newsom. New York state, by contrast, issued a stay-at-home order on March 20 and made it effective on March 22. California's earlier, aggressive stay-at-home order is one reason that a model published by the University of Washington's Institute of Health Metrics and Evaluation suggests that New York state will see its worst day of the epidemic in early April, and that it will be dramatically worse than California's worst day. The report projects the peak of hospitalizations and deaths in California to come in late April. "Given what we've been seeing in California, we are expecting the peak of the epidemic -- the intensity of it -- to be lower than in New York," said Dr. Chris Murray, professor and director of the Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation and the author of the report. "That means the surge in the hospitals will be smaller." Officials advising President Trump said their model of the pandemic mirrors the University of Washington projections. But other experts have raised doubts about the conclusions. Nicholas Jewell, a biostatistics researcher at UC Berkeley, said he is "very skeptical" about the work. He said it makes a number of assumptions that remain to be proved -- including about the death rate in Wuhan, China, where the disease originated, and in one region of Italy hard hit by the coronavirus. The University of Washington projections changed from Friday to Monday, as the researchers fed new data into their computer simulation. On Monday, it showed that California would most likely be hit with 4,306 deaths, compared with the 6,109 forecast last week. For New York, the projected death total rose considerably -- from 10,243 to 15,546. Those sharp shifts were another factor giving Jewell pause. "I am not saying their answer is wrong," Jewell said. "I am just saying we shouldn't put too much confidence in it yet." A University of Washington biology professor also raised questions about the projections, saying they represent a "best case" model that appears to assume a degree of social distancing equivalent to that achieved in Wuhan. "It's not obvious to me, especially in states without control orders, that we will get anything like the shutdown we saw in Wuhan," said Carl T. Bergstrom, an expert in mathematical and computational biology. Besides the later stay-at-home order for New York, other potential factors for that state's sharp rise in cases include New York City's population density and crowded mass transit system, Murray said. Unlike the U.S., where tests have been in short supply, Asian cities had the advantages of being able to test for the virus widely, isolating the infected, finding their close contacts and quarantining those who may have been infected. Wide availability of tests in South Korea also gave health officials the ability to spot outbreaks before they emerged, allowing authorities to keep those with the potential to spread the virus away from uninfected people. Models projecting the course of an epidemic can be controversial. The modeling is only as good as the data it is based on, and California is at a disadvantage because of the lack of available tests, Barbara Ferrer, Los Angeles County's public health director, said Friday. Still, Ferrer said she thinks it is plausible that case numbers will continue to increase for three more weeks in L.A. County. Cases could continue to double every four to six days for weeks, given the rapid rise that has been seen so far in the region. "Given what we know ... we're likely to have a lot of people here that are going to be infected," she said. Dr. Grant Colfax, the director of public health in San Francisco, said it's still too early to tell whether the rise in COVID-19 cases is slowing down. "I simply do not know if our aggressive actions early on ... have had the intended effect," he said. "I certainly am hoping and praying that that is the case. We still need the data to confirm that." In the meantime, doctors at UCSF Medical Center are using the time to prepare. "Every single day that goes by, we have an opportunity to get more ventilators, to repurpose more clinical space, to open up isolation wards, to learn from our colleagues on the East Coast," said Dr. Jahan Fahimi, medical director of the hospital's emergency department. "So even when the surge comes ... we now have the ability to meet more demand." -- Lin reported from Millbrae, Karlamangla from Los Angeles, Greene from Thousand Oaks and Rainey from South Pasadena. Caption: PHOTO: A BART TRAIN in Oakland. Ridership plummeted after the Bay Area issued the nation's first coronavirus shelter-in-place order. PHOTOGRAPHER:Justin Sullivan Getty Images 
Mar 30, 2020	Before dawn, bags of groceries ordered online are plopped at my front door by deliverymen (women?) whose faces I'll never see. I summon taxis on my smartphone, rendering unnecessary even the brief conversation to give the driver my destination or discuss an optimal route. All manners of food -- from steaming stews to sushi to the seemingly most ephemeral of dishes, shaved ice -- can be ordered for delivery within the hour. If I so choose, I can avoid even a split-second of face time by requesting, in an app, that the food be left outside my door. In Seoul, one of the most densely packed metropolises in the world, I can glide through a day dining out, shopping and even singing karaoke on my own without ever interfacing with another human. My world is one of apps, tablets and self-service screens. It's almost as if the city was girding itself for this moment in history, when each and every face-to-face interaction has come to feel like a game of Russian roulette.  Long before the virus' arrival, social distancing was becoming a way of life in my native South Korea, as it was around a globe increasingly accustomed to same-day shipping, on-demand service apps and more streamed entertainment than one could watch in a lifetime. The precision and convenience of drop-down menus and electronic payments have taken the place of in-person transactions; the allure of algorithm-optimized content and infinitely replenishing social media has come to trump the less sure bet of flesh-and-blood company. The coronavirus, in forcing a swath of humanity to shelter in place for weeks on end, may very well accelerate that digital sequestration and seal us more deeply in the glow of our screen-enabled confines. It's a grand social experiment of an unprecedented scale. When we emerge from weeks or months of distancing from one another, will we crave and relish human contact, or realize how comfortably we can live without it? What will that do to us? "I think this will become the new normal," said Koo Bon-kwon, a South Korean columnist and author who writes about how technology has changed human lives. "A chunk of our society will experience this for the first time and realize, there isn't a whole lot of difference to workflow, productivity and performance." It's long been the paradox of urban living that the closer we're packed together, the more anonymous and alienated we become. The novel coronavirus has added to even the most fleeting of interactions a sense of peril, changing the risk-benefit calculus of the minute, mundane human encounters that thread our daily lives. Will that exchange with the store clerk, that brush on the subway, that elevator ride be the fateful moment the invisible virus makes its entry? The shelter-in-place and 6-feet physical distancing measures unfolding across the U.S. have left many anxious about the indefinite period of isolation ahead. News reports are asking everyone from astronauts to inmates in long-term solitary confinement for tips on how to persevere. But nestled in front of our TV screens and scrolling through our smartphones, weren't we increasingly living that way already? Isolation has for years been both a cultural trend and marketing buzzword in South Korea and elsewhere in East Asia. The once-robust family ties in these societies are fraying. Rapid urbanization and cut-throat economic competition have left a generation fatigued by interacting with fellow denizens. In Japan, "low-interaction dining" for lone diners, facilitated by automated ticketing machines and cubicle-like partitions, had long since become a fixture of city life. In China, consultants in recent years published reports on the "Economy of Loneliness," extolling business opportunities to cater to a generation more comfortable spending time alone than in the company of others. In South Korea, increasing numbers of young adults had been self-identifying as " honjok" -- loosely translated to "tribe of loners," people who prefer solitude. Businesses realized more and more people preferred services devoid of human contact, and would even pay a premium for it. They began offering up what's come to be known here as "untact" services, a neologism combining "undo" and "contact," popularizing self-service auto financing, coffee served up by robot-arm baristas and unmanned, self-pay karaoke stalls. In the U.S. and Europe, there's been increasing alarm about the health consequences of loneliness, with researchers calling loneliness itself an "epidemic." But in Asia, time alone for some has come to be celebrated and cherished as a revolt against a collectivist tradition and something of a liberation for a generation of young adults. Jeong Dan-bi runs a start-up providing information and services for the honjok -- such as cocktail recipes to make at home, and where to get shabu shabu for one. She said the "loner" phenomenon was about prioritizing one's own time and preference in defiance of a rigid corporate and working culture that limits individual expression. "We were probably able to accept [social distancing] more easily because that culture was already spreading, especially among millennials," said Jeong, 31, chief executive of the company King of Honjok. Since the coronavirus outbreak, there's been a twofold surge in sign-ups for her app, Jeong said. She noted that in South Korea, there had been negative views of the trend from the older generation casting it as youthful selfishness, but that may shift with the coronavirus outbreak. "A monumental event like this will really change people's perceptions," she said. "People across generations were forced to experience it. There are going to be people who think, now that I've tried it out, I like it." Despite an early surge of coronavirus infections in February -- with the largest number of infected outside China at one point -- South Korea never imposed mandatory business closures or large-scale quarantines. Instead it urged citizens to voluntarily distance themselves for two weeks. Combined with extensive contact tracing and widespread testing, the approach appeared to stabilize the community spread, with the number of new infections leveling off in recent weeks. A newspaper op-ed this month credited South Korea's legions of delivery workers as the unsung heroes who had allowed life in the country to largely go on even as cities elsewhere went on lockdown. Amid a surge in orders, a deliveryman in his 40s with a heart condition collapsed and died on the job in the early hours of March 12. "It is not an exaggeration to say, doctors are on the front lines fighting the coronavirus and protecting our lives, while in the rear, deliverymen are protecting people struggling to keep their distance from the virus," an op-ed in the newspaper Joongang Ilbo said. While the possibility of a second wave of cases from travelers and students returning from abroad remains, Seoul is in a thaw. In time for the spring bloom, Jeong's office reopened after about two weeks of telecommuting. Koo, the columnist, who writes for the Hankyoreh newspaper, has begun setting up the occasional lunch appointment after about a month of little contact with anyone outside his immediate family. "The world has changed. It could easily have been very depressing and anxiety-inducing, but even in self-quarantine we were connected through the mobile web," said Koo, who is 54 and identifies as a product of a pre-digital world. "We were cut off but not cut off at the same time, connected all the more intimately." Koo, though, said he believed there were things that would never be replaced with an app or a screen. "There is an emptiness that comes from not being able to see someone's facial expression, feel their warmth and share a moment of kinship," he said. Caption: PHOTO: A MAN has a park mostly to himself in Goyang, South Korea. In a nation where isolation is a cultural trend, self-service auto financing, coffee served up by robot-arm baristas and self-pay karaoke stalls are part of life. PHOTOGRAPHER:Ahn Young-joon Associated Press PHOTO:A WOMAN passes a temple in Seoul. Distancing rules to stem the virus may accelerate the sequestration that has long been part of life in South Korea. PHOTOGRAPHER:Chung Sung-jun Getty Images 
Mar 30, 2020	Both the COVID-19 pandemic and climate change are global crises with the power to derail economies and kill millions of people. Society has moved far more aggressively to address the novel coronavirus than it has the climate crisis. But some experts wonder whether the unprecedented global mobilization to slow the pandemic might help pave the way for more dramatic climate action. Leah Stokes, a political scientist at UC Santa Barbara, pointed out that aggressive steps to reduce planet-warming emissions -- such as investing in solar and wind power, switching to electric cars and requiring more efficient buildings -- wouldn't be nearly as disruptive to everyday life as the stay-at-home orders that have defined the coronavirus response.  "Dealing with the climate crisis is a decades-long transformation of our energy system," Stokes said. It's also possible COVID-19 will change nothing for the climate fight because the calamitous effects of rising temperatures -- such as worsening wildfires, deadlier heat waves and rising seas -- are building over time rather than all at once. We asked eight scientists, activists and other experts what a coronavirus-like response to climate change would look like, and what we can learn from the pandemic. Here's what they said. -- Emily Grubert, social scientist and engineer, Georgia Tech: To Grubert, the ongoing pandemic "highlights how much we do actually need systemic responses to an emergency." In other words, narrowly addressing root causes isn't enough. Public officials in various parts of the country haven't just tried to slow the spread of COVID-19; they've suspended evictions, guaranteed paid sick leave and proposed sending cash to Americans. Similarly, Grubert said, climate policies can't just focus on reducing emissions. They must provide relief for those who are most vulnerable, such as coal workers who lose their jobs and low-income communities suffering the worst effects of pollution. "We can't really solve the climate crisis without having support for people's healthcare, and support for people being able to survive wage-wise and job-wise," she said. "And I think with the coronavirus response, we're starting to see a lot of those same types of arguments being applied." Grubert has also been reading about public transit systems faced with massive budget shortfalls because ridership has cratered during the pandemic. She's hopeful those types of headlines might spur greater support for government investment in light rail and buses, which can play a huge role in reducing planet-warming emissions by getting people out of their cars. -- Shane Skelton, former energy advisor to onetime House Speaker Paul Ryan: Skelton sees an important lesson for climate policy in the coronavirus outbreak: that confronting a crisis is far more difficult and expensive when it's already on your doorstep. The consequences of planet-warming emissions are already here, but the most devastating effects are yet to come. And whether it's disease prevention or climate change, Skelton said, "the gross amount of money spent, and the disruption to the economy, is far less when you invest in prevention than in managed chaos and recovery." Climate change "will be as bad as coronavirus when we're really feeling it. So let's not go there," he said. Skelton thinks federal stimulus money to jump-start the economy after the pandemic subsides should include big investments in clean energy infrastructure, such as electric vehicle manufacturing, building retrofits, microgrids and projects to reduce emissions from industry. He also wants to see Congress set a federal clean electricity standard, possibly as high as 80% by 2050. Skelton described himself as "very much a states' rights advocate." But the federal government's true value, he said, is addressing emergencies and economic crises that can't be solved by the states alone -- such as climate change, or a global pandemic. -- Leah Stokes, climate policy researcher, UC Santa Barbara: Stokes pointed out a striking contrast between the coronavirus and climate change. To prevent the spread of COVID-19, young people around the world are staying at home, in large part to protect their parents' and grandparents' generations. With climate change, it's older generations who are being asked to protect the planet for their children and grandchildren by making smaller lifestyle changes, such as driving less or eating less meat. "I hope we could have this sort of inter-generational solidarity on the climate crisis," Stokes said. Lifestyle changes alone won't solve the climate crisis, and passing laws to reduce emissions will still be tough as long as the fossil-fuel industry exerts political influence, Stokes said. But the coronavirus crisis might "wake people up" to the importance of listening to scientists, and to the value of well-staffed, well-funded government agencies, she said. She also noted that many critics have been quick to dismiss the multitrillion-dollar climate plans proposed by Democratic presidential candidates. But now Congress and President Trump have passed $2 trillion in federal spending as part of a coronavirus relief package. "It suddenly becomes really questionable why there's never any money to deal with this [climate] crisis," Stokes said. -- Kyle Meyaard-Schaap, national organizer, Young Evangelicals for Climate Action: Meyaard-Schaap believes the coronavirus could have tangible and intangible ripple effects for climate. On the tangible side, when the federal government sends $1,200 checks to individual Americans -- a key piece of the relief package being debated by Congress -- that might help build political support for a carbon tax and dividend. It's a proposal to tax companies that emit planet-warming carbon pollution, then return the proceeds to households. "Do you want to get that money in a more sustainable way? Let's tax carbon, and cut everyone a check," Meyaard-Schaap said. On the intangible side, the pandemic might help people better understand the dangers posed by climate change. Scientists say a warmer planet is more conducive to the insects that spread diseases such as malaria and Zika. A hotter planet with worse air quality from increased smog formation and larger wildfires could also keep people indoors, as the coronavirus has. COVID-19 "could make each of us more afraid, more cynical, less trusting in government," and thus less willing to come together on climate, Meyaard-Schaap said. But he's hopeful the pandemic will instead offer something else: "an opportunity for all of us to be inspired by each other, and to be chastened by our own call to responsibility." -- Michael Webber, chief scientist and technology officer, Engie: As chief scientist for a Paris-based multinational energy company, Webber is in the thick of the global coronavirus response. Like many utilities, Engie is implementing contingency plans to keep power plants running, and trying to figure out how it can use its emergency response and infrastructure expertise to help hospitals and governments deal with the outbreak. For Webber, who is also an engineering professor at the University of Texas, Austin, there are two main lessons for climate change. The first is the importance of listening to scientists, who have been warning for years about the risk of a global pandemic in much the same way they've been sounding alarm bells about climate. The second is the need to act early on those warnings. Webber pointed to the success of early, aggressive responses to COVID-19 in countries such as Singapore and South Korea. The virus has spread more quickly and infected more people in countries that were slower to respond, such as the United States. "This feels like climate change to me, where every year we wait to take action on climate change means we have to hustle even harder," Webber said. "And unfortunately people are going to die." -- Aracely Jimenez, deputy communications director, Sunrise Movement: The Sunrise Movement is the youth-led activist group behind the Green New Deal, a sweeping set of proposals that would slash planet-warming emissions while also guaranteeing a living-wage job and high-quality healthcare for every American. To Jimenez, the fallout from the coronavirus -- including widespread layoffs across industries such as food service and hospitality, and the fact that many Americans fear they won't be able to afford treatment if they get sick -- exposes the "fault lines" in America's social safety net. Those are the fault lines the Green New Deal seeks to address, she said. The country's post-pandemic economic recovery plan "has to be one that's about creating good jobs that are tied to meaningful work," Jimenez said. "The Green New Deal is the only plan on the table that is looking at the economy and understanding how critical it is to rebuild it, and make it resistant to these crisis-level shocks." Jimenez said the world's rapid mobilization to slow the COVID-19 pandemic shows that sweeping climate action is possible. "We can model and demand a world where we come together across lines of generation and race and class to understand that we deserve a better world where everyone is taken care of," she said. -- Rich Powell, executive director, ClearPath: Powell runs a clean energy advocacy group founded by Jay Faison, a conservative mega-donor who has been trying for years to get Republican politicians to take climate change seriously. For Powell, the COVID-19 pandemic hammers home the importance of reliable, affordable energy supplies. He noted that power companies are going to "heroic lengths" to keep the lights on, making it possible for society to keep functioning amid the crisis. Keeping energy reliable and affordable even as economies transition away from fossil fuels will require more than just solar farms and wind turbines, which can go a long way toward reducing emissions but are still limited by the on-again, off-again nature of sun and wind. ClearPath supports government investment in technologies that might drive deeper emissions cuts, such as enhanced geothermal, advanced nuclear, pumped-storage hydropower and carbon capture from fossil fueled generators. Powell foresees an opportunity to bolster those kinds of technologies through the economic stimulus packages that will almost certainly be needed even after the pandemic subsides. "We actually have a daunting but also exciting opportunity ahead of us this century, which is figuring out how to get everybody linked up to affordable, reliable electricity, and figure out how to do it clean," he said. -- Anne Orford, chair of international law, Melbourne Law School: Orford wrote a blog post for the London Review of Books arguing that efforts to rein in the novel coronavirus have "led to a significant shift in the way individuals, institutions and politicians discuss our responsibility to protect vulnerable groups." "States that for decades had been committed to neoliberal thinking have slowly begun to embrace such radically old-fashioned ideas as planning for the future, relying on scientific expertise, or calling on their constituents to make sacrifices," she wrote. In an interview, Orford explained that international law has long been shaped by the "rational choice" paradigm that dominates U.S. legal thinking. She described that way of thinking as follows: "You can't ask people to make any sacrifice of liberty or property for the collective -- and even if you did ask them, they wouldn't do it." Nations, too, will act only in their own self-interest, "even when faced with destruction of the planet." Now the COVID-19 pandemic is putting those ideas to the test. And Orford suspects there's no going back. "We can't un-live this," she said. "We now know you can ask people to radically do something we wouldn't have thought possible, and we can do that with good humor. So why can't we do that for the environment?" Caption: PHOTO: SOME EXPERTS wonder if the global mobilization to slow the COVID-19 pandemic might pave the way for more serious climate action. Above, visitors keep their distance this month at San Diego's Mission Bay Park. PHOTOGRAPHER:Howard Lipin San Diego Union-Tribune PHOTO:EFFORTS to reduce emissions -- such as investing in solar power -- wouldn't be as disruptive to life as stay-at-home orders. Above, an American flag flutters at the Desert Sunlight solar farm in Desert Center, Calif. PHOTOGRAPHER:Marcus Yam Los Angeles Times 
Mar 29, 2020	SERIES Almost Paradise An ex-DEA agent retires to a tranquil, out-of-the-way resort in the Philippines, where he gets drawn into a drug sting run by the local police department, in the premiere of this action series. Arthur Acuña, Nonie Buencamino, Christian Kane, Ces Quesada and Samantha Richelle star. 7 p.m. WGN America The Voice The battle rounds continue as the coaches enlist the Jonas Brothers, Dua Lipa, Ella Mai and Bebe Rexha to prepare the artists. 8 p.m. NBC Whose Line Is It Anyway? Jeff Davis and Amber Riley are guests on this new episode of the improv comedy series. 8 p.m. CW American Idol The Hawaii showcase ends in this new episode. 8 p.m. ABC Cosmos: Possible Worlds This new episode of the science documentary series is titled “The Search for Intelligent Life on Earth.” 8 p.m. National Geographic Roswell, New Mexico Determined to regain control of her life, Isobel (Lily Cowles) makes a risky choice with major potential consequences. Also, Alex and Michael (Tyler Blackburn, Michael Vlamis) work together to unravel the mystery surrounding the night Nora’s (Kayla Ewell) spaceship crashed in 1947. 9 p.m. CW Prodigal Son The squad investigates the high-stress classical dance world after the mysterious poisoning of a swiftly rising ballet star in this new episode. Also, Jessica (Bellamy Young) reunites with an old socialite friend (guest star Dermot Mulroney), while Bright and Eve (Tom Payne, Molly Griggs) press Martin (Michael Sheen) for answers about the girl in the box. Andy Karl (“Groundhog Day”) also guest stars. 9 p.m. Fox Better Call Saul Jimmy and Kim (Bob Odenkirk, Rhea Seehorn) build a legal firewall in this new episode. Jonathan Banks and Giancarlo Esposito also star. 9 p.m. AMC Driven Beau Boeckmann, president of Galpin Motors — which revolutionized the automotive world in 1952 with the first dealership to design, build and sell a custom car — teams up with car builder Dave Shuten and customization specialist “Mad Mike” Martin to restore custom car culture in this new unscripted series. 9 p.m. Discovery The Good Doctor Following the earthquake, the doctors and hospital staff desperately work to save the lives of those around them. Freddie Highmore, Nicholas Gonzalez, Antonia Thomas, Hill Harper and Richard Schiff star in the season finale of the medical drama. 10 p.m. ABC Independent Lens China ended its draconian one-child policy, which made it illegal for families to have more than one baby, in 2015. Filmmakers Nanfu Wang and Jialing Zhang’s documentary “One Child Nation” examines the repercussions of that social experiment. 10 p.m. KOCE Breeders In the wake of a tragedy the family stays with Darren (Patrick Baladi) at his country house. Martin Freeman, Daisy Haggard, George Wakeman and Jayda Eyles star. 10 p.m. FX Dispatches From Elsewhere With time running out, the gang splits up in an effort to find Clara (Cecilia Balagot). Jason Segel, Sally Field, André Benjamin, Richard E. Grant and Eve Lindley star in this new episode of the quirky drama. 10:08 p.m. AMC CORONAVIRUS TV SPECIALS Pandemic: What You Need to Know Addressing the widespread issues caused by the global COVID-19 pandemic. (N) Noon ABC Washington Journal Primetime (N) 5 p.m. CSPAN News Special: Virus Update (N) 7 p.m. CW 20/20: Fighting the Pandemic (N) 9 p.m. ABC Coronavirus Crisis (N) 7 p.m. Fox Coronavirus Pandemic Coverage (N) 10 p.m. Fox News SPECIALS #KidsTogether: The Nickelodeon Town Hall Hosted by Kristen Bell, this special offers a kid’s-eye view of the coronavirus pandemic. It directly address questions and concerns children may have and includes tips and insights from medical experts on ways to be healthy. California Surgeon General Dr. Nadine Burke Harris and former U.S. Surgeon General Dr. Vivek H. Murthy are featured. With Charli D’Amelio, Kel Mitchell, Kenan Thompson and Russell and Ciara Wilson. 8 p.m. Nickelodeon Homefest: James Corden’s Late Late Show Special James Corden chats with celebrities from the safety of their homes. Includes musical performances from BTS in South Korea; Andrea Bocelli in Italy; Dua Lipa in London; and Billie Eilish with Finneas and John Legend in Los Angeles. 10 p.m. CBS TALK SHOWS CBS This Morning (N) 7 a.m. KCBS Today (N) 7 a.m. KNBC KTLA Morning News (N) 7 a.m. KTLA Good Morning America Daymond John and Kevin O’Leary (“Shark Tank”); Jonathan Karl; chef Sandra Lee. (N) 7 a.m. KABC Good Day L.A. (N) 7 a.m. KTTV Live With Kelly and Ryan Issa Rae (“Insecure”); Leslie Odom Jr. performs. (N) 9 a.m. KABC The View (N) 10 a.m. KABC The Talk (N) 1 p.m. KCBS The Dr. Oz Show (N) 1 p.m. KTTV The Kelly Clarkson Show Jeff Goldblum performs; Ilana Glazer. (N) 2 p.m. KNBC Dr. Phil (N) 3 p.m. KCBS The Ellen DeGeneres Show Chelsea Handler; guest host Sean Hayes. (N) 3 p.m. KNBC The Real (N) 3 p.m. KTTV The Doctors Tricked by a health-insurance broker; Myth or Reality: OB-Gyn Edition; Doctor’s Shot of Health. (N) 3 p.m. KCOP To the Contrary With Bonnie Erbé Karin Agness Lips, Eleanor Holmes Norton and Patrice Onwuka. (N) 6 p.m. KVCR Amanpour and Company (N) 11 p.m. KCET; midnight KVCR; 1 a.m. KLCS The Daily Show With Trevor Noah (N) 11 p.m. Comedy Central Conan (N) 11 p.m. TBS The Late Show With Stephen Colbert (N) 11:35 p.m. KCBS The Tonight Show Starring Jimmy Fallon Singer-songwriter Ryan Tedder; best of Fallon. (N) 11:35 p.m. KNBC Nightline (N) 11:35 p.m. KABC Jimmy Kimmel Live! (N) 12:04 a.m. KABC The Late Late Show With James Corden Dr. Phil McGraw; actress Lana Condor; Green Day performs. 12:37 a.m. KCBS Late Night With Seth Meyers 12:37 a.m. KNBC A Little Late With Lilly Singh Model Tyra Banks. (N) 1:37 a.m. KNBC DAYTIME MOVIES Twelve Monkeys (1995) 8 a.m. Showtime Hoosiers (1986) 8:16 a.m. Encore The Green Mile (1999) 9:30 a.m. AMC Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban (2004) 9:45 a.m. Syfy Bohemian Rhapsody (2018) 9:55 a.m. HBO One Way Passage (1932) 10 a.m. TCM Overlord (2018) 10:05 a.m. Epix Courageous (2011) 10:14 a.m. Encore Good Will Hunting (1997) 10:15 a.m. Showtime Ghost (1990) 11 a.m. Freeform Training Day (2001) 11:15 a.m. IFC Across the Pacific (1942) 11:30 a.m. TCM Deepwater Horizon (2016) 12:30 p.m. FX The Miseducation of Cameron Post (2018) 12:45 p.m. Cinemax Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire (2005) 12:46 p.m. Syfy Love & Basketball (2000) 12:55 p.m. BET Split (2016) 1 p.m. FXX Baby Boom (1987) 1 p.m. TMC A Few Good Men (1992) 1:30 p.m. AMC Monkey Business (1931) 1:30 p.m. TCM Phineas and Ferb: The Movie: Across the 2nd Dimension (2011) 2 p.m. Disney XD Braveheart (1995) 2 p.m. Sundance Rogue One: A Star Wars Story (2016) 2 p.m. TNT Unstoppable (2010) 2:20 p.m. Cinemax Trumbo (2015) 2:20 p.m. Showtime Live Free or Die Hard (2007) 3:03 p.m. Starz Spider-Man (2002) 3:30 p.m. FXX Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix (2007) 4:15 p.m. Syfy Amistad (1997) 4:26 p.m. Encore Star Wars: The Force Awakens (2015) 5 p.m. TNT Annihilation (2018) 6 p.m. Epix Back to the Future (1985) 6 p.m. Freeform The Patriot (2000) 6 p.m. Sundance; 9:30 p.m. Sundance Lethal Weapon (1987) 7 p.m. Ovation Soul Food (1997) 7:03 p.m. Encore Harry Potter and the Half-Blood Prince (2009) 7:17 p.m. Syfy Jumanji: Welcome to the Jungle (2017) 7:30 p.m. FX 
Mar 29, 2020	In the best of all pandemic-ridden worlds, the coronavirus would spur powerful countries to cooperate with one another since everyone is facing the same danger. Not this time. The United States and China have turned the pandemic into a battle zone in their struggle for global influence. And so far, the United States is losing ground. After bungling its initial response to the infections that first appeared in Wuhan, China appears to have largely contained the contagion and is delivering medical supplies to Italy, Spain and other hard-hit countries. Chinese President Xi Jinping spent last week on the phone offering well-publicized help to leaders around the world. The White House bungled the U.S. response by failing to stockpile test kits and medical supplies, insisting that a travel ban with China would protect Americans. It didn’t. After initially sending aid to Italy, federal officials are now frantically trying to buy masks and other critically needed gear from other countries to cover shortages at home. Meanwhile, Beijing and Washington squabbled over which country was to blame. In China, officials initially tried to cover up the Wuhan outbreak and rebuffed U.S. and United Nations offers to send scientists to help study the virus. The Chinese Foreign Ministry spread a conspiracy theory, unsupported by evidence, that visiting U.S. soldiers had introduced it. Secretary of State Michael R. Pompeo called his counterpart in Beijing to complain, and launched a broad attack on Xi’s government. “The Chinese Communist Party poses a substantial threat to our health and way of life, as the Wuhan virus clearly has demonstrated,” Pompeo told reporters, blasting Beijing for providing assistance to other countries and then “claiming that they are now the white hat.” Pompeo also created a needless diplomatic flap last week by demanding that the Group of 7 democracies blame the pandemic on the “Wuhan virus” in a joint communique intended to show global powers standing shoulder to shoulder during a global crisis. The other G-7 countries refused and the joint statement was shelved. As a result, a once-powerful coalition led by the United States was visibly disunited. Trump chairs the G-7 this year, but diplomats said he didn’t convene a videoconference of its leaders until France’s Emmanuel Macron repeatedly nudged him to. That’s not leadership. Pompeo is right about the facts. China did try to cover up the initial outbreak. Its Communist Party does lead a brutally authoritarian regime. But he is ignoring our allies’ needs. European countries in the grips of the deadly pandemic want China’s help. They don’t want to score rhetorical points against Beijing; they need to stay on Xi’s good side. China’s apparent recovery, coupled with the White House disarray, has given Xi an opportunity to win hearts and minds around the world. When people are sick, they don’t care where the medicine comes from. Xi is simply doing what any normal big-power leader would do: working to expand his country’s influence. The problem isn’t that China is acting more like a global leader. It’s that the United States is acting less like one. The State Department offered aid to more than two dozen countries, but it’s been virtually invisible, both because he’s preoccupied with the pandemic at home and because he shows such disdain for alliances and international organizations. China’s still recovering from its outbreak. Although its economy is the world’s second-largest, its military is far smaller than America’s. It has fewer allies. It limits access to the internet, jails dissidents and recently expelled journalists from major U.S. news organizations. And Beijing’s aid offensive hasn’t been error-free. There has been a backlash in parts of Europe against clumsy Chinese efforts to mix humanitarian aid with commercial deals, like the electronic giant Huawei’s shipments of surgical masks to countries where it’s seeking big contracts. “I’d say both the U.S. and China are playing the soft-power game very poorly,” Susan A. Thornton, a former State Department China expert, told me. “Trying to use a disaster response to score political points is tricky,” she said. “When thousands of people are dying, you’d better be seen to be doing everything you can to save lives and cooperate, or you’re not going to win any hearts and minds.” If the question is which political or economic model has been most effective in fighting the pandemic, the answer is neither China nor the United States. The places that have fared best so far are well-run democracies with sophisticated healthcare networks that did lots of early testing: South Korea, Taiwan, possibly Germany. Like any other global cataclysm, the pandemic appears likely to change the balance of power — depending partly on which countries recover quickly. So far, China appears to have increased its influence; how much isn’t clear. It has made the United States look ineffective; how durably isn’t clear. It has made traditional institutions of international cooperation, like the U.N. and the G-7, look irrelevant as a medical catastrophe and economic carnage pose dangers to global stability. That makes the most likely outcome a world in which nobody’s a winner.
Mar 29, 2020	In the best of all pandemic-ridden worlds, the coronavirus would spur powerful countries to cooperate with one another since everyone is facing the same danger. Not this time. The United States and China have turned the pandemic into a battle zone in their struggle for global influence. And so far, the United States is losing ground.  After bungling its initial response to the infections that first appeared in Wuhan, China appears to have largely contained the contagion and is delivering medical supplies to Italy, Spain and other hard-hit countries. Chinese President Xi Jinping spent last week on the phone offering well-publicized help to leaders around the world. The White House bungled the U.S. response by failing to stockpile test kits and medical supplies, insisting that a travel ban with China would protect Americans. It didn't. After initially sending aid to Italy, federal officials are now frantically trying to buy masks and other critically needed gear from other countries to cover shortages at home. Meanwhile, Beijing and Washington squabbled over which country was to blame. In China, officials initially tried to cover up the Wuhan outbreak and rebuffed U.S. and United Nations offers to send scientists to help study the virus. The Chinese Foreign Ministry spread a conspiracy theory, unsupported by evidence, that visiting U.S. soldiers had introduced it. Secretary of State Michael R. Pompeo called his counterpart in Beijing to complain, and launched a broad attack on Xi's government. "The Chinese Communist Party poses a substantial threat to our health and way of life, as the Wuhan virus clearly has demonstrated," Pompeo told reporters, blasting Beijing for providing assistance to other countries and then "claiming that they are now the white hat." Pompeo also created a needless diplomatic flap last week by demanding that the Group of 7 democracies blame the pandemic on the "Wuhan virus" in a joint communique intended to show global powers standing shoulder to shoulder during a global crisis. The other G-7 countries refused and the joint statement was shelved. As a result, a once-powerful coalition led by the United States was visibly disunited. Trump chairs the G-7 this year, but diplomats said he didn't convene a videoconference of its leaders until France's Emmanuel Macron repeatedly nudged him to. That's not leadership. Pompeo is right about the facts. China did try to cover up the initial outbreak. Its Communist Party does lead a brutally authoritarian regime. But he is ignoring our allies' needs. European countries in the grips of the deadly pandemic want China's help. They don't want to score rhetorical points against Beijing; they need to stay on Xi's good side. China's apparent recovery, coupled with the White House disarray, has given Xi an opportunity to win hearts and minds around the world. When people are sick, they don't care where the medicine comes from. Xi is simply doing what any normal big-power leader would do: working to expand his country's influence. The problem isn't that China is acting more like a global leader. It's that the United States is acting less like one. The State Department has offered aid to more than two dozen countries, but it's been virtually invisible, both because he's preoccupied with the pandemic at home and because he shows such disdain for alliances and international organizations. China's still recovering from its outbreak. Although its economy is the world's second-largest, its military is far smaller than America's. It has fewer allies. It limits access to the internet, jails dissidents and recently expelled journalists from major U.S. news organizations. And Beijing's aid offensive hasn't been error-free. There has been a backlash in parts of Europe against clumsy Chinese efforts to mix humanitarian aid with commercial deals, like the electronic giant Huawei's shipments of surgical masks to countries where it's seeking big contracts. "I'd say both the U.S. and China are playing the soft-power game very poorly," Susan A. Thornton, a former State Department China expert, told me. "Trying to use a disaster response to score political points is tricky," she said. "When thousands of people are dying, you'd better be seen to be doing everything you can to save lives and cooperate, or you're not going to win any hearts and minds." If the question is which political or economic model has been most effective in fighting the pandemic, the answer is neither China nor the United States. The places that have fared best so far are well-run democracies with sophisticated healthcare networks that did lots of early testing: South Korea, Taiwan, possibly Germany. Like any other global cataclysm, the pandemic appears likely to change the balance of power -- depending partly on which countries recover quickly. So far, China appears to have increased its influence; how much isn't clear. It has made the United States look ineffective; how durably isn't clear. It has made traditional institutions of international cooperation, like the U.N. and the G-7, look irrelevant as a medical catastrophe and economic carnage pose dangers to global stability. That makes the most likely outcome a world in which nobody's a winner. -- McManus' column appears on Sunday and Wednesday. Caption: PHOTO: CHINESE PRESIDENT Xi Jinping, seen visiting Wuhan in Hubei province earlier this month, has had an opportunity since China's apparent recovery to win hearts and minds around the world by offering assistance. PHOTOGRAPHER:Xie Huanchi New China News Agency
Mar 29, 2020	The Pentagon was waging a two-front war against the coronavirus outbreak Saturday, ramping up assistance in hard-hit states as commanders battled to prevent widespread infections in the ranks that could force them to curtail military operations around the globe. The Pentagon already has canceled or reduced several large-scale training exercises, halted the movement of troops overseas and domestically, confined the aircraft carrier Theodore Roosevelt to port in Guam after an outbreak aboard the warship, and shuttered many of its recruiting offices around the country. President Trump flew to Naval Station Norfolk in Virginia on Saturday to watch as the 1,000-bed Navy hospital ship Comfort departed for New York City, the epicenter of the U.S. outbreak, where it will take patients who don't have the virus in an attempt to relieve overwhelmed civilian hospitals. The sister ship Mercy docked in the Port of Los Angeles on Friday to perform the same role there.  "We will win this war, and we will win this war quickly -- with as little death as possible," Trump said, standing on the pier with Defense Secretary Mark Esper. The use of the two hospital ships highlighted the growing military role in assisting beleaguered state officials as they try to contain the contagion. As of Saturday, public health officials had confirmed more than 124,000 U.S. cases of COVID-19, the disease caused by the virus, and more than 2,100 deaths. More than 12,000 members of the National Guard were mobilized as of Friday to help run testing sites, move supplies and build makeshift tent hospitals in dozens of states where infection numbers are rising. At the same time, senior Pentagon officials and top commanders grappled with the potential effect on military operations and the possible risks to national security if thousands of U.S. military personnel become sick or need to be quarantined. The Pentagon had tallied 613 coronavirus cases as of Friday among U.S. military personnel, family members, Defense Department civilians and contractors. More than half were uniformed military personnel, although a contractor and military dependent were the only reported deaths. In South Korea, U.S. commanders on Friday for the first time ordered most of the 28,000 American soldiers stationed there to remain in their barracks or off-post homes, hoping to curtail the spread of the virus. Only a bare-bones staff was on duty at Camp Humphreys, the main U.S. base south of Seoul, and other installations, a spokesman said. "I think we will have moderate to low levels of readiness impacts, only because of the numbers -- at least, the numbers so far," Army Gen. Mark Milley, chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, said in a videoconference with military commands Tuesday. "This could change. We'll have to assess it, and we are assessing it frequently ... but I think it'll be on the lower end." Senior Pentagon officials have issued a flurry of directives as they seek to preserve the readiness of U.S. forces and prevent the spread of the virus, especially among active-duty troops. Balancing health risks against national security missions, the Pentagon has ordered many of the 25,000 workers to work from home. But civilian officials so far have given wide discretion to the military services to decide whether to cancel training or shrink operations. In some cases, commanders have scaled back training events, including one of the largest exercises in Europe since the Cold War. It was supposed to involve 25,000 troops, many coming from the U.S., but was cut to 6,000 troops already overseas. But for the most part, commanders have held off halting major training and operations entirely. "I trust our commanders and our senior enlisted personnel to do the right thing particular to your unit, to your situation, to your mission," Esper said in the videoconference Tuesday. But some former Pentagon officials warned against delegating too much discretion to commanders. "Even in the best of times, boot camps and other group training sites are known for routinely having problems with controlling infections," said Kathleen Hicks, a former Pentagon official now at the Center for Strategic and International Studies, a Washington think tank. "Yet boot camps continue, as does mission-essential training, even as cases of infection come to light." As of Friday, governors in every state as well as Puerto Rico, Guam, the U.S. Virgin Islands and Washington, D.C., had activated Guard members to help civilian authorities respond to the virus outbreak, according to the National Guard Bureau, the Pentagon office that oversees the reservists. Defense officials have sought to limit the mobilization to avoid taking medical personnel in the reserves from civilian hospitals and other jobs where they may be treating infected patients. The Pentagon has also tried to quash rumors fueled by Facebook and Twitter suggesting that activation of the Guard could lead to imposition of martial law to enforce quarantines. "There is no truth to this rumor that people are conspiring, that governors are planning, that anyone is conspiring to use the National Guard ... to do military action to enforce shelter-in-place or quarantines," Gen. Joseph Lengyel, chief of the National Guard Bureau, said in a conference call. The Pentagon on Wednesday halted troop movements worldwide for 60 days, which affects thousands of soldiers, airmen and others who were due for transfer assignments and units that had been scheduled to deploy overseas. The order granted a planned troop drawdown to continue in Afghanistan, allowing a key Trump goal -- scaling down involvement in America's longest war -- to move ahead. Trump on Friday signed an order permitting the Pentagon to activate for up to two years as many as 1 million former service members from the ready reserves so they can help respond to the COVID-19 pandemic. Officials said there were no plans now to bring back into service anything close to that number. But the order gives the military flexibility. More than 9,000 former soldiers expressed interest in returning to active duty after the Pentagon emailed 800,000 to gauge interest, the Army said. In a sign of the paralyzing uncertainty the virus is causing, the Army, the military's largest branch, ordered a halt to all training exercises and nonessential activities in the last two weeks but rescinded the order after it sparked confusion in the ranks. Asked to comment on the canceled order, Lt. Col. Crystal Boring, an Army spokeswoman, said, "The Army is constantly assessing the current situation." The order was first reported by the New York Times. In South Korea, the stay-in-barracks orders forced the cancellation of unit training and other daily operations. But the top commander of U.S. forces in Korea said the move would not degrade the readiness of his forces, who are stationed on the Korean peninsula to deter North Korea. Pyongyang has launched several projectiles into the sea in recent weeks, including one reportedly on Saturday. "We're at a pretty high level of readiness, so I'm not concerned for four or five or six days. Now if we had to hypothetically maintain these conditions for 30 days, then I would start to get concerned," Gen. Robert Abrams, the top U.S. commander in Korea, told Stars and Stripes newspaper. The U.S. and South Korea previously canceled joint military exercises planned for this month due to the pandemic. Often forced to live in close quarters in far-flung parts of the globe, military personnel face unique risks from the virus, experts said. But because most troops are relatively young and are subject to strict regulations, the effect is likely to be more limited than in the civilian population. Sailors aboard the aircraft carrier Roosevelt began getting sick after a port visit in Vietnam in early March. Three sailors who tested positive for the coronavirus two weeks after the ship departed Da Nang were flown off the ship for treatment. But 36 infections were soon detected aboard the carrier, and after the Roosevelt reached Guam on Thursday, the entire crew of 5,000 underwent testing. The carrier will remain in Guam with the crew confined to the ship or the pier indefinitely, officials said. "We are taking this threat very seriously and are working quickly to identify and isolate positive cases while preventing further spread of the virus aboard the ship," Adm. Mike Gilday, chief of naval operations, said in a statement. To guard against the virus affecting operations in Afghanistan, commanders are separating troops and putting newly arrived personnel in quarantine, said Bruce Klingner, the father of a Marine serving in Afghanistan and a research fellow at the Heritage Foundation. Klingner's son was assigned new sleeping quarters, away from others in his job classification, in order to lower the chances of infecting anyone, Klingner said in a tweet Saturday. "I'm sitting in my new room in the morgue," Klingner's son told his father in a video chat. "You call it that because it was so quiet?" Klingner said he asked. "No, because it was the morgue," his son replied. Caption: PHOTO: PRESIDENT TRUMP in Norfolk, Va., before the Navy hospital ship Comfort left for New York City. "We will win this war," he said, referring to the coronavirus. PHOTOGRAPHER:Jim Watson AFP/Getty Images
Mar 28, 2020	Clayton Kazan, Los Angeles County’s new coronavirus testing coordinator, has no shortage of opinions on how management of the crisis has gone so far. It’s been a failure at all levels of government, he says, and testing capacity in Los Angeles County remains “grossly inadequate” — a fact that should frustrate residents here. He also believes that the tests, even if widely available, can be unreliable — and effectively useless to people without symptoms or those who test negative, because they can face exposure moments after getting the results. With the pandemic growing exponentially, and with the test availability still lagging, the county’s Board of Supervisors announced Kazan this week as the new coordinator on the testing issue. His job is to wrangle the network of health officials — both private and public — and help solve the problem. Kazan is the medical director at the Los Angeles County Fire Department and an emergency room physician in Torrance. The Rancho Palos Verdes native, 45, talked with The Times about his frustration with the system’s slow adaptation to the need for testing — and whether it’s too late now to limit the strain on hospitals. What follows is a transcript of that conversation, lightly edited for clarity and brevity. Q. It seems like getting to widespread testing might be the defining challenge so far in tackling this crisis. Would you agree? I would .… When you ask countries that have been successful, that is one thing that they point to. When you ask countries that have been especially challenged, like Italy and now the United States, one of the big limiters to them in the initial phase has been a lack of access to rapid, widespread testing. More coronavirus coverage  Q. And you’re now coordinating that effort for Los Angeles County, one of the most populous and complex municipalities in the nation. That seems like a job most people wouldn’t want. [Laughs] I’m one of the physician leaders of the county, so when asked to step forward, of course, I did. This is all in addition to my duties at the L.A. County Fire Department. But I can recognize as a clinician that there’s a desperate need to get this access. Let me give you an example. In the hospital where I work in the emergency department, I had a patient who appeared really ill. She didn’t meet any classic definitions of COVID, but I had no explanations for why she was ill .… We put her in isolation. We took all the precautions, and we sent off the test. The patient did better, was sent home and after she got home, the test result came back six days later positive. Q. The public is looking at this, and they’re asking: Were we not prepared? It is hard to prepare a lab to receive specimens for a novel virus …. There was some initial denial that it could do in Los Angeles what it has done in Wuhan, because our healthcare system is so good. But unfortunately, we’re realizing that there are definite cracks in our armor that we hadn’t anticipated. We’re trying to spool up our labs to handle not just this unique test that we need but also on a scale that we’ve never done before. That takes time. Q. What have been the main roadblocks for the county and its healthcare system related to testing? Internal equipment? Staff? Delays in getting test kits? Reagents to process the kits? Private lab capacity? It really is all of the above. The number one shortage item that the labs talk to me about is swabs. Number two is reagent and materials for running the tests. So, on the existing machines where they can do it, they’re lacking some of the different raw materials that they need. But number one is swabs: the simplest piece. Q. How many tests are we able to perform per day now, roughly, in L.A. County? It’s so rapidly changing from day to day. I would say we’re able to run a few thousand a day, if everything is operating at capacity and has all the raw materials in all of the labs. Q. The turnaround for those tests could still be days, or many days, depending on where they’re sent? The range that I’ve heard from those who are doing best, those who are doing it on-site, is about four to six hours. The long end of the range [is] running four to six days. If you’re sick enough to have it done in the hospital, and the hospital can do the test in their own lab, the turnaround can be just a few hours. But unfortunately, not a lot of hospitals in our region are able to do that. A lot of them send it out. Q. Are you and the policymakers you’re talking to happy with that turnaround time? If not, how can we speed it up? No, I’m not at all happy about that turnaround time. As a clinician and as an ER physician, by nature I am an impatient person. In the ER we get turnaround times of 30 to 60 minutes for the tests that really matter for us. The acceptable time on this one for me should be measured in no more than hours. Anything beyond that becomes relatively useless to us. What do we need to do to get there? We need a massive scaling locally. As long as we’re having to ship our labs out of state, and we’re having to compete with all the other states that are struggling with their own outbreaks, then we’re going to be struggling. Q. Does that mean that hospitals and local testing outfits need more equipment? What can be done locally to speed up or improve our capacity locally? Having spoken to our Department of Health Services county hospital labs, they have acquired the equipment that they need. The equipment has to be set up, and they are actively doing that right now. And then it has to be calibrated before it can be used. So it takes about five to seven days from the time they received the equipment until it can be used. Up until now, they are not able to run any specimens in the county hospitals at all. They are all sent out, either to the county Department of Public Health labs or those national labs like Quest [Diagnostics] or LabCorp. Q. When will normal folks be able to get a test, either at a drive-through site or from their primary care doctor? And how long will they have to wait to get it turned around? With the testing that we do, and with widespread community spread of the disease, there is no benefit to people without symptoms being tested, because the meaning of a negative test is pretty much zero. The tests still have a pretty high false negative rate that can approach 30%. Secondly, even if I can test you at a moment in time, until you get the results, you are being exposed every day, whether you go to the supermarket or go home. So when that test finally comes back as negative, we don’t want people to let their guard down and go back and resume their previous lives. They may well have an early infection that the test missed, or since that test was taken, they may have gone and exposed themselves to the virus. Q. Can you describe the enormity of the challenge we face to get to where we want to be? Newsletter Get our free Coronavirus Today newsletter Sign up for the latest news, best stories and what they mean for you, plus answers to your questions. Sign Me Up You may occasionally receive promotional content from the Los Angeles Times. When we talk about announcing 20,000 tests from Seegene [the South Korean company that was innovative in helping that country establish a reliable testing system early in the crisis], it sounds like a huge number. And yet that’s only enough tests for one in every 500 people in the county. What sounds like a big number quickly erodes to something approaching insignificant when you look at the size of our population and the scope of our need. In terms of lab capacity, the issue with that is that the level of sophistication of this test should not be underestimated. To bring something like that on a novel virus to a massive scale in a short period of time is a truly monumental worldwide effort. Right now we are deeply challenged by it. Q. We had weeks of people moving around before social distancing measures, we still don’t have widespread testing and we’ve given up really on any chance of meaningful contact tracing — even if we could do it at scale at this point. Should we be frustrated about that? I think it’s right to be a bit frustrated. The problem with contact tracing is it depends on widespread testing and rapid turnaround. In order for you to start tracing back people’s contacts, you first have to know who’s positive with some degree of reliability. With the level that we were testing a couple of weeks ago, or a month ago, the kind of critical juncture where we started to get our exponential rise, we had only a tiny percentage of the capacity that we even have now, and what we have now is still grossly inadequate. Q. It seems obvious now that, for whatever reason, we were just late to a proper testing regime. As someone asked now to coordinate this for the county, how do you feel about that, in terms of what kind of a challenge that presents? There is certainly truth in that, and reason to be frustrated. It’s something that was vital to South Korea’s response, and we had time to develop it for ourselves, and yet we failed. That failure was federal, state and local. We all failed. I think we all, myself included, had some level of denial that it would ever reach our shores as it is now .… But, yes, we unfortunately missed an opportunity. If we could go back to January, when we saw what was happening in Wuhan, if we had taken that opportunity to scale ourselves up in anticipation, we could have been more prepared than we are now. We still would be facing an enormous challenge. Q. What’s your sense for how long this might continue, this major adaptation in the way we live — weeks, months, into the fall or until we get some sort of vaccine? So, it’s anyone’s guess. Because what we are seeing is unprecedented. Right now I would suggest that it is most likely going to follow the Italian model, where we’re going to see an exponential rise, and we’re going to have weeks or months of very, very big healthcare challenges. What we’ve been saying from the beginning is that COVID is not just a problem of acuity but [one] of capacity. Most of the people who get the coronavirus have a relatively mild syndrome. At least 80% have a pretty mild course. The problem is that the 20% who have mild to severe courses can be very needy for healthcare. It can very quickly overwhelm our already saturated emergency and critical care resources. Q. How worried are you about what those weeks and months are going to look like? Extremely. But this is unprecedented. If it follows the 1918 flu epidemic, we could see it drop off suddenly. We could see a very long peak that could last for many months. There really is no telling. We’re preparing for a very long peak — at least, as a county, we’re preparing for up to six months. If we get surprised, and cases drop off, that’s outstanding. We will take every opportunity to prepare for another surge. No one really knows what the future is going to hold with this. There are only models.
Mar 28, 2020	The Pentagon was waging a two-front war against the coronavirus outbreak Saturday, ramping up assistance in hard-hit states as commanders battled to prevent widespread infections in the ranks that could force them to curtail military operations around the globe. The Pentagon already has canceled or reduced several large-scale training exercises, halted the movement of troops overseas and domestically, confined the aircraft carrier Theodore Roosevelt to port in Guam after an outbreak aboard the warship, and shuttered many of its recruiting offices around the country. President Trump flew to Naval Station Norfolk in Virgina on Saturday to watch as the 1,000-bed Navy hospital ship Comfort departed for New York City, the epicenter of the U.S. outbreak, where it will take patients who don’t have the virus in an attempt to relieve overwhelmed civilian hospitals. The sister ship Mercy docked in the Port of Los Angeles on Friday to perform the same role there. “We will win this war, and we will win this war quickly – with as little death as possible,” Trump said, standing on the pier with Defense Secretary Mark Esper. The use of the two hospital ships highlighted the growing military role in assisting beleaguered state officials as they try to contain the contagion. As of Saturday, public health officials had confirmed more than 121,000 cases of COVID-19, the disease caused by the virus, and more than 2,000 deaths. More than 12,000 members of the National Guard were mobilized as of Friday to help run testing sites, move supplies and build makeshift tent hospitals in dozens of states where infection numbers are rising and threatening to overwhelm civilian medical facilities. At the same time, senior Pentagon officials and top commanders grappled with the potential effect on military operations and the potential risks to national security if thousands of U.S. military personnel become sick or need to be quarantined. The Pentagon had tallied 613 coronavirus cases as of Friday among U.S. military personnel, family members, Defense Department civilians and contractors. More than half were uniformed military personnel, although a contractor and military dependent were the only reported deaths. In South Korea, commanders on Friday for the first time ordered most of the 28,000 U.S. soldiers stationed there to remain in their barracks or off-post homes, hoping to curtail the spread of the virus. Only a bare-bones headquarters staff was on duty at Camp Humphreys, the main U.S. base south of Seoul, and other installations, a spokesman said. “I think we will have moderate to low levels of readiness impacts, only because of the numbers — at least, the numbers so far,” Army Gen. Mark Milley, chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, said in a video conference with military commands Tuesday. “This could change. We’ll have to assess it, and we are assessing it frequently… but I think it’ll be on the lower end.” Senior Pentagon officials have issued a flurry of directives as they seek to preserve the readiness of U.S. forces and prevent the spread of the virus, especially among active duty troops. Balancing health risks against national security missions, the Pentagon has ordered many of the 25,000 workers to work from home. But civilian officials so far have given wide discretion to the military services to decide whether to cancel training or shrink operations. In some cases, commanders have scaled back training events, including one of the largest exercises in Europe since the Cold War. It was supposed to involve 25,000 troops, many coming from bases in the United States, but was cut to 6,000 troops already overseas. But for the most part, commanders have held off halting major training and operations entirely. “I trust our commanders and our senior enlisted personnel to do the right thing particular to your unit, to your situation, to your mission,” Esper said in the video conference Tuesday. “It’s up to the commanders and senior [noncommissioned officers] to make the right calls relevant to their situation to ensure that we protect our people while at the same time maintaining mission readiness.” But some former Pentagon officials warned against delegating too much discretion to commanders. “Even in the best of times, boot camps and other group training sites are known for routinely having problems with controlling infections,” said Kathleen Hicks, a former Pentagon official now at the Center for Strategic and International Studies, a Washington think tank. “Yet boot camps continue, as does mission-essential training, even as cases of infection come to light.” As of Friday, governors in every state as well as Puerto Rico, Guam, the U.S. Virgin Islands and Washington, D.C., had activated Guard members to help civilian authorities respond to the virus outbreak, according to the National Guard Bureau, the Pentagon office that oversees the reservists. Defense officials have sought to limit the mobilization to avoid taking doctors, nurses and other medical personnel who serve in the reserves from civilian hospitals and other jobs where they already may be treating infected patients. The Pentagon has also tried to quash rumors fueled by Facebook and Twitter showing military equipment moving by rail and suggesting that activation of the Guard could lead to imposition of martial law to enforce quarantines and stay-at-home orders. “There is no truth to this rumor that people are conspiring, that governors are planning, that anyone is conspiring to use the National Guard ... to do military action to enforce shelter in place or quarantines,” Gen. Joseph Lengyel, chief of the National Guard Bureau, told reporters in a conference call. The Pentagon on Wednesday halted troop movements worldwide for 60 days, essentially freezing in place thousands of soldiers, airmen and others who were due to transfer from one assignment to another, as well as whole units that had been scheduled to deploy overseas. The order allowed a planned troop drawdown to continue in Afghanistan, allowing a key Trump political goal — scaling down involvement in America’s longest war — to move ahead, even as the virus spreads. Trump on Friday signed an order permitting the Pentagon to activate for up to two years as many as 1 million former service members from the ready reserves so they can assist in responding to the COVID-19 pandemic. Officials said there are no plans now to bring back into service anything close to that number. But the order gives the military flexibility should additional medical personnel and other specialists be required. More than 9,000 former soldiers expressed interest in returning to active duty after the Pentagon emailed 800,000 of them to gauge interest, according to the Army. In a sign of the paralyzing uncertainty the virus is causing, the Army, the military’s largest branch, ordered a halt to all training exercises and nonessential activities last week but later rescinded the order after it sparked widespread confusion in the ranks. Asked to comment on the canceled order, Lt. Col. Crystal Boring, an Army spokeswoman, said, “The Army is constantly assessing the current situation.” The order was first reported by the New York Times. In South Korea, the stay-in-barracks orders forced cancellation of unit training and other daily operations. But the top commander of U.S. forces in Korea said the move would not degrade the readiness of his forces, who are stationed on the Korean peninsula in order to deter North Korea. Pyongyang has launched several projectiles into the sea in recent weeks, including one reportedly on Saturday. “We’re at a pretty high level of readiness, so I’m not concerned for four or five or six days. Now if we had to hypothetically maintain these conditions for 30 days, then I would start to get concerned,” Gen. Robert Abrams, the top U.S. commander in Korea, told Stars and Stripes, a Pentagon-funded newspaper that serves troops. The U.S. and South Korea previously canceled joint military exercises planned for this month due to the pandemic. Often forced to live in close quarters in far-flung parts of the globe, military personnel face unique risks from the easily-spread virus, experts said. Because most troops are relatively young, and are subject to strict regulations, the effect is likely to be more limited than in the civilian population. Sailors aboard the aircraft carrier Roosevelt began getting sick after a port visit in Vietnam in early March. Three sailors who tested positive for the coronavirus two weeks after the ship departed Da Nang were flown off the ship for treatment. But 36 infections were soon detected aboard the carrier, and after the Roosevelt reached Guam on Thursday in a previously scheduled port visit, the entire crew of 5,000 underwent testing. The carrier will remain in Guam with the crew confined to the ship or the pier indefinitely, officials said. “We are taking this threat very seriously and are working quickly to identify and isolate positive cases while preventing further spread of the virus aboard the ship,” Adm. Mike Gilday, chief of naval operations, said in a statement. To guard against the virus affecting operations in Afghanistan, commanders are separating troops and putting newly arrived troops in quarantine, said Bruce Klingner, the father of a Marine serving in Afghanistan and a research fellow at the Heritage Foundation, a Washington think tank. Klingner’s son was assigned new sleeping quarters, away from others in his own job classification, in order to lower the chances that all of them would become infected, Klingner said in a tweet Saturday. His son is a “joint terminal attack controller,” a Marine responsible for directing airstrikes from the ground. “I’m sitting in my new room in the morgue,” Klingner’s son told his father in a video chat. “You call it that because it was so quiet?” Klingner said he asked. “No, because it was the morgue,” his son replied. 
Mar 28, 2020	Kathy Griffin might have been exposed to the coronavirus. Or she might not have. After a recent trip to urgent care and the emergency room while gravely ill, the comic wasn't able to get tested. Griffin has an abdominal infection that is being treated with medication, though she won't know whether she's turned the corner for a couple of days, she told The Times in a phone interview Wednesday afternoon. She's back home, and she's not going out anytime soon. The public likely wouldn't have known about her illness at all had President Trump not tweeted a claim Wednesday that the U.S. had outpaced South Korea in COVID-19 testing. Griffin, who had just come home from an emergency room the day before, just had to comment, because what the president was saying didn't match with what she had experienced.  "I was sent to the #COVID19 isolation ward room in a major hospital ER from a separate urgent care facility after showing UNBEARABLY PAINFUL symptoms," Griffin wrote on Twitter after she accused Trump of lying. She said she couldn't get tested because of "CDC (Pence task force) restrictions." With that response, the 59-year-old posted a couple of alarming photos showing her in a mask, in a hospital bed, in what appeared to be a sealed hospital room. Soon her name was trending on social media. What happened? Last Saturday, Griffin started having what her husband, Randy Bick, described as "mild stomach issues." But then they receded, he said. Temporarily. "Two days later," Bick said also by phone, "she woke up very early in the morning and had incredibly intense pain, vomiting, diarrhea, every 20 minutes. Just really sick." "The vomiting felt like a convulsion," Griffin said. And about a week prior, the couple had traveled internationally. "We were both nervous because we were still in the incubation period after returning from Mexico, but also we had not left the house in days," Griffin said. "We'd been hearing about a 14-day incubation period [for the coronavirus]. So for me to get what felt like food poisoning after six days, I thought, OK, is this a coincidence or what?" They'd been self-quarantined since returning home mid-March. After a phone consult with her doctor, she took his advice and went to an urgent care. "We both put on N-95 masks and gloves and I drove her down there," Bick said. "We got to the front and immediately there was a security officer and some nurses' assistants outside." Once inside, Griffin was hooked up to an IV and got a shot for her abdominal pain, which was considerable. But she was still vomiting frequently, so they sent her along to the Cedars-Sinai emergency room. "I remember vividly the doctor telling me ... 'I'm going to send you to Cedars ER today because I don't think I could get you in 13 days from now,' " Griffin said. She was freaked out. The emergency department setup these days at Cedars-Sinai Medical Center is different than usual: There are tents outside where staff see low-risk COVID-19 patients. Patients seen there are mostly well and discharged home, a Cedars spokesman said via email. Then there's a specific COVID-19 area in the emergency department where staffers see patients who are sicker and may require more testing or hospitalization. That's where Griffin was. "In all locations, patients wear masks and are isolated, and/or there is a six-foot distance maintained between them," the spokesman said. Various masks Griffin, who had a mask on in the picture she posted, said she was surprised by the personal protective equipment she saw -- or didn't see -- on the healthcare staff around her. One doctor had a plastic visor-style face guard, she said. Some people had masks; others didn't. The types of masks varied. "Frankly, when they said the corona ward, I thought I would be walking into the white suits with blue-taped ceilings, everything," she said. "I kind of expected them to put me in a shower room and all that -- but as recently as [Tuesday], there's no cavalry that's coming in handing out millions of [test] swabs." She said she also saw a bunch of "really smart, incredibly brave people" who cared deeply about what they were doing. Griffin said she kept telling everyone they were heroes. She couldn't praise the healthcare workers enough. Griffin wound up getting a chest X-ray that showed clear lungs and an abdominal CT scan that revealed the infection. Her temperature was around normal. But nausea and diarrhea, along with the severe chills and sore throat she had, are all COVID-19 symptoms. The urgent-care doctor told her she should get tested. And the ER doctor seemed to want to test both Griffin and her husband but could not, the comic said. "The doctor was going through the boxes and going through the boxes [on a form] and she kept saying, like, 'Ugh, because of the lungs, the fever and the kind of cough ... you don't meet the CDC requirements,' " Griffin said. She was given the option to be admitted to the hospital, where she might be more likely to get tested, but after consulting with a few healthcare staffers decided she'd be better off self-isolating at home. Can't buy a test So much for those stories about celebrities being able to buy a coronavirus test whenever they want one. "The realization when they told me the guidelines was, 'Wow ... I now know not to come back unless my lungs are full with what feels like pieces of shattered mirror, unless I can't breathe and unless my fever is 103 ...' " Griffin said. "They're not making the rules at all. That's a frightening feeling. "I just think it's so obvious that those tests have to be accessible to everybody," Griffin said in a tired voice. "A lot of people, when they hear the president saying everyone who needs a test should get one, they shouldn't have to then go to a hospital where, frankly, they may be exposing themselves or exposing others. "Hopefully sooner than later you can either go to a pharmacy and get one or they could deliver one at home, something like that." Of course, this isn't the first time Griffin has tangled with the president. Their disputes go back to that day in 2017 when a picture of her raising a rubber replica of Trump's severed head covered with ketchup "blood" went viral -- and nearly ruined her career. She had apologized for the gag almost immediately, then retracted her apology a year later. To say there is no love lost between Griffin and Trump is to understate a very public feud. But the testing problem might not be entirely with the federal government: California has been lagging behind New York and other hot-spot states when it comes to coronavirus testing. By Sunday afternoon, approximately 26,400 tests had been conducted on California's 40 million residents, according to the state's official tally. In contrast, New York had about 78,000 tests done as of Monday. "We are cobbling together various approaches," Susan Butler-Wu, an associate professor of clinical pathology at USC's Keck School of Medicine and a director of a clinical microbiology lab in L.A., told The Times earlier this week. "The whole thing is badly discombobulated. ... I think 100% that the system is broken." Griffin can vouch for that. Despite going to the ER with a slew of symptoms, she said she still has no idea whether she's positive or negative for the novel coronavirus. Only time and testing will tell. "I just don't have an answer. I don't know," she said. "Someone at Cedars said to me, we cannot give you this test because of the CDC guidelines. I'm suggesting that the guidelines are still too strict because they don't have enough tests." A warning on the CDC website on Wednesday read, "While supplies of these tests are increasing, it may still be difficult to find a place to get tested." Griffin also didn't get an answer to another important question, she said: Did her infection make her more vulnerable to the coronavirus? "An active gastrointestinal infection, like any other infection, takes a toll on the body's immune system, which may leave a person vulnerable to other types of infection, including COVID-19," said Dr. John Lipham, division chief of upper gastrointestinal and general surgery at Keck Medicine of USC, in an email Wednesday. "However, the 2019 novel coronavirus is still very new, and more research is needed before we can conclusively determine how the virus impacts people with different underlying conditions. The best thing for people to do is to follow social distancing recommendations, wash their hands frequently, and self-isolating when they feel sick or may have been exposed to the virus." As of Friday afternoon, the CDC was reporting 85,356 coronavirus cases in the United States and 1,246 deaths. Caption: PHOTO: KATHY GRIFFIN posted this photo of herself in the Cedars-Sinai emergency department on Tuesday. PHOTOGRAPHER:Kathy Griffin 
Mar 28, 2020	Dockless scooter companies charged into cities in 2018, promising a mobility revolution with cheap, clean rides and billions of dollars in venture capital backing. Yet they soon faced roadblocks, including shaky business models, safety concerns and fast-moving city regulators. At the start of 2020, cash-losing operators were shrinking their headcounts and vehicle fleets. Now as governments around the world fight to slow the spread of the coronavirus, the companies are facing a deeper existential challenge.  The two largest, Lime and Bird, drastically reduced fleets by mid-March. Santa Monica-based Bird began major layoffs Friday, cutting 30% of its workforce "due to the financial and operational impact" of the pandemic, according to a memo from Chief Executive Travis VanderZanden. "We just raised hundreds of millions from investors," VanderZanden wrote, "but given all the uncertainty, we needed to ensure a cash runway to last through the end of 2021." Several other start-ups, including Wheels and Uber-owned Jump, say they're looking at how to keep operating as people are ordered to stay at home and rider demand plummets. The appeal of sharing a high-touch vehicle with an unknown number of strangers has succumbed to the fear of viral transmission. Lime is "winding down or pausing" service in all markets but South Korea, CEO Brad Bao said. Jump has paused electric bike and scooter rentals in most of its European markets and trimmed the size of its fleets across the U.S. Lyft Inc. has continued to operate its network of mostly docked bikeshare systems in eight U.S. markets. The sudden disappearance of scooters and e-bikes comes after months of industry turbulence. Bird and Lime have struggled to raise money from investors, and both cut staff starting late last year. The companies, once singularly focused on growth, have realized their problematic business plans need rethinking. Last year, talks of an acquisition of Bird or Lime by Uber didn't pan out. Some industry watchers said the eye-popping valuations of each -- in 2019, Bird and Lime hit $2.5 billion and $2.4 billion, respectively -- were a factor. Wheels and Lime say ridership was rising before the start of widespread social distancing. Many investors, already skeptical about the viability of the e-scooter business, say the current situation could be the nail in the industry's coffin. Emily Castor Warren, a principal and director of policy at the transportation planning firm Nelson Nygaard and a former director of policy at both Lyft and Lime, agreed that the pandemic could be a death knell for scooter businesses with large overhead costs, especially those that were already in an uncertain financial position. "I think it's pretty dire," she says. "If these lockdowns persist, they're going to have to, at the very least, undertake major layoffs to core teams, because the one cost they can't bring down to zero is salaries for headcount and real estate for their offices." -- Times staff writer Sam Dean contributed to this report.  Credit: Bliss writes for Bloomberg. 
Mar 27, 2020	In the heat of a global crisis more sudden and severe than anything in living memory, economic orthodoxies are getting tossed aside at a furious pace. Some of them may be gone for good. Public debt, for example, has often been seen as a drag on economies -- but right now it's their lifeline. The coronavirus has shut down swaths of private business. In the U.S. alone, it threw about 3 million people out of work in just a week. Whatever their prior views on budget deficits, leaders have been forced to fill the gap by channeling cash to households, businesses and markets -- strengthening safety nets that are paid for out of the public purse, and improvising some new ones.  With government spending helping to steer countries through the pandemic, it may not be easy to turn off the taps afterward. Politicians will have little incentive for belt-tightening measures that could endanger a rebound. Economists, especially from the rising Modern Monetary Theory school, will argue that in a low-inflation world there's no need to try. Even when the acute phase of the health crisis has passed, "political pressures for large fiscal stimulus to be deployed whenever possible will remain strong and open-ended," says Stephen Jen, who runs hedge fund and advisory firm Eurizon SLJ Capital. That's what happened to monetary policy after the 2008 crisis, he points out, with central banks still struggling to remove their unconventional stimulus more than a decade later. For the few parts of the developed world that managed to move away from emergency settings, such as the U.S., the pandemic has sent them crashing back there. In the low-rates era, governments are already the biggest borrowers. Now they're about to go into overdrive. The U.S. is poised to smash records with a fiscal package worth about $2 trillion making its way through Congress, and lawmakers expect more measures to follow. Other governments, when measured against the size of their economies, aren't far behind. The European Union and its powerhouse Germany have ditched once-sacred spending caps. The British government has pledged to cover 80% of the wage bill for workers whose jobs are at risk because lockdowns have shut entire industries. Countries from South Korea to Australia have torn up their budget plans and pivoted to more spending. Many economists say that even more fiscal firepower may be needed because it won't be possible to assess the full extent of economic damage until the virus is contained. Once that happens, support for the spending bonanza may be tested -- on the markets, and in politics. The surge in supply of government bonds is likely to push yields higher, though central-bank buying can help keep a lid on them. That's already an explicit goal of the Bank of Japan, and other countries are set to follow. In the U.S., investors may rethink the risks lurking in the longest-duration bonds -- but that's likely a problem for down the road, with much of the initial burst of borrowing set to be financed by short-term paper. Governments may also face political pressure to unwind their largesse, and at least some economists are likely to join in. In the crisis moment, there's been a shift among even conservative economists, and they've united behind "rapid and large fiscal stimulus," said Adam Posen, who heads the Peterson Institute for International Economics in Washington. "Whether that is an ongoing turning point remains to be seen," he said. "If we see a recovery, God willing in months, people will want to turn off the taps." Germany, for one, signaled this week that it aims to return to its customary frugal stance -- though officials acknowledged further stimulus may be needed first, if the economy is stuck in a deep slump after the public health emergency has abated. A pickup in inflation -- a risk, because the pandemic has shut down so much production -- could also make conditions tougher for the borrowers. But there's an alternative post-virus future, in which politicians are reluctant to balance the books. Some economists question whether it makes sense to even try. James Knightley, chief international economist at ING, cites the U.S. case as an example. "I really cannot see Donald Trump, assuming he gets re-elected, embarking on an austerity drive to get the fiscal position on a sounder footing," he said. For progressive Democrats too, the fiscal debate "should have changed forever," according to Nobel prize-winning economist Joseph Stiglitz. After President Trump's trillion-dollar deficits, it'll be hard to make the case that "somehow we can't afford healthcare and education," he said. "That argument is going to look very different." It's in this scenario that the once-strict dividing lines between fiscal and monetary policy, already looking a bit blurry of late, are likely to get even more so. "There could be pressure to come up with a plan to see central banks cancel a proportion of government debts around the world," Knightley said. "There will be more calls for these sorts of extreme measures." While deficits and debt have surged to much higher levels during major wars, Deutsche Bank strategists found that public-debt-to-GDP ratios "as a median across the major developed economies" are currently at peacetime records. Since 2008, central banks have been buying more of that debt, while ultra-low rates made it easier for the governments to keep borrowing. The coronavirus has accelerated their purchases to a new level. The transactions typically occur in secondary bond markets, letting monetary policy makers claim they're not directly financing deficit-spending -- a traditional taboo in policy circles. That taboo serves no useful purpose, according to Modern Monetary Theory. The theory's adherents think the traditional fear of budget deficits is overblown. Governments that borrow in their own currencies can't go broke, their argument goes, so they can spend as long as inflation remains subdued -- and there's no reason why central banks shouldn't finance them. That's a recipe for over-spending, according to the mainstream of modern economics. The consensus for decades has been that central banks should be independent from budget-setting governments, and thus able to rein them in. Jen said that tide may be turning, and "large fiscal deficits fully underwritten by central banks" are likely to become the new normal. "Whether intentional or not," he says, "we are collectively moving toward" Modern Monetary Theory. Caption: PHOTO: TREASURY SECRETARY Steven T. Mnunchin helped negotiate the $2-trillion stimulus package working its way through Congress. With government spending being used to steer countries through the pandemic, it may not be easy to turn off the taps afterward. PHOTOGRAPHER:Chip Somodevilla Getty Images Credit: Holland and Curran write for Bloomberg. 
Mar 25, 2020	One of the most effective ways authorities can limit the spread of a pandemic is to immediately locate, test and isolate anyone who’s had contact with a carrier of the disease. But pinpointing those contacts is painstaking. An infected person can’t reliably remember the dozens or more people they’ve crossed paths with in the preceding days or weeks. With that in mind, the Singaporean government introduced an app that will alert users if they’ve been in close proximity with a confirmed case of the coronavirus, helping authorities slow the spread of a disease that’s surged in the city state over the last week. The app, called TraceTogether, works by exchanging short distance Bluetooth signals with other users of the app, giving officials a database to track potential COVID-19 carriers. The app is being offered voluntarily but it comes at a time when governments across the globe are increasingly seizing on location data to combat the pandemic. The targeting of an individual’s movements is stoking tensions and raising civil rights questions over public health and personal privacy. Countries including China, South Korea and Israel are tracking users’ cellphones to varying degrees to warn their citizens about potential infections and to chart the spread of the disease — a technological tool that didn’t exist during past outbreaks. Such advances are leading to wider surveillance and a deeper reach by governments into the lives of their citizens. They require a growing acceptance of diminished privacy — a sacrifice many are willing to make against a global health crisis — in an age when more than a few governments and companies have squandered public trust in their ability to safeguard personal information, experts say. “The attitude around digital technology has certainly changed since the 2014 West Africa Ebola epidemic. Back then, it was very difficult to deploy digital technology for surveillance due to doubt in its utility,” said Anne Liu, a health technology expert at Columbia University. “Six years later we’re seeing more confidence in the tech, but less so in the people who deploy it and their intentions with the data.” South Korea’s aggressive testing and radical transparency have contributed to a dramatic decline in the rate of coronavirus infections. But it’s come at a price for some of the 9,000 people who have contracted COVID-19. South Koreans are provided such immense detail about new cases and their recent whereabouts that it’s given citizens fodder to speculate on alleged romantic affairs and the means to dox suspected cases. The deluge of information prompted the National Human Rights Commission of Korea to warn that people sickened by the virus now face a second trauma of harassment and ridicule, leading some South Koreans to fear social stigma more than the disease itself. In Israel, Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu has been accused of using the pandemic as a pretext to enhance his powers after the government issued emergency measures allowing internal state security to track citizens’ cellphone data to curb the disease. The move drew an immediate rebuke from critics and civil rights groups who feared it would set a precedent for the embattled prime minister to exploit. This month, millions of Iranians were reportedly pinged by the government on their smartphones, urging citizens to download an app that claimed it could determine if users and their loved ones were infected by the coronavirus. Millions signed up despite the software’s dubious claims, ostensibly giving the autocratic regime access to personal location data for swaths of the country. Taiwan, lauded for its early success combating the coronavirus, recently introduced a digital fence using cellphone data to enforce quarantines of people required to stay at home. Those under watch must leave their devices switched on and are called unannounced by authorities to ensure they haven’t left their homes. No country, though, has matched the technological lengths to which China has gone to restrain the virus. Partnering with internet giants Alibaba and Tencent, the government is assigning citizens color codes that denote their health status, which in turn grants them access past checkpoints or even entrance to a restaurant or a subway station. Users have reported being color-coded erroneously and being unable to contact the app providers to change their status. The software strengthens the ability of Chinese authorities to track people in a country that already uses widespread facial recognition to suppress opposition. Human rights advocates say the technology will probably remain in place after the pandemic is over. “In many cases, the fear and panic have allowed governments to impose quite drastic measures which can be very difficult to roll back,” said Maya Wang, a senior China researcher at Human Rights Watch. “Once you have a system implemented, they become normalized. “Governments have a responsibility to ensure public safety and health; however, in emergencies like this they still have to respect human rights, which includes rights to privacy,” Wang added. “Any interference in privacy has to meet standards of legality, proportionality and necessity.” Expectations of privacy and a patchwork of laws — along with revelations that after Sept. 11, 2001, terrorist attacks, the government increased phone surveillance — make it difficult for contact tracing based on cellphone information to take hold in the United States. The Trump administration, however, is in talks with Facebook and Google to use aggregated, anonymized location data to track the disease, the Washington Post reported last week. There’s growing sentiment in the U.S. that technology can play a vital role in stemming the pandemic. A group of technologists, epidemiologists and medical professionals recently signed an open letter outlining ways Silicon Valley, whose companies, including Facebook, have been blamed for an eroding personal privacy, can assist. Among them was a call for Apple, Google and other mobile operating system vendors to provide their users an opt-in contact tracing feature that would also protect people’s identities. “If such a feature could be built before SARS-CoV-2 is ubiquitous, it could prevent many people from being exposed. In the longer term, such infrastructure could allow future disease epidemics to be more reliably contained,” read the letter, whose signatories included Peter Eckersley, a distinguished technology fellow at the digital-rights-focused Electronic Frontier Foundation. A computer scientist at MIT led a team that developed a prototype app called Private Kit: Safe Paths that shares encrypted location data for contact tracing between phones rather than sending it to a central database. The aim is to ensure a user will know they’ve come in close contact with someone carrying the coronavirus while preserving the carrier’s anonymity. One of the keys to any such app will be reaching critical mass to reverse the growth of the outbreak. New COVID-19 cases have surged in Singapore over the last week as returnees from overseas raise the risk of more community transmissions. To promote Singapore’s TraceTogether, which was launched Friday, schools and private companies have advocated the app’s use, calling it a social responsibility, like hand washing. Unlike many parts of the U.S., the island nation of 5.7 million has resisted lockdowns. But in a sign of the deteriorating situation, the government announced Tuesday that starting Thursday night, bars, nightclubs and movie theaters would close and gatherings of more than 10 people would be prohibited for at least the next month. Until recently, Singapore appeared to be a rare bright spot in the battle against the coronavirus. The rise in confirmed cases will probably now aid the government’s bid to have TraceTogether widely adopted. Privacy matters don’t elicit concern in the de facto one-party state like they do in the U.S. or Europe. Government surveys show more than three-quarters of Singaporeans trust the way authorities handle personal data. That sentiment has allowed Singapore to embark on its Smart Nation initiative, which aims to digitize vast corners of everyday life with cashless payments and facial recognition cameras on lampposts, with little resistance. Still, the country isn’t immune to data breaches. In 2018, its largest health network was hacked, resulting in the theft of 1.5 million patients’ records. Last year, a former American expatriate leaked the names of more than 14,000 HIV-positive individuals in Singapore after gaining access to the data through his partner, a Singaporean doctor. Developers of TraceTogether say that users’ identities will be anonymized and that the app doesn’t track location, but proximity between users by using Bluetooth, not GPS or cell signals. The information collected is stored on phones and erased after 21 days. The only information stored on government servers is provided by users confirmed to have COVID-19 who agree to share their logs. The app can identify users within a 6½-foot radius with a duration of contact of at least 30 minutes. Information gleaned from the app will only be used for contact tracing, the government says. The government says it will make the app’s underlying technology available to other countries. Times staff writers Victoria Kim in Seoul and Alice Su in Beijing contributed to this report.
Mar 25, 2020	Leave it to “Carpool Karaoke” mastermind James Corden to round up some of the biggest names in music for a special quarantine edition of “The Late Late Show.” On March 30, the English comedian will host “Homefest: James Corden’s Late Late Show Special” from his garage, accompanied remotely by Billie Eilish, BTS, John Legend and more. In addition to featuring appearances from Hollywood stars such as Will Ferrell and David Blaine, the hourlong program will also include musical performances from BTS in South Korea, Andrea Bocelli in Italy and Dua Lipa in London, as well as Eilish, Finneas and Legend in Los Angeles. “Since [‘The Late Late Show’] came off the air, we have been thinking of different ways to try and make a show at this time,” said executive producers Ben Winston and Rob Crabbe in a statement Wednesday. “With the help of some wonderful guests, we are going to try to put on the best show we can, to entertain, raise awareness, raise money and hopefully lift spirits. “Shooting from James’ garage may be far from perfect, but under the circumstances we hope it can help someone, somewhere, who needs some cheer right now.” Throughout the show, Corden and his famous guests will also remind viewers to follow Centers for Disease Control and Prevention guidelines to prevent the spread of the coronavirus, as well as provide information on how to donate to the CDC Foundation and Feed the Children. “Homefest: James Corden’s Late Late Show Special” airs March 30 on CBS at 10 p.m. Pacific.
Mar 25, 2020	One of the most effective ways authorities can limit the spread of a pandemic is to immediately locate, test and isolate anyone who's had contact with a carrier of the disease. But pinpointing those contacts is painstaking. An infected person can't reliably remember the dozens or more people they've crossed paths with in the preceding days or weeks. With that in mind, the Singaporean government introduced an app that will alert users if they've been in close proximity with a confirmed case of the coronavirus, helping authorities slow the spread of a disease that's surged in the city-state over the last week.  The app, called TraceTogether, works by exchanging short distance Bluetooth signals with other users of the app, giving officials a database to track potential COVID-19 carriers. The app is being offered voluntarily but it comes at a time when governments across the globe are increasingly seizing on location data to combat the pandemic. The targeting of an individual's movements is stoking tensions and raising civil rights questions over public health and personal privacy. Countries including China, South Korea and Israel are tracking users' cellphones to varying degrees to warn their citizens about potential infections and to chart the spread of the disease -- a technological tool that didn't exist during past outbreaks. Such advances are leading to wider surveillance and a deeper reach by governments into the lives of their citizens. They require a growing acceptance of diminished privacy -- a sacrifice many are willing to make against a global health crisis -- in an age when more than a few governments and companies have squandered public trust in their ability to safeguard personal information, experts say. "The attitude around digital technology has certainly changed since the 2014 West Africa Ebola epidemic. Back then, it was very difficult to deploy digital technology for surveillance due to doubt in its utility," said Anne Liu, a health technology expert at Columbia University. "Six years later we're seeing more confidence in the tech, but less so in the people who deploy it and their intentions with the data." South Korea's aggressive testing and radical transparency have contributed to a dramatic decline in the rate of coronavirus infections. But it's come at a price for some of the 9,000 people who have contracted COVID-19. South Koreans are provided such immense detail about new cases and their recent whereabouts that it's given citizens fodder to speculate on alleged romantic affairs and the means to dox suspected cases. The deluge of information prompted the National Human Rights Commission of Korea to warn that people sickened by the virus now face a second trauma of harassment and ridicule, leading some South Koreans to fear social stigma more than the disease itself. In Israel, Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu has been accused of using the pandemic as a pretext to enhance his powers after the government issued emergency measures allowing internal state security to track citizens' cellphone data to curb the disease. The move drew an immediate rebuke from critics and civil rights groups who feared it would set a precedent for the embattled prime minister to exploit. This month, millions of Iranians were reportedly pinged by the government on their smartphones, urging citizens to download an app that claimed it could determine if users and their loved ones were infected by the coronavirus. Millions signed up despite the software's dubious claims, ostensibly giving the autocratic regime access to personal location data for swaths of the country. Taiwan, lauded for its early success combating the coronavirus, recently introduced a digital fence using cellphone data to enforce quarantines of people required to stay home. Those under watch must leave their devices switched on and are called unannounced by authorities to ensure they haven't left home. No country, though, has matched the technological lengths to which China has gone to restrain the virus. Partnering with internet giants Alibaba and Tencent, the government is assigning citizens color codes that denote their health status, which in turn grants them access past checkpoints or even entrance to a restaurant or a subway station. Users have reported being color-coded erroneously and being unable to contact the app providers to change their status. The software strengthens the ability of Chinese authorities to track people in a country that already uses widespread facial recognition to suppress opposition. Human rights advocates say the technology will probably remain in place after the pandemic is over. "In many cases, the fear and panic have allowed governments to impose quite drastic measures which can be very difficult to roll back," said Maya Wang, a senior China researcher at Human Rights Watch. "Once you have a system implemented, they become normalized. "Governments have a responsibility to ensure public safety and health; however, in emergencies like this they still have to respect human rights, which includes rights to privacy," Wang added. "Any interference in privacy has to meet standards of legality, proportionality and necessity." Expectations of privacy and a patchwork of laws -- along with revelations that after the Sept. 11, 2001, terrorist attacks, the government increased phone surveillance -- make it difficult for contact tracing based on cellphone information to take hold in the U.S. The Trump administration, however, is in talks with Facebook and Google to use aggregated, anonymized location data to track the disease, the Washington Post reported last week. There's growing sentiment in the U.S. that technology can play a vital role in stemming the pandemic. A group of technologists, epidemiologists and medical professionals recently signed an open letter outlining ways Silicon Valley, whose companies, including Facebook, have been blamed for eroding personal privacy, can assist. Among them was a call for Apple, Google and other mobile operating system vendors to provide their users an opt-in contact tracing feature that would also protect people's identities. "If such a feature could be built before SARS-CoV-2 is ubiquitous, it could prevent many people from being exposed. In the longer term, such infrastructure could allow future disease epidemics to be more reliably contained," read the letter, whose signatories included Peter Eckersley, a distinguished technology fellow at the digital-rights-focused Electronic Frontier Foundation. A computer scientist at MIT led a team that developed a prototype app called Private Kit: Safe Paths that shares encrypted location data for contact tracing between phones rather than sending it to a central database. The aim is to ensure a user will know they've come in close contact with someone carrying the coronavirus while preserving the carrier's anonymity. One of the keys to any such app will be reaching critical mass to reverse the growth of the outbreak. New COVID-19 cases have surged in Singapore over the last week as returnees from overseas raise the risk of more community transmissions. To promote Singapore's TraceTogether, which was launched Friday, schools and private companies advocated the app's use, calling it a social responsibility, like hand washing. Unlike many parts of the U.S., the island nation of 5.7 million has resisted lockdowns. But in a sign of the deteriorating situation, the government said Tuesday that starting Thursday night, bars, nightclubs and movie theaters would close and gatherings of more than 10 people would be prohibited for at least the next month. Until recently, Singapore appeared to be a rare bright spot in the battle against the coronavirus. The rise in confirmed cases will probably now aid the government's bid to have TraceTogether widely adopted. Privacy matters don't elicit concern in the de facto one-party state like they do in the U.S. or Europe. Government surveys show more than three-quarters of Singaporeans trust the way authorities handle personal data. That sentiment has allowed Singapore to embark on its Smart Nation initiative, which aims to digitize vast corners of everyday life with cashless payments and facial recognition cameras on lampposts, with little resistance. Still, the country isn't immune to data breaches. In 2018, its largest health network was hacked, resulting in the theft of 1.5 million patients' records. Last year, a former American expatriate leaked the names of more than 14,000 HIV-positive individuals in Singapore after gaining access to the data through his partner, a Singaporean doctor. Developers of TraceTogether say that users' identities will be anonymized and that the app doesn't track location, but proximity between users by using Bluetooth, not GPS or cell signals. The information collected is stored on phones and erased after 21 days. The only information stored on government servers is provided by users confirmed to have COVID-19 who agree to share their logs. It's unclear how accurately the technology can locate users, how long someone needs to be near a COVID-19 case to trigger notifications and whether the app can be used for other investigations. The government, which did not respond to emailed questions, says it will make the app's underlying technology available to other countries. -- Times staff writers Victoria Kim in Seoul and Alice Su in Beijing contributed to this report. Caption: PHOTO: SINGAPORE'S app alerts users to COVID-19 cases in their proximity. Critics raise privacy concerns. PHOTOGRAPHER:Catherine Lai AFP/Getty Images PHOTO:TRAVELERS navigate Changi Airport. Singapore launched TraceTogether, an app that alerts users to COVID-19 cases in their proximity, as the Asian nation recorded a surge in coronavirus cases in the last week. PHOTOGRAPHER:Ore Huiying Getty Images 
Mar 25, 2020	New York Gov.ew York Gov. Andrew Cuomo, whose state is suffering the worst coronavirus outbreak in the nation, asked recently whether it's necessary to shut down the entire economy to save a single life. Cuomo was being rhetorical -- and he was purposefully setting an unrealistic bar. More than 100 people in New York City have died from the virus, and clearly many more lives are at stake. But the idea embedded in his question -- that there are trade-offs between halting the disease and minimizing the economic meltdown -- is important for politicians to consider. President Trump was inexcusably slow to admit to the pandemic's severity, and I fear that his solutions now -- an arbitrary Easter deadline, for instance -- could be reckless. However, the trade-offs he and others have raised are real.  A prolonged and draconian economic freeze will have its own negative health and social effects. And it is the job of policymakers to weigh competing costs and risks. We do it all the time. We set the speed limit at 65 mph, and in 2019 more than 38,000 Americans died in car accidents. A lower limit -- say 30 mph -- would vastly reduce the number of deaths. Each year, approximately 15,000 Americans die from non-self-inflicted gun deaths. Were we to confiscate all guns in house-to-house searches, it would surely save lives. The common flu felled tens of thousands of Americans this season. Requiring more social distancing and mandatory vaccinations would sharply reduce flu exposure and death. Not all of these policies were necessarily optimal; the point is that public policy involves trade-offs, with costs on either side. And politicians should be encouraged to openly debate these trade-offs. No one likes to speak of the economic costs of lives, but doing so is embedded in what economists do. Loggers receive higher pay than warehouse workers -- partly as "payment" for performing a job with an enhanced risk. In lawsuits, courts award settlements partly based on the size of the injured party's projected lost income. Younger workers are compensated more highly, because they would have been productive for more years. The social distancing and economic cooling America has practiced in recent weeks has been necessary, especially in light of our woeful unpreparedness. But legislators need to consider the economic consequences of continuing these measures over the long haul, balancing costs and benefits. The stimulus will help, but the strength of the economy isn't our paper (dollars and digital dollars) but our economic output. That can shut down perhaps for a period of weeks without long-term damage, but an economic freeze that extended many months would have extremely serious consequences -- including widespread avoidance of health regulations, smuggling, black markets and lawlessness. And an economic downturn carries its own risk of higher mortality. The point is not to fault the so-far relatively brief blanket on economic activity. It is that, if and as the epidemic endures, restrictions should be sensible and targeted. Restrictions might be greater in Manhattan and less extreme in areas with lower densities and lesser outbreaks. Small businesses that interact with small numbers of people might be treated differently from baseball stadiums. Behind each of those small businesses is an entrepreneur, often a family, that invested capital, work, hope and a portion of their lives. These are the engines of job creation in the future. Letting them fail in large numbers would have catastrophic consequences. In Cambridge, Mass., where I live, the city has shut down all construction, residential and commercial. There is a difference between permitting a large crew to enter an apartment building and allowing a two-person team to enter a single-family home. Both have risks -- but the scale matters. We are dealing with trade-offs on both sides. The rush to close primary schools should be reconsidered in the light of competing costs. Each of those kids has parents who, by their presence at home, is wrested from the workforce. In the case of young children, a prolonged isolation could cause enduring harm to both learning and socialization. Right now, officials in some states face opprobrium for any measures save the most draconian. They are being pushed by highly speculative predictions based on worst-case scenarios and mathematical modeling of a sort that has proved flawed in the past. Models work well when the subjects being modeled cannot adjust their behavior to affect the result. But as we have seen time and again in the financial world, modeling can fail. In the face of financial panic, for example, selling can provoke panic selling far beyond what a model might have predicted. People also adjust their behavior in a pandemic. Countries in Asia have flattened the curve, and more, with far lesser rates of contagion than California Gov. Gavin Newsom and some other officials have warned of here. Pollyannish denial is no solution -- but worst-case forecasts can also be harmful to the social order. Countries have arrested the virus with a mix of relatively brief but severe restrictions on travel and output (China), and extensive testing and quarantines for those who are ill, with fewer economic restrictions (South Korea). Some of each of these will apply here, in varying degrees according to the geographic area and the industry. We should assess these tools -- and the expected costs and benefits -- less like politicians or Republicans or Democrats, and more like economists.  Credit: Roger Lowenstein is a financial journalist and former staff writer for the Wall Street Journal. He is the author of, among other books, "Buffett: The Making of an American Capitalist."
Mar 24, 2020	Both the COVID-19 pandemic and climate change are global crises with the power to derail economies and kill millions of people. Society has moved far more aggressively to address the coronavirus than it has the climate crisis. But some experts wonder if the unprecedented global mobilization to slow the pandemic might help pave the way for more dramatic climate action. Leah Stokes, a political scientist at UC Santa Barbara, pointed out that aggressive steps to reduce planet-warming emissions — such as investing in solar and wind power, switching to electric cars and requiring more efficient buildings — wouldn’t be nearly as disruptive to everyday life as the stay-at-home orders that have defined the novel coronavirus response. “Dealing with the climate crisis is a decades-long transformation of our energy system,” Stokes said. It’s also possible COVID-19 will change nothing for the climate fight, precisely because the calamitous effects of rising temperatures — such as worsening wildfires, deadlier heat waves and rising seas — are building over time rather than all at once. We asked eight scientists, activists and other experts what a coronavirus-like response to climate change would look like, and what we can learn from the pandemic. Here’s what they said. Emily Grubert, social scientist and engineer, Georgia Tech To Grubert, the ongoing pandemic “highlights how much we do actually need systemic responses to an emergency.” In other words, narrowly addressing root causes isn’t enough. Public officials in various parts of the country haven’t just tried to slow the spread of COVID-19; they’ve suspended evictions, guaranteed paid sick leave and proposed sending cash to Americans. Similarly, Grubert said, climate policies can’t just focus on reducing emissions. They must provide relief for those who are most vulnerable, such as coal workers who lose their jobs and low-income communities suffering the worst effects of pollution. “We can’t really solve the climate crisis without having support for people’s healthcare, and support for people being able to survive wage-wise and job-wise,” she said. “And I think with the coronavirus response, we’re starting to see a lot of those same types of arguments being applied.” Grubert has also been reading about public transit systems faced with massive budget shortfalls because ridership has cratered during the pandemic. She’s hopeful those types of headlines might spur greater support for government investment in light rail and buses, which can play a huge role in reducing planet-warming emissions by getting people out of their cars. Shane Skelton, former energy advisor to U.S. House Speaker Paul Ryan Skelton sees an important lesson for climate policy in the coronavirus outbreak: that confronting a crisis is far more difficult and expensive when it’s already on your doorstep. The consequences of planet-warming emissions are already here, but the most devastating effects are yet to come. And whether it’s disease prevention or climate change, Skelton said, “the gross amount of money spent, and the disruption to the economy, is far less when you invest in prevention than in managed chaos and recovery.” Climate change “will be as bad as coronavirus when we’re really feeling it. So let’s not go there,” he said. Skelton thinks federal stimulus money to jump-start the economy after the pandemic subsides should include big investments in clean energy infrastructure, such as electric vehicle manufacturing, building retrofits, microgrids and projects to reduce emissions from industry. He also wants to see Congress set a federal clean electricity standard, possibly as high as 80% by 2050. Skelton described himself as “very much a states’ rights advocate.” But the federal government’s true value, he said, is addressing emergencies and economic crises that can’t be solved by the states alone — such as climate change, or a global pandemic. Your support helps us deliver the news that matters most. Subscribe to the Los Angeles Times. Leah Stokes, climate policy researcher, UC Santa Barbara Stokes pointed out a striking contrast between the coronavirus and climate change. To prevent the spread of COVID-19, young people around the world are staying at home, in large part to protect their parents’ and grandparents’ generations. With climate change, it’s older generations who are being asked to protect the planet for their children and grandchildren by making smaller lifestyle changes, such as driving less or eating less meat. “I hope we could have this sort of inter-generational solidarity on the climate crisis,” Stokes said. Lifestyle changes alone won’t solve the climate crisis, and passing laws to reduce emissions will still be tough as long as the fossil-fuel industry exerts political influence, Stokes said. But the coronavirus crisis might “wake people up” to the importance of listening to scientists, and to the value of well-staffed, well-funded government agencies, she said. She also noted that many critics have been quick to dismiss the multitrillion-dollar climate plans proposed by Democratic presidential candidates. But now Congress is debating nearly $2 trillion in federal spending as part of a coronavirus relief package. “It suddenly becomes really questionable why there’s never any money to deal with this [climate] crisis,” Stokes said. Kyle Meyaard-Schaap, national organizer, Young Evangelicals for Climate Action Meyaard-Schaap believes the coronavirus could have tangible and intangible ripple effects for climate. On the tangible side, if the federal government sends $1,200 checks to individual Americans — a key piece of the relief package being debated by Congress — that might help build political support for carbon tax and dividend. It’s a proposal to tax companies that emit planet-warming carbon pollution, then return the proceeds to households. “Do you want to get that money in a more sustainable way? Let’s tax carbon, and cut everyone a check,” Meyaard-Schaap said. On the intangible side, the pandemic might help people better understand the dangers posed by climate change. Scientists say a warmer planet is more conducive to the insects that spread diseases such as malaria and Zika. A hotter planet with worse air quality from increased smog formation and larger wildfires could also keep people indoors, as coronavirus has. COVID-19 “could make each of us more afraid, more cynical, less trusting in government,” and thus less willing to come together on climate, Meyaard-Schaap said. But he’s hopeful the pandemic will instead offer something else: “an opportunity for all of us to be inspired by each other, and to be chastened by our own call to responsibility.” Michael Webber, chief scientist and technology officer, Engie As chief scientist for a Paris-based multinational energy company, Webber is in the thick of the global coronavirus response. Like many utilities, Engie is implementing contingency plans to keep power plants running, and trying to figure out how it can use its emergency response and infrastructure expertise to help hospitals and governments deal with the outbreak. For Webber, who is also an engineering professor at the University of Texas, Austin, there are two main lessons for climate change. The first is the importance of listening to scientists, who have been warning for years about the risk of a global pandemic in much the same way they’ve been sounding alarm bells about climate. The second is the need to act early on those warnings. Webber pointed to the success of early, aggressive responses to COVID-19 in countries such as Singapore and South Korea. The virus has spread more quickly and infected more people in countries that were slower to respond, such as the United States. “This feels like climate change to me, where every year we wait to take action on climate change means we have to hustle even harder,” Webber said. “And unfortunately people are going to die.” Aracely Jimenez, deputy communications director, Sunrise Movement The Sunrise Movement is the youth-led activist group behind the Green New Deal, a sweeping set of proposals that would slash planet-warming emissions while also guaranteeing a living-wage job and high-quality healthcare for every American. To Jimenez, the fallout from the coronavirus — including widespread layoffs across industries such as food service and hospitality, and the fact that many Americans fear they won’t be able to afford treatment treatment if they get sick — exposes the “fault lines” in America’s social safety net. Those are the fault lines the Green New Deal seeks to address, she said. The country’s post-pandemic economic recovery plan “has to be one that’s about creating good jobs that are tied to meaningful work,” Jimenez said. “The Green New Deal is the only plan on the table that is looking at the economy and understanding how critical it is to rebuild it, and make it resistant to these crisis-level shocks.” Jimenez said the world’s rapid mobilization to slow the COVID-19 pandemic shows that sweeping climate action is possible. “We can model and demand a world where we come together across lines of generation and race and class to understand that we deserve a better world where everyone is taken care of,” she said. Rich Powell, executive director, ClearPath Powell runs a clean energy advocacy group founded by Jay Faison, a conservative mega-donor who has been trying for years to get Republican politicians to take climate change seriously. For Powell, the COVID-19 pandemic hammers home the importance of reliable, affordable energy supplies. He noted that power companies are going to “heroic lengths” to keep the lights on, making it possible for society to keep functioning amid the crisis. Keeping energy reliable and affordable even as economies transition away from fossil fuels will require more than just solar farms and wind turbines, which can go a long way toward reducing emissions but are still limited by the on-again, off-again nature of sun and wind. ClearPath supports government investment in technologies that might drive deeper emissions cuts, such as enhanced geothermal, advanced nuclear, pumped-storage hydropower and carbon capture from fossil fueled generators. Powell foresees an opportunity to bolster those kinds of technologies through the economic stimulus packages that will almost certainly be needed even after the pandemic subsides. “We actually have a daunting but also exciting opportunity ahead of us this century, which is figuring out how to get everybody linked up to affordable, reliable electricity, and figure out how to do it clean,” he said. Anne Orford, chair of international law, Melbourne Law School Orford wrote a blog post for the London Review of Books arguing that efforts to rein in the novel coronavirus have “led to a significant shift in the way individuals, institutions and politicians discuss our responsibility to protect vulnerable groups.” “States that for decades had been committed to neoliberal thinking have slowly begun to embrace such radically old-fashioned ideas as planning for the future, relying on scientific expertise, or calling on their constituents to make sacrifices,” she wrote. In an interview, Orford explained that international law has long been shaped by the “rational choice” paradigm that dominates U.S. legal thinking. She described that way of thinking as follows: “You can’t ask people to make any sacrifice of liberty or property for the collective — and even if you did ask them, they wouldn’t do it.” Nations, too, will act only in their own self-interest, “even when faced with destruction of the planet.” Now the COVID-19 pandemic is putting those ideas to the test. And Orford suspects there’s no going back. “We can’t un-live this,” she said. “We now know you can ask people to radically do something we wouldn’t have thought possible, and we can do that with good humor. So why can’t we do that for the environment?”
Mar 24, 2020	One of the most effective ways authorities can limit the spread of a pandemic is to immediately locate, test and isolate anyone who’s had contact with a carrier of the disease. But pinpointing those contacts is painstaking. An infected person can’t reliably remember the dozens or more people they’ve crossed paths with in the preceding days or weeks. With that in mind, the Singaporean government introduced an app that will alert users if they’ve been in close proximity with a confirmed case of the coronavirus, helping authorities slow the spread of a disease that’s surged in the city state over the past week. The app, called TraceTogether, works by exchanging short distance Bluetooth signals with other users of the app, giving officials a database to track potential COVID-19 carriers. The app is being offered voluntarily but it comes at a time when governments across the globe are increasingly seizing on location data to combat the pandemic. The targeting of an individual’s movements is stoking tensions and raising civil rights questions over public health and personal privacy. Countries including China, South Korea and Israel are tracking users’ cellphones to varying degrees to warn their citizens about potential infections and to chart the spread of the disease — a technological tool that didn’t exist during past outbreaks. Such advances are leading to wider surveillance and a deeper reach by governments into the lives of their citizens. They require a growing acceptance of diminished privacy — a sacrifice many are willing to make against a global health crisis — in an age when more than a few governments and companies have squandered public trust in their ability to safeguard personal information, experts say. “The attitude around digital technology has certainly changed since the 2014 West Africa Ebola epidemic. Back then, it was very difficult to deploy digital technology for surveillance due to doubt in its utility,” said Anne Liu, a health technology expert at Columbia University. “Six years later we’re seeing more confidence in the tech, but less so in the people who deploy it and their intentions with the data.” South Korea’s aggressive testing and radical transparency has contributed to a dramatic decline in the rate of coronavirus infections. But it’s come at a price for some of the nearly 9,000 people who have contracted COVID-19. South Koreans are provided such immense detail about new cases and their recent whereabouts that its given citizens fodder to speculate on alleged romantic affairs and the means to dox suspected cases. The deluge of information prompted the National Human Rights Commission of Korea to warn that people sickened by the virus now face a second trauma of harassment and ridicule, leading some South Koreans to fear social stigma more than the disease itself. In Israel, Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu has been accused of using the pandemic as a pretext to enhance his powers after the government issued emergency measures allowing internal state security to track citizens’ cellphone data to curb the disease. The move drew an immediate rebuke from critics and civil rights groups who feared it would set a precedent for the embattled prime minister to exploit. Earlier this month, millions of Iranians were reportedly pinged by the government on their smartphones urging citizens to download an app that claimed it could determine if users and their loved ones were infected by the coronavirus. Millions signed up despite the software’s dubious claims, ostensibly giving the autocratic regime access to personal location data for swaths of the country. Taiwan, a nation lauded for its early success combating the coronavirus, recently introduced a digital fence using cellphone data to enforce quarantines of people required to stay at home. Those under watch must leave their devices switched on and are called unannounced by authorities to ensure they haven’t left their homes. No country, though, has matched the technological lengths China has gone to restrain the virus. Partnering with Internet giants Alibaba and Tencent, the government is assigning citizens color codes that denote their health status, which in turn grants them access past checkpoints or even entrance to a restaurant or a subway station. Users have reported being color coded erroneously and being unable to contact the app providers to change their status. The software strengthens the ability of Chinese authorities to track people in a country that already uses widespread facial recognition to suppress opposition. Human rights advocates say the technology will likely remain in place after the pandemic is over. “In many cases, the fear and panic has allowed governments to impose quite drastic measures which can be very difficult to roll back,” said Maya Wang, a senior China researcher at Human Rights Watch. “Once you have a system implemented, they become normalized. “Governments have a responsibility to ensure public safety and health; however, in emergencies like this they still have to respect human rights, which includes rights to privacy,” Wang added. “Any interference in privacy has to meet standards of legality, proportionality and necessity.” Expectations of privacy and a patchwork of laws — along with revelations that after Sept. 11, 2001, the government increased phone surveillance — make it difficult for contact tracing based on cellphone information to take hold in the United States. The Trump administration, however, is in talks with Facebook and Google to use aggregated, anonymized location data to track the disease, the Washington Post reported last week. There’s growing sentiment in the U.S. that technology can play a vital role in stemming the pandemic. A group of technologists, epidemiologists and medical professionals recently signed an open letter outlining ways Silicon Valley, whose companies, including Facebook, have been blamed for an eroding personal privacy, can assist. Among them was a call for Apple, Google and other mobile operating system vendors to provide their users an opt-in contact tracing feature that would also protect people’s identities. “If such a feature could be built before SARS-CoV-2 is ubiquitous, it could prevent many people from being exposed. In the longer term, such infrastructure could allow future disease epidemics to be more reliably contained,” read the letter, whose signatories included Peter Eckersley, a distinguished technology fellow at the digital-rights-focused Electronic Frontier Foundation. A computer scientist at MIT led a team that developed a prototype app called Private Kit: Safe Paths that shares encrypted location data for contact tracing between phones rather than sending it to a central database. The aim is to ensure a user will know they’ve come in close contact with someone carrying the coronavirus while preserving the carrier’s anonymity. One of the keys to any such app will be reaching critical mass to reverse the growth of the outbreak. New COVID-19 cases have surged in Singapore over the past week as returnees from overseas raise the risk of more community transmissions. To promote Singapore’s TraceTogether, which was launched last Friday, schools and private companies have urged that using the app is socially responsible, like hand washing. Unlike many parts of the U.S., the island nation of 5.6 million has resisted lockdowns. But in a sign of the deteriorating situation, the government announced Tuesday that starting Thursday night, bars, nightclubs and movie theaters would close and gatherings of more than 10 people would be prohibited for at least the next month. Until recently, Singapore appeared like a rare bright spot in the battle against the coronavirus. The growth in confirmed cases will likely now aid the government’s bid to have TraceTogether widely adopted. Privacy matters don’t elicit concern in the de facto one-party state like they do in the U.S. or Europe. Government surveys show more than three-quarters of Singaporeans trust the way authorities handle personal data. That sentiment has allowed Singapore to embark on its Smart Nation initiative, which aims to digitize vast corners of everyday life with cashless payments and facial recognition cameras on lamp posts, with little resistance. Still, the country isn’t immune to data breaches. In 2018, the country’s largest health network was hacked, resulting in the theft of 1.5 million patients’ records. Last year, a former American expatriate leaked the names of over 14,000 HIV-positive individuals in Singapore after gaining access to the data through his partner, a Singaporean doctor. Developers of TraceTogether say users’ identities will be anonymized and that the app doesn’t track location, but proximity between users by using Bluetooth, not GPS or cell signals. The information collected is stored on phones and erased after 21 days. The only information stored on government servers is provided by users confirmed to have COVID-19 who agree to share their logs. It’s unclear how accurately the technology can locate users, how long someone needs to be near a COVID-19 case to trigger contacting and whether the app can be used for other investigations. The government, which did not respond to emailed questions, says it will make the app’s underlying technology available to other countries. Times staff writers Victoria Kim in Seoul and Alice Su in Beijing contributed to this report. 
Mar 24, 2020	The city of Los Angeles has expanded its temporary ban on evictions during the novel coronavirus outbreak by prohibiting landlords from removing tenants from rent-stabilized apartments for the purposes of converting them to condominiums, Mayor Eric Garcetti announced Monday afternoon. Garcetti said at a news conference that he was enacting an executive order prohibiting such evictions under the Ellis Act, a state law that allows people to be ejected from rent-stabilized apartments if the landlord is getting out of the rental business, which can include turning the building into condos. “This is necessary to protect additional tenants from being displaced from their homes at the exact same moment we’re asking them to stay at home,” Garcetti said. Between 2001 and 2018, more than 25,000 apartments that had been covered by the city’s rent control laws were removed from the market through the Ellis Act, according to city statistics. Garcetti’s order applies to tenants who have already received eviction notices under the act but whose date for vacating their apartments has not occurred. Monday’s order follows one Garcetti announced last week, which prohibits the evictions of any tenant in the city that can’t pay rent due to health or economic effects caused by the virus outbreak. Garcetti’s action still require tenants to pay any back rent that accumulates within six months of the expiration of the emergency order. He emphasized Monday that tenants should still pay their rent if they can because landlords need to pay their bills as well. “It’s important to remember that everyone is struggling right now,” he said. “Not all property owners are large companies, and many get by on the month-to-month checks they collect.” Garcetti’s announcement Monday will provide relief to renters such as Paula Peng. The 39-year-old lives in a bungalow court with four apartments in South Robertson and had been facing an Ellis Act eviction in May. She lost work as a substitute teacher at a private school because of the closures and has already applied for unemployment. She has laid in bed at night, worrying that she would need to go against public health advice to try to find another place to live. That she no longer faced immediate eviction gave her relief. “I was just freaking out and wondering where I’m going to be,” Peng said. “Now I feel like I can tackle it like a normal person.” The L.A. City Council had planned to advance some broader protections against evictions on Tuesday, but it’s unclear when that vote will be held after Council President Nury Martinez canceled the scheduled meeting, citing logistical problems and safety concerns over the virus. More testing, more cases Los Angeles city and county officials announced Monday a partnership with Seegene Technologies, Inc., a South Korea-based test kit manufacturer, to buy and process 20,000 new tests for the coronavirus. The first 20,000 tests will be directed toward first responders and medical professionals. In Los Angeles, only 325 residents “on the front lines” — critical city workers, healthcare professionals and those working with the homeless — have been tested, according to city officials. City and county officials plan to work out a larger agreement with Seegene, which has committed to provide 100,000 tests per week to Los Angeles. All tests will be made free to the public, the officials said in a media briefing. “We cannot beat a pandemic we cannot see, and we cannot properly address this crisis until we better understand it,” L.A. City Councilman David Ryu said. “The United States has fallen behind other nations in response to this pandemic, and we can’t wait on the federal government to fix it.” Ryu said Seegene, which was responsible for a majority of the coronavirus testing in South Korea, can process 5,000 tests a day locally and is working to build a national network of laboratories to run 30,000 tests a day. The company produces 1 million test kits a week and is working to expand that to 2 million a week, Ryu said. To date, Ryu said, roughly 25,200 tests have been conducted in California, with only 2,400 completed in L.A. County. “We know nations that have gained the upper hand in this pandemic have prioritized testing,” Ryu said. Officials have cautioned residents that as testing increases, so will the number of confirmed cases of the coronavirus. County officials confirmed 128 new cases and two more deaths on Monday, bringing the total number of deaths in the county to seven and the number of cases to 536. Of the two new deaths, one was a Glendale man in his 60s who had underlying health conditions, and the other was between the ages of 30 and 50 from an area still under investigation. Across the county, 80% of those who have tested positive are between the ages of 18 and 65 and 42% are ages 18-40. “This virus can infect people from across the board,” said Barbara Ferrer, director of the L.A. County Public Health Department. Ninety people who have been infected in the county — 17% of those who have tested positive — have been hospitalized while sick, she said. Ferrer also acknowledged “a number of outbreaks in some of our senior facilities.” As the number of confirmed coronavirus infections and deaths in California rises, federal, state and local officials are ramping up unprecedented restrictions on people’s movements in an effort to slow the spread of the virus and increasing resources to assist during the crisis. Parks have been closed throughout the state, following a weekend that saw packed hiking trails and beaches as people flocked to outdoor spaces, defying statewide instructions to shelter in place. Gov. Gavin Newsom on Monday night also ordered the immediate closure of all state parking lots, including nine in L.A. County. The state parks themselves will not be closed, and Newsom encouraged people to enjoy the outdoors with “intention and purpose.” “We need to practice common sense and socially distance,” Newsom said. “That means we need to help you help yourself.” All the while, the call for help from the federal government has remained a constant need. To help cities in California beef up their response to the pandemic, President Trump on Sunday approved a request from Newsom to declare a major disaster and for the federal government to provide “mass care,” emergency aid, unemployment assistance and disaster legal services. The president said the Federal Emergency Management Agency would ship mobile hospital units to California within the next 48 hours. The state is in line to get eight of these units, for a total of 2,000 beds. The Navy hospital ship Mercy, based in San Diego, has been deployed to Los Angeles, Adm. Michael M. Gilday, the chief of naval operations, said in a tweet Monday. Though its facilities will not be used to treat COVID-19 patients, it will accept those with other medical issues to relieve the burden on local hospitals, FEMA Administrator Peter Gaynor said. Newsom said Monday that the state is working to rapidly scale up its capacity to treat COVID-19 patients. There are 75,000 licensed hospital beds in California right now, he said, and the state needs an additional 50,000 to meet anticipated healthcare needs. The state itself will provide 20,000 of those beds. “All told, we’ve got about 3,000 beds that we have lined up and identified in the short term,” Newsom said. Los Angeles Unified School District Supt. Austin Beutner announced Monday that schools, which closed along with others across California last week to help quell the outbreak, will remain shuttered through at least May 1. “Students are learning in different ways, teachers are teaching in different ways and families are struggling to support their children in their studies while balancing other responsibilities,” Beutner said in a statement. “I wish I could tell you it will all be back to normal sometime soon, but it does not look like that will be the case.” Beutner also announced that Verizon will provide free internet for all students who do not have access. The district is working on a plan to distribute more computers to students and instructions for accessing the Verizon program. As of Monday, at least 1,940 cases of coronavirus infection had been reported in California, and at least 38 people had died. The number of confirmed cases is expected to grow as more testing occurs statewide and more deaths are recorded. Number of deaths increases On Sunday, San Diego County public health officials reported the region’s first fatality. The man, who was in his early 70s, had traveled to Hawaii and was hospitalized in Santa Clara County, but it was not clear whether he had been on a cruise or a plane, said Tim McClain, public affairs coordinator for the county’s Health and Human Services Agency. “Our sympathies and condolences go out to the individual’s family and friends,” said San Diego County Public Health Officer Wilma Wooten. The Alameda County Public Health Department on Monday announced the county’s first virus-related death. The person was elderly with underlying conditions and had no history of travel or known contact with a confirmed COVID-19 case, health officials said. There were 112 cases of coronavirus infection in Alameda County as of Monday, with evidence of widespread community transmission. Long Beach also reported its first fatality linked to the virus Monday. The woman who died was in her 50s and had an underlying health condition. “We’ve been dreading this day and were hoping it would never come,” Mayor Robert Garcia said. “We extend our deepest condolences to the victim’s family, friends and loved ones. We are all mourning this incredible loss to our community.” And Ventura County reported a virus-related death on Sunday. The person was in their 70s and had health conditions that made them more vulnerable to the virus, according to the county health department. Other details about the person were not released. The county also reported four new coronavirus cases, bringing its total to 30. Most are concentrated in Simi Valley, where there are 10 confirmed cases. Thousand Oaks has the second most number of cases, with five. Sacramento County on Monday announced the fourth death of a COVID-19 patient. The individual, like three others who died of the coronavirus in the county, was older than 70 and had underlying health conditions. Sacramento County is offering updates three times a week and last reported on Friday its number of confirmed cases was at 53. On Monday, that number had risen to 88, health officials said. Orange County reported a total of 125 new cases, up from 30. Despite the jump in the number of confirmed cases, there have been no reported deaths in the county. Confirmed cases increase As the death toll increased across the state, the number of confirmed cases has skyrocketed. On Sunday, the Los Angeles Community College District reported its first confirmed case of the virus, at East Los Angeles College in Monterey Park. A student there was tested Wednesday after reporting symptoms and is in quarantine and recovering, a letter from interim President Raul Rodriguez said. Rodriguez said the student was believed to have been exposed while at UCLA during the week of March 8 and last came to the East L.A. College campus on March 12. All faculty and staff who were supposed to come to campus Monday were directed to work from home unless otherwise notified by their supervisors. A ground-support employee responsible for handling luggage at Hollywood Burbank Airport also tested positive for COVID-19, according to a statement released Monday by the company that employs the worker. A fifth Transportation Service Authority employee at San Jose International Airport has also contracted the illness. The employee last worked at the airport March 11 at a passenger screening checkpoint. And an inmate in the state’s prison system, along with five prison workers, also tested positive. The prisoner, housed in L.A. County, was listed as stable and was being treated on site as of Sunday night. Elsewhere, healthcare workers are increasingly feeling the toll of their work. In a video message recorded Sunday night, Marin County’s Public Health Officer Dr. Matt Willis announced that he tested positive for the virus that afternoon. Willis said he has been self-quarantined from his family since his symptoms first appeared late last week. “My case is further proof that COVID-19 is with us,” Willis said. “While my symptoms are now mild, as most people’s will be, we also know that for many, especially our elders, this same illness can be life threatening.” Willis’ source of exposure is unknown, since he has actively met with healthcare workers around the Bay Area for work. Meanwhile, as more testing becomes available, the need for increased capacity has not dissipated. The city of Hayward opened a free public testing center Monday that officials say should be able to screen up to 350 people a day and provide results within 24 hours. In a joint effort between the Alameda County city and Avellino, a Menlo Park-based precision medicine company, the center at city Fire Station No. 7 will be open daily and staffed by personnel from the Hayward Fire Department. No doctor’s referral is required, but people will be screened for symptoms of the disease — such as fever, cough and shortness of breath — before they’re tested. As of Monday morning, there were “dozens of people who have presented themselves for testing, arriving both by car and on foot,” city spokesman Chuck Finnie said. Park closures In Los Angeles, Mayor Eric Garcetti on Sunday admonished Angelenos who hadn’t taken orders to practice social distancing seriously, announcing the closure of the city’s golf courses and parking lots at Venice Beach and called a halt to organized group sports at city parks, which were continuing to attract throngs of people. “This weekend we saw too many images of too many people crowding beaches or canyons beyond their capacity. Too many people, too close together, too often,” Garcetti said during his daily briefing on the impact of the novel coronavirus. “The longer we do that, the more people will get sick, and the more people will die,” he said. “There’s no way to sugarcoat that.” Parking lots near Venice Beach and the boardwalk were closed Monday, he said. In Santa Monica, the city also decided to close its beach parking lots. L.A. County Sheriff Alex Villaneuva closed beach parking lots throughout Malibu’s 26 miles of coast as part of an effort to allow for social distancing. Among the parking lots shut were Topanga, Surfrider, Corral Canyon, Point Dume, Zuma, El Matador, La Piedra, Nicolas Canyon and Leo Carrillo. On Sunday night, Long Beach Mayor Garcia announced the closure of Long Beach’s public basketball, tennis and volleyball courts, as well as its dog parks, playgrounds and skate parks. Officials in Orange County also were tightening regulations after groups of people descended on beaches and public trails over the weekend despite warnings about social distancing. The Laguna Beach City Council voted in a closed session Sunday night to close trail access to county wilderness parks as early as Monday morning. The council also directed staff to close all city beaches by Monday night and request that the county do the same for all stretches of sand in its jurisdiction. “We were unanimous that these steps must be taken now in our city to slow the spread of COVID-19,” Laguna Beach Mayor Bob Whalen said. “I urge everyone to comply with our actions for the health of everyone in our community and beyond.” The Mountains Recreation and Conservation Authority announced over the weekend that it was closing all of its parks and trails, including parkland owned by the Santa Monica Mountains Conservancy. Access roads and parking lots also will be closed. Many were packed over the weekend as people — eager to get out of the house and into the warm weather after days of rain — flocked to the outdoor destinations. In Marin County, health officials have ordered the immediate closure of all county parks to stem the tide of visitors. The measures build on Newsom’s sweeping order, issued Thursday, urging Californians to stay home — with a few exceptions — and put distance between themselves and others to slow the spread of COVID-19. Garcetti issued similar orders last week, which have closed most businesses in the city. Many who flocked to public areas over the weekend insisted they needed time outdoors to maintain their sanity. Clifford Aquino and Ryan Castro, both 28, couldn’t go to their gyms in Cerritos, as they had closed under government orders. So they decided to go to Long Beach instead, where there are plenty of outdoor gyms and paths for running. “This is only Day 2,” Castro said. “It sucks.” “It does suck,” Aquino replied, “but you have to find different ways to stay active.” Aquino said he felt safe using the outdoor machines because he was able to keep a safe distance from others. If one area is too busy, he finds another, he said. He said he wiped down each machine with a disinfecting wipe before using it. Newsletter Get our free Coronavirus Today newsletter Sign up for the latest news, best stories and what they mean for you, plus answers to your questions. Sign Me Up You may occasionally receive promotional content from the Los Angeles Times. Guard deployed Trump announced that he had signed paperwork to have the federal government pay for National Guard deployments in California, New York and Washington. Newsom on Friday deployed the California National Guard to assist food banks statewide in serving residents whose needs had not been met due to food shortages. The governor said the guard would focus on both humanitarian and public safety needs. Newsom pointed out that the state wanted to ensure that “food delivery is happening appropriately” and expressed concern about grocery stores overwhelmed by customers hoarding food and other essential household goods. California’s National Guard force of roughly 22,000 troops has often been activated in times of disaster and crisis, particularly in response to devastating wildfires and earthquakes. Meanwhile, Garcetti urged residents with disposable income to donate to the city’s emergency crisis response fund, which will help pay for child care for medical workers, grants for families and individuals who need financial assistance and meals for seniors. More coverage on coronavirus in California  Times staff writers Richard Winton, Nina Agrawal, David Cloud, Luke Money, Sean Greene and Jaclyn Cosgrove contributed to this report. 
Mar 24, 2020	New York Gov. Andrew Cuomo, whose state is suffering the worst coronavirus outbreak in the nation, asked recently whether it’s necessary to shut down the entire economy to save a single life. Cuomo was being rhetorical — and he was purposefully setting an unrealistic bar. More than 100 people in New York City have died from the virus, and clearly many more lives are at stake. But the idea embedded in his question — that there are trade-offs between halting the disease and minimizing the economic meltdown — is important for politicians to consider. President Trump was inexcusably slow to admit to the pandemic’s severity, and I fear that his solutions now — an arbitrary Easter deadline, for instance — could be reckless. However, the trade-offs he and others have raised are real. A prolonged and draconian economic freeze will have its own negative health and social effects. And it is the job of policymakers to weigh competing costs and risks. We do it all the time. We set the speed limit at 65 mph, and in 2019 more than 38,000 Americans died in auto accidents. A lower limit — say 30 mph — would vastly reduce the number of deaths. Each year, approximately 15,000 Americans die from non-self-inflicted gun deaths. Were we to confiscate all guns in house-to-house searches, it would surely save lives. The common flu felled tens of thousands of Americans this season. Requiring more social distancing and mandatory vaccinations would sharply reduce flu exposure and death. Not all of these policies were necessarily optimal; the point is that public policy involves trade-offs, with costs on either side. And politicians should be encouraged to openly debate these trade-offs. No one likes to speak of the economic costs of lives, but doing so is embedded in what economists do. Loggers receive higher pay than warehouse workers — partly as “payment” for performing a job with an enhanced risk. In lawsuits, courts award settlements partly based on the size of the injured party’s projected lost income. Younger workers are compensated more highly, because they would have been productive for more years. The social distancing and economic cooling America has practiced in recent weeks has been necessary, especially in light of our woeful unpreparedness. But legislators need to consider the economic consequences of continuing these measures over the long haul, balancing costs and benefits. The stimulus will help, but the strength of the economy isn’t our paper (dollars and digital dollars) but our economic output. That can shut down perhaps for a period of weeks without long-term damage, but an economic freeze that extended many months would have extremely serious consequences — including, eventually, higher mortality, widespread avoidance of health regulations, smuggling, black markets and lawlessness. The point is not to fault the so-far relatively brief blanket on economic activity. It is that, if and as the epidemic endures, restrictions should be sensible and targeted. Restrictions might be greater in Manhattan and less extreme in areas with lower densities and lesser outbreaks. Small businesses that interact with small numbers of people might be treated differently from baseball stadiums. Behind each of those small businesses is an entrepreneur, often a family, that invested capital, work, hope and a portion of their lives. These are the engines of job creation in the future. Letting them fail in large numbers would have catastrophic consequences. In Cambridge, Mass., where I live, the city has shut down all construction, residential and commercial. There is a difference between permitting a large crew to enter an apartment building and allowing a two-person team to enter a single-family home. Both have risks — but the scale matters. We are dealing with trade-offs on both sides. The rush to close primary schools should be reconsidered in the light of competing costs. Each of those kids has parents who, by their presence at home, is wrested from the workforce. In the case of young children, a prolonged isolation could cause enduring harm to both learning and socialization. Right now, officials in some states face opprobrium for any measures save the most draconian. They are being pushed by highly speculative predictions based on worst-case scenarios and mathematical modeling of a sort that has proved flawed in the past. Models work well when the subjects being modeled cannot adjust their behavior to affect the result. But, as we have seen time and again in the financial world, modeling can fail. In the face of a financial panic, for example, selling can provoke panic selling far beyond what a model might have predicted. People also adjust their behavior in a pandemic. Countries in Asia have flattened the curve, and more, with far lesser rates of contagion than California Gov. Gavin Newsom and some other officials have warned of here. Pollyannish denial is no solution — but worst-case forecasts can also be harmful to the social order. Countries have arrested the virus with a mix of relatively brief but severe restrictions on travel and output (China), and extensive testing and quarantines for those who are ill, with fewer economic restrictions (South Korea.) Some of each of these will apply here, in varying degrees according to the geographic area and the industry. We should assess these tools — and the expected costs and benefits — less like politicians or Republicans or Democrats, and more like economists. Roger Lowenstein is a financial journalist and former staff writer for the Wall Street Journal. He is the author of, among other books, “Buffett: The Making of an American Capitalist.” 
Mar 24, 2020	Michael Levitt, a Nobel laureate and Stanford biophysicist, began analyzing the number of COVID-19 cases worldwide in January and correctly calculated that China would get through the worst of its coronavirus outbreak long before many health experts had predicted. Now he foresees a similar outcome in the United States and the rest of the world. While many epidemiologists are warning of months, or even years, of massive social disruption and millions of deaths, Levitt says the data simply don’t support such a dire scenario — especially in areas where reasonable social distancing measures are in place. “What we need is to control the panic,” he said. In the grand scheme, “we’re going to be fine.” Here’s what Levitt noticed in China: On Jan. 31, the country had 46 new deaths due to the novel coronavirus, compared with 42 new deaths the day before. Newsletter Get our free Coronavirus Today newsletter Sign up for the latest news, best stories and what they mean for you, plus answers to your questions. Sign Me Up You may occasionally receive promotional content from the Los Angeles Times. Although the number of daily deaths had increased, the rate of that increase had begun to ease off. In his view, the fact that new cases were being identified at a slower rate was more telling than the number of new cases itself. It was an early sign that the trajectory of the outbreak had shifted. Think of the outbreak as a car racing down an open highway, he said. Although the car is still gaining speed, it’s not accelerating as rapidly as before. “This suggests that the rate of increase in the number of deaths will slow down even more over the next week,” Levitt wrote in a report he sent to friends Feb. 1 that was widely shared on Chinese social media. And soon, he predicted, the number of deaths would be decreasing every day. Three weeks later, Levitt told the China Daily News that the virus’ rate of growth had peaked. He predicted that the total number of confirmed COVID-19 cases in China would end up around 80,000, with about 3,250 deaths. This forecast turned out to be remarkably accurate: As of March 16, China had counted a total of 80,298 cases and 3,245 deaths — in a nation of nearly 1.4 billion people where roughly 10 million die every year. The number of newly diagnosed patients has dropped to around 25 a day, with no cases of community spread reported since Wednesday. Now Levitt, who received the 2013 Nobel Prize in chemistry for developing complex models of chemical systems, is seeing similar turning points in other nations, even those that did not instill the draconian isolation measures that China did. He analyzed data from 78 countries that reported more than 50 newcases of COVID-19 every day and sees “signs of recovery” in many of them. He’s not focusing on the total number ofcases in a country, but on the number of new cases identified every day — and, especially, on the change in that number from one day to the next. “Numbers are still noisy, but there are clear signs of slowed growth.” In South Korea, for example, newly confirmed cases are being added to the country’s total each day, but the daily tally has dropped in recent weeks, remaining below 200. That suggests the outbreak there may be winding down. In Iran, the number of newly confirmed COVID-19 cases per day remained relatively flat last week, going from 1,053 last Monday to 1,028 on Sunday. Although that’s still a lot of new cases, Levitt said, the pattern suggests the outbreak there “is past the halfway mark.” Italy, on the other hand, looks like it’s still on the upswing. In that country, the number of newly confirmed cases increased on most days this past week. In places that have managed to recover from an initial outbreak, officials must still contend with the fact that the coronavirus may return. China is now fighting to stop new waves of infection coming in from places where the virus is spreading out of control. Other countries are bound to face the same problem. Levitt acknowledges that his figures are messy and that the official case counts in many areas are too low because testing is spotty. But even with incomplete data, “a consistent decline means there’s some factor at work that is not just noise in the numbers,” he said. In other words, as long as the reasons for the inaccurate case counts remain the same, it’s still useful to compare them from one day to the next. The trajectory of deaths backs up his findings, he said, since it follows the same basic trends as the new confirmed cases. So do data from outbreaks in confined environments, such as the one on the Diamond Princess cruise ship. Out of 3,711 people on board, 712 were infected, and eight died. This unintended experiment in coronavirus spread will help researchers estimate the number of fatalities that would occur in a fully infected population, Levitt said. For instance, the Diamond Princess data allowed him to estimate that being exposed to the new coronavirus doubles a person’s risk of dying in the next two months. Most people have an extremely low risk of death in a two-month period, so that risk remains extremely low even when doubled. Nicholas Reich, a biostatistician at the University of Massachusetts Amherst, said the analysis was thought-provoking, if nothing else. “Time will tell if Levitt’s predictions are correct,” Reich said. “I do think that having a wide diversity of experts bringing their perspectives to the table will help decision-makers navigate the very tricky decisions they will be facing in the upcoming weeks and months.” Levitt said he’s in sync with those calling for strong measures to fight the outbreak. The social-distancing mandates are critical — particularly the ban on large gatherings — because the virus is so new that the population has no immunity to it, and a vaccine is still many months away. “This is not the time to go out drinking with your buddies,” he said. Getting vaccinated against the flu is important, too, because a coronavirus outbreak that strikes in the middle of a flu epidemic is much more likely to overwhelm hospitals and increases the odds that the coronavirus goes undetected. This was probably a factor in Italy, a country with a strong anti-vaccine movement, he said. But he also blames the media for causing unnecessary panic by focusing on the relentless increase in the cumulative number of cases and spotlighting celebrities who contract the virus. By contrast, the flu has sickened 36 million Americans since September and killed an estimated 22,000, according to the CDC, but those deaths are largely unreported. Levitt fears the public health measures that have shut down large swaths of the economy could cause their own health catastrophe, as lost jobs lead to poverty and hopelessness. Time and again, researchers have seen that suicide rates go up when the economy spirals down. The virus can grow exponentially only when it is undetected and no one is acting to control it, Levitt said. That’s what happened in South Korea last month, when it ripped through a closed-off cult that refused to report the illness. “People need to be considered heroes for announcing they have this virus,” he said. The goal needs to be better early detection — not just through testing but perhaps with body-temperature surveillance, which China is implementing — and immediate social isolation. While the COVID-19 fatality rate appears to be significantly higher than that of the flu, Levitt says it is, quite simply put, “not the end of the world.” “The real situation is not as nearly as terrible as they make it out to be,” he said. Dr. Loren Miller, a physician and infectious diseases researcher at the Lundquist Institute for Biomedical Innovation at Harbor-UCLA Medical Center, said it’s premature to draw any conclusions — either rosy or bleak — about the course the pandemic will take. “There’s a lot of uncertainty right now,” he said. “In China they nipped it in the bud in the nick of time. In the U.S. we might have, or we might not have. We just don’t know.” 
Mar 24, 2020	Los Angeles County officials confirmed Monday there were 128 new COVID-19 cases in the county and two more deaths from the disease caused by the coronavirus. That brings the total number of fatalities in the county to seven and the total case count to 536. Of those, 90 are hospitalized. The numbers are expected to rise as more people are tested. Officials announced Monday a partnership with Seegene Technologies Inc., a South Korea test kit manufacturer, to buy and process 20,000 new tests kits for the coronavirus. The first 20,000 tests will be directed toward first responders and medical professionals. In Los Angeles, only 325 residents “on the front lines” — critical city workers, healthcare professionals and those working with the homeless — have been tested, according to city officials. Of those who have tested positive, 80% are people ages 18 to 65, and 42% are in the 18-40 age group. - Agoura Hills 1 - Alhambra 4 - Altadena 5 - Arcadia 3 - Athens 1 - Baldwin Hills 3 - Bellflower 3 - Beverly Hills 12 - Beverlywood 7 - Boyle Heights 5 - Brentwood 27 - Burbank 2 - Calabasas 3 - Canoga Park 2 - Carson 6 - Castaic 1 - Century City 4 - Century Palms/Cove 1 - Cerritos 2 - Cloverdale/Cochran 1 - Compton 1 - Covina 1 - Crestview 6 - Culver City 5 - Del Rey 2 - Diamond Bar 2 - Downtown 2 - Duarte 1 - Eagle Rock 2 - East Hollywood 1 - East Los Angeles 2 - Echo Park 2 - El Segundo 1 - Encino 10 - Exposition Park 1 - Florence 1 - Gardena 1 - Glendale 9 - Glendora 1 - Granada Hills 5 - Hancock Park 6 - Hawthorne 3 - Hollywood 14 - Hollywood Hills 7 - Hyde Park 1 - Inglewood 3 - Koreatown 3 - La Cañada Flintridge 2 - La Mirada 3 - La Verne 2 - Lake Balboa 2 - Lakewood 1 - Lancaster 7 - Lawndale 2 - Lincoln Heights 1 - Lomita 8 - Long Beach - 17 - Los Feliz 2 - Lynwood 2 - Manhattan Beach 9 - Mar Vista 6 - Melrose 19 - Miracle Mile 5 - Monterey Park 3 - North Hollywood 9 - Northridge 1 - Pacific Palisades 8 - Palmdale 1 - Palms 2 - Paramount 2 - Park La Brea 6 - Pasadena 3 - Playa Vista 3 - Rancho Palos Verdes 1 - Redondo Beach 5 - Reseda 3 - San Dimas 1 - San Fernando 1 - San Pedro 2 - Santa Clarita 7 - Santa Monica 12 - Santa Monica Mountains 2 - Sherman Oaks 8 - Silver Lake 4 - South El Monte 1 - South Gate 1 - South Park 1 - South Pasadena 3 - South Whittier 2 - Stevenson Ranch 2 - Studio City 7 - Sun Valley 2 - Sunland 1 - Sylmar 1 - Tarzana 8 - Temple City 1 - Torrance 4 - Tujunga 1 - University Park 1 - Valley Glen 7 - Van Nuys 4 - Venice 7 - Vermont Knolls 1 - Vermont Vista 1 - Vernon Central 1 - Walnut 1 - West Adams 1 - West Covina 1 - West Hills 4 - West Hollywood 23 - West Los Angeles 4 - West Vernon 2 - Westchester 3 - Westlake 1 - Westwood 6 - Whittier 2 - Wilmington 3 - Wilshire Center 1 - Winnetka 1 - Woodland Hills 7 - Under Investigation 61  Here is an age breakdown*: 0 to 17 -- 9 18 to 40 --217 41 to 65 --198 Over 65 --92 *Excludes Pasadena and Long Beach 
Mar 24, 2020	In January, as Singapore racked up the highest numbers of coronavirus infections outside China, an alarmed Shasta Grant searched for flights back home to Indianapolis. The 44-year-old American writer, who moved to this island city-state with her family eight years ago, worried that their adopted home would be ravaged again by a runaway disease and that the school where her husband teaches and their 12-year-old son studies would be closed. She feared food shortages, overwhelmed hospitals and travel bans. But her husband persuaded her not to flee. Two months later, Singapore and other Asian nations have largely corralled their outbreaks; meanwhile, the virus roars across North America and Europe, leaving Grant dumbstruck by how quickly the U.S. went from a distant spectator of the epidemic to one of its primary victims.  "It feels very strange to say that I feel safer here than in my home country," Grant said. "That sinking feeling that it was really going to get awful, that we were all going to get infected, that just didn't happen. Things never really got bad in Singapore, and obviously they're a mess in America." In Asian countries that initially faced the gravest risk from the coronavirus, the shambolic U.S. response to the pandemic has elicited confusion, horror and even a measure of pity. Suddenly, it seems, the U.S. is the basket case, an aloof, inward-looking power that had already weakened its alliances and failed to lead on global emergencies such as climate change, and now was shrinking in a crisis. The United States was quick to restrict travel from China in the early weeks of the outbreak; now travelers from the U.S. and other Western countries are exporting a "second wave" of infections to China, Hong Kong and Singapore. President Trump, who once said the virus would disappear "like a miracle," has watched it explode in California, Washington state and New York while vigilant testing and contact tracing brought it under control in Taiwan and South Korea. As commercial shutdowns and shelter-in-place orders grind life to a halt in the United States' biggest cities, restaurants, bars, shopping malls and subway trains have operated virtually without interruption in Singapore and Taipei, Taiwan -- the occasional mask and thermometer gun the only obvious signs of a pandemic. Emerging outbreaks in India and Indonesia, huge populations where little testing has been done, now worry experts more than China and its immediate surroundings. Though the number of confirmed infections in the U.S. now exceeds 43,900, health experts warn that many more coronavirus cases are going unrecorded because of a scarcity of tests. Hospitals nationwide lack enough ventilators, beds and medication to treat an expected onslaught of critically ill patients. Herve Lemahieu, an Asia expert at the Lowy Institute, an Australian think tank, drew comparisons to Hurricane Katrina, another calamitous emergency response that laid bare the cracks in the U.S. political system and the widening inequities in American society. "That was the first time that the world saw images broadcast from the U.S. that resembled those of a developing country, and that's something that for most of us was surprising," Lemahieu said. "These kinds of moments have a psychological impact on the way the U.S. is perceived abroad." They are having a financial impact, too, as fears of a prolonged U.S. slump drag down Asian stock markets, threatening to plunge some of the fastest-growing economies into recession. "This stock market fall is serious," said Freddy Lim, a legislator in Taiwan, where the stock exchange has lost 20% of its value over the last month. "So we hope the U.S. will get this under control as soon as possible." That the U.S. would look riskier in a pandemic than parts of Asia would have been unthinkable not long ago. In 2002 and 2003, an outbreak of severe acute respiratory syndrome, or SARS, killed almost 800 people -- nearly all in China, Hong Kong, Taiwan and Singapore -- and erased an estimated $40 billion from the global economy. Aggressive public health measures helped stop the disease before it spread in the U.S., while chastened leaders in China and Singapore pledged to invest in health infrastructure and epidemic surveillance. Although China initially concealed the extent of this coronavirus outbreak -- as it did with SARS -- the Communist Party swiftly blanketed the epicenter of the virus, Hubei province, in a draconian lockdown that the World Health Organization praised as "extraordinary" in slowing the virus. Through a mixture of strict quarantining, contact tracing, temperature checks and diligent testing, Singapore, South Korea, Taiwan and Hong Kong also bought time for other governments to prepare. Health officials say the U.S. and other Western governments failed to anticipate the coronavirus reaching their shores. "Just because Singapore or Hong Kong experienced SARS while other places didn't, there's still lessons to be learned," said Dale Fisher, a Singapore-based expert on infectious disease who traveled to China last month as part of a WHO-led mission. "You don't have to be in a car accident to know that car accidents happen. I'm saddened that the world couldn't use that lead time to prepare better." Others were blunter. "Trump was saying this virus is no big deal, and now suddenly he's changed his tune," said PN Balji, a veteran Singaporean journalist and commentator. "It shows a callous disregard for your own citizens -- and, to a certain extent, the world." Taiwan, less than 90 miles from the Chinese mainland and visited by as many as 2,000 Chinese tourists daily, had recorded 195 infections -- or roughly 1 in 120,000 people, among the lowest rates of any of the more than 170 countries and territories affected by the virus. Compare that with the U.S., where 1 in 7,500 Americans has tested positive for the virus, add universal healthcare, and it's easy to see why Taiwan's president, Tsai Ing-wen, urged her citizens this week to "stay in Taiwan" because it was safer than traveling overseas. "Taiwan has a very robust health system," said ruling party lawmaker Lo Chih-cheng. "This is one area where I think the U.S. can learn from Taiwan." Sean Kramer, a 32-year-old from the Seattle area who teaches at a junior high school in Taiwan, said friends and relatives messaged him in January to ask whether he'd be safe there. For a while, he considered flying home. But then he watched the numbers of infections in China skyrocket while those in Taiwan stayed flat. He saw people on the street instinctively don masks, the Taiwanese administration roll out a succession of helpful messages and authorities quickly decide to extend Lunar New Year holidays for three extra weeks in February. All the steps that appeared to Kramer like overreactions seemed to keep a lid on the epidemic. As the virus spreads across his home state, he tries to do his part for his family by logging on to Amazon from Taipei to buy masks and hand sanitizer for his sister in suburban Seattle. "We never got the whole lockdown status, so seeing everyone react at home now, I can't relate to their emotions or their fear," Kramer said. "That's the scary part for me as an American." The U.S. stumbles have also thrown a lifeline to Chinese President Xi Jinping, who was facing a rare spasm of dissent at home after his government's initial attempts to paper over the outbreak in Wuhan, the capital of Hubei. As the total number of infections for the rest of the world has soared past those in China, Beijing has gone on a diplomatic and humanitarian offensive, pledging masks and medical equipment to dozens of countries -- including the U.S. -- in a bid to regain its global standing. Last week, Chinese billionaire Jack Ma sent a shipment of 1 million masks and 500,000 coronavirus test kits to "our friends in America." Such moves -- and Trump's repeated references to the "Chinese virus" -- highlight how the outbreak has become yet another arena of competition between the two leading global powers. Both countries appear to be covering up their mishandling of the crisis, said Lemahieu of the Lowy Institute, who called the war of words "pathetic and unappealing on both sides." Yet many Asian leaders retain faith that the U.S. will get a handle on its outbreak once social distancing orders and ramped-up health measures take hold, allowing it to resume a position of leadership in the global response. "The United States has got enormous resources at its disposal," Singaporean Foreign Affairs Minister Vivian Balakrishnan told CNBC this month. "It's a matter of getting it organized and getting it delivered. So let's wait and see. You know, I would never count the Americans out." -- Special correspondent Ralph Jennings in Taipei contributed to this report. Caption: PHOTO: SCHOOL is in session in Taiwan. Governments in Asia have managed to keep the outbreak in check. PHOTOGRAPHER:Paula Bronstein Getty Images PHOTO:WUHAN, China, during lockdown. Neighboring nations have largely corralled their coronavirus outbreaks. PHOTOGRAPHER: Getty Images
Mar 24, 2020	Gavin Newsom was the first governor to order his citizens to stay at home, shutting down California's economy, the world's eighth-largest, in the face of the COVID-19 pandemic. The next day, Friday, Andrew Cuomo, the governor of New York, followed suit. But not so in Texas and Florida, the nation's second and third most populous states, where a small-government philosophy -- less taxes, fewer regulations and a weaker safety net -- has long held sway. About one-fifth of Texas' 29 million people lacks health insurance, and nearly one-quarter of Florida's 21 million residents are elderly. But the governors of those states have resisted stay- at-home orders, despite mounting criticism.  Democratic mayors in both states have canceled events like Miami's Ultra electronic music festival and Austin's South by Southwest and have opened a handful of testing sites. They complain the patchwork of policies has made it nearly impossible to limit the disease's spread. But the governors, who are Republican, fear overreacting. "The vast, vast majority of people are testing negative for this," Florida Gov. Ron DeSantis said at a Sunday briefing at one of the state's three coronavirus test sites. Texas Gov. Greg Abbott has pointed to the state's vast rural stretches in arguing against ordering residents to stay home. "What may be right for places like the larger urban areas may not be right for the more than 200 counties that still have zero cases of COVID-19," Abbott said. Officials in Houston, San Antonio and Dallas, the state's largest cities, disagree. On Monday, San Antonio issued a stay-at-home order and Austin was expected to follow suit on Tuesday. "I'm hopeful the governor will reconsider," Clay Jenkins, the Dallas County judge, or chief executive, said at a Sunday briefing. There, Jenkins displayed a chart showing the projected spread of the coronavirus far exceeded Texas' available hospital beds. According to the projection, a statewide stay-at-home order could decrease coronavirus deaths from 430,000 to 5,000. He noted that Dallas has 250,000 uninsured residents, the most of any U.S. city. "Those folks aren't going to the doctor. If we don't do something it's going to be very, very bad here," he said. On Sunday, Abbott created a "strike force" of public and private sector officials to get Texas more medical supplies and deployed National Guard troops to assist local test sites. He promised that Texas would soon perform up to 20,000 coronavirus tests a week -- but in Dallas County, just a couple of hundred of people had been tested, said Dallas Mayor Eric Johnson. "The availability of testing isn't there," he said. Johnson, a former state legislator elected mayor last year, has faced tough decisions since the start of the crisis, when he canceled the city's St. Patrick's Day parade. He and Houston's mayor, Sylvester Turner, declared emergencies before the governor did, but he said the orders have been difficult to enforce without statewide support. "It makes all the economic pain you're inflicting on one city a wasted effort if a neighboring city is doing something different -- if people are continuing to congregate on the other side of an imaginary line," he said. "The approach probably should have been statewide from the outset. I think the governor is there now." Turner declined to issue a stay-at-home order Monday, citing the need for "economic balance." "In some cases, for many people, that can be worse than the virus itself," he said. Lina Hidalgo, the county judge for Harris County, which includes Houston, said local officials had planned to create 10 testing sites, but the federal government sent only enough supplies for four, and they were delayed. As of Monday, three test sites had opened capable of testing up to 250 people a day with results taking several days. "We do expect there to be a waiting list," Hidalgo said. "There is a triage process going on behind the scenes." Hidalgo has been conferring with officials in California and Washington as she tries to increase testing capacity. With testing so limited, she said, "All we have left is the blunt tool of social distancing." Hidalgo worries Texas will soon look like Italy, with rampant coronavirus infections and deaths, especially in places like the county jail. "Italy has an award-winning healthcare system. We have 20% uninsured," she said. "They're overwhelmed. You can bet we'd be overwhelmed if we saw the kind of spike they've seen." In Texas, drive-through coronavirus testing just started Thursday and has been slow to expand, even in Dallas and Houston, where police and firefighters have tested positive for the virus. So far, 10,000 Texans have been tested, less than half of California's number. New York is now testing 16,000 daily and has tested 75,000 total. Even Florida, a small-government state led by Republicans with a smaller population of about 20 million, had tested more people than Texas as of Sunday. "The unknown is whether every city is going to look like New York in a couple weeks, or whether we've interrupted community spread," said Dr. Peter Hotez, dean of the School of Tropical Medicine at Baylor College of Medicine in Houston. "Without the testing, it's hard to know." The first coronavirus case was reported in Houston on March 4, about a month after California. Two days after California's first confirmed COVID-19 fatality, Newsom convened top officials and ran a series of "scenarios for worst-case spread" and created pandemic response plans, he later said. Newsom declared a statewide emergency and sought both early federal assistance and community compliance through new rules for elder care and caution in attending large events. He ordered more help for seniors, renters and the homeless; delayed income tax filings; and loosened rules on commercial trucking and election procedures. But in Texas, Abbott waited until Thursday to issue an order closing schools and dine-in restaurants and limiting gatherings to 10 people, as of Saturday. "The traditional disaster model we have applied for so long does not apply," Abbott conceded in announcing the measures. "What we're dealing with now is not a local disaster: It's an international pandemic." The same day, Newsom ordered all of California's 40 million residents to stay home for two weeks. The next day, Cuomo issued a similar order covering 19 million residents of New York. In the last three days, other states have followed suit with stay-at-home orders: Hawaii, Illinois, New Jersey, Louisiana, Ohio, Delaware, Indiana, Michigan, Oregon and West Virginia. Louisiana's governor, John Bel Edwards, a Democrat, warned coronavirus is spreading faster there than anywhere else in the world, with more cases per capita than any state other than Washington and New York. He said they were on pace to run out of hospital beds in as soon as a week. "There's no reason to believe we won't be the next Italy," he said Sunday. Newsom has said California needs 30,000 additional hospital beds; Cuomo said New York needs an additional 50,000. Both said they don't have enough ventilators needed to treat critical coronavirus patients. "Ventilators are to this war what missiles were to World War II," Cuomo said Friday. Abbott has yet to address Texas' ventilator supply. He has praised the president's handling of the outbreak, waited to issue a disaster declaration and was still investigating Sunday how to add hospital beds. On Sunday, he ordered elective hospital procedures postponed and suspended regulations limiting hospital room capacity. "These orders will free up countless hospital beds across the state of Texas to treat COVID-19 patients," he said, although it wasn't clear how many added beds would be provided. Texas has 2.9 hospital beds per 1,000 people, about the national average, according to regulators. That's less capacity than Italy (3.2 beds per 1,000 people), where hospitals have been overwhelmed by coronavirus, and far less than South Korea (12 beds per 1,000 people). The looming shortage has alarmed local Texas officials. While the California Legislature approved up to $1 billion in emergency spending on coronavirus efforts -- a plan that was written and enacted in a matter of hours with broad bipartisan support -- Abbott has yet to commit to tapping the state's rainy-day fund of more than $11 billion to help the unemployed or issue a special open enrollment for health insurance, as California and New York have. Texas' Legislature meets every other year -- in the interest of small government -- and isn't due to reconvene until January unless Abbott calls a special session. "You've had a state government that for weeks has been hands off and trailing behind the crisis," said Manny Garcia, executive director of the Texas Democratic Party. In Florida, DeSantis refused to issue a stay-at-home order, despite pleas from local leaders and Nikki Fried, the state agriculture commissioner, who warned in a letter last week that, "We cannot afford to lose another week." Miami Mayor Francis Suarez closed dine-in restaurants and bars March 16, only to see people continue to party to the north on Fort Lauderdale beaches. "It's frustrating because you get blamed for things that you have no say over," said Suarez, a Republican who is self-quarantined at home after testing positive for the virus. Suarez has posted videos online encouraging Floridians to stay at home, but said he's not he can legally order them to do so the way the governor can. -- Hennessy-Fiske reported from Houston and Kaleem from Miami. Times staff writers John Myers in Sacramento and Meredith Blake in New York contributed to this report. Caption: PHOTO: THE REV. ROD CLARK holds a service in the parking lot of his Episcopal church in McAllen, Texas. PHOTOGRAPHER:Delcia Lopez Monitor PHOTO:TEXAS Gov. Greg Abbott, center, says the state's vast rural stretches argue against ordering people to stay home. Leaders in the state's largest cities disagree. PHOTOGRAPHER:Eric Gay Associated Press
Mar 23, 2020	In January, as Singapore racked up the highest numbers of coronavirus infections outside China, an alarmed Shasta Grant searched for flights back home to Indianapolis. The 44-year-old American writer, who moved to this island city-state with her family eight years ago, worried that their adopted home would be ravaged again by a runaway disease and that the school where her husband teaches and their 12-year-old son studies would be closed. She feared food shortages, overwhelmed hospitals and travel bans. But her husband persuaded her not to flee. Two months later, Singapore and other Asian nations have largely corralled their outbreaks; meanwhile, the virus roars across North America and Europe, leaving Grant dumbstruck by how quickly the U.S. went from a distant spectator of the epidemic to one of its primary victims. “It feels very strange to say that I feel safer here than in my home country,” Grant said. “That sinking feeling that it was really going to get awful, that we were all going to get infected, that just didn’t happen. Things never really got bad in Singapore, and obviously they’re a mess in America.” In Asian countries that initially faced the gravest risk from the coronavirus, the shambolic U.S. response to the pandemic has elicited confusion, horror and even a measure of pity. Suddenly, it seems, the U.S. is the basket case, an aloof, inward-looking power that had already weakened its alliances and failed to lead on global emergencies such as climate change, and now was shrinking in a crisis. The U.S. was quick to restrict travel from China in the early weeks of the outbreak; now travelers from the U.S. and other Western countries are exporting a “second wave” of infections to China, Hong Kong and Singapore. President Trump, who once said the virus would disappear “like a miracle,” has watched it explode in California, Washington state and New York while vigilant testing and contact tracing brought it under control in Taiwan and South Korea. As commercial shutdowns and shelter-in-place orders grind life to a halt in the United States’ biggest cities, restaurants, bars, shopping malls and subway trains have operated virtually without interruption in Singapore and Taipei, Taiwan — the occasional mask and thermometer gun the only obvious signs of a pandemic. Emerging outbreaks in India and Indonesia, huge populations where little testing has been done, now worry experts more than China and its immediate surroundings. Though the number of confirmed infections in the U.S. now exceeds 43,900, health experts warn that many more coronavirus cases are going unrecorded because of a scarcity of tests. Hospitals nationwide lack enough ventilators, beds and medication to treat an expected onslaught of critically ill patients. Newsletter Get our free Coronavirus Today newsletter Sign up for the latest news, best stories and what they mean for you, plus answers to your questions. Sign Me Up You may occasionally receive promotional content from the Los Angeles Times. Hervé Lemahieu, an Asia expert at the Lowy Institute, an Australian think tank, drew comparisons to Hurricane Katrina, another calamitous emergency response that laid bare the cracks in the U.S. political system and the widening inequities in American society. “That was the first time that the world saw images broadcast from the U.S. that resembled those of a developing country, and that’s something that for most of us was surprising,” Lemahieu said. “These kinds of moments have a psychological impact on the way the U.S. is perceived abroad.” They are having a financial impact, too, as fears of a prolonged U.S. slump drag down Asian stock markets, threatening to plunge some of the world’s fastest-growing economies into recession. “This stock market fall is serious,” said Freddy Lim, a legislator in Taiwan, where the stock exchange has lost 20% of its value over the last month. “So we hope the U.S. will get this under control as soon as possible.” That the U.S. would look riskier in a pandemic than parts of Asia would have been unthinkable not long ago. In 2002 and 2003, an outbreak of severe acute respiratory syndrome, or SARS, killed almost 800 people — nearly all in China, Hong Kong, Taiwan and Singapore — and erased an estimated $40 billion from the global economy. Aggressive public health measures helped stop the disease before it spread in the U.S., while chastened leaders in China and Singapore pledged to invest in health infrastructure and epidemic surveillance. Although China initially concealed the extent of this coronavirus outbreak — as it did with SARS — the Communist Party swiftly blanketed the epicenter of the virus, Hubei province, in a draconian lockdown that the World Health Organization praised as “extraordinary” in slowing the virus. Through a mixture of strict quarantining, contact tracing, temperature checks and diligent testing, Singapore, South Korea, Taiwan and Hong Kong also bought time for other governments to prepare. Health officials say the U.S. and other Western governments failed to anticipate the coronavirus reaching their shores. “Just because Singapore or Hong Kong experienced SARS while other places didn’t, there’s still lessons to be learned,” said Dale Fisher, a Singapore-based expert on infectious disease who traveled to China last month as part of a WHO-led mission. “You don’t have to be in a car accident to know that car accidents happen. I’m saddened that the world couldn’t use that lead time to prepare better.” Others were blunter. “Trump was saying this virus is no big deal, and now suddenly he’s changed his tune,” said PN Balji, a veteran Singaporean journalist and commentator. “It shows a callous disregard for your own citizens — and, to a certain extent, the world.” Taiwan, less than 90 miles from the Chinese mainland and visited by as many as 2,000 Chinese tourists daily, had recorded 195 infections as of Friday — or roughly 1 in every 120,000 people, among the lowest rates of any of the more than 170 countries affected by the virus. Compare that with the U.S., where 1 in 7,500 Americans has tested positive for the virus, add universal healthcare, and it’s easy to see why Taiwan’s president, Tsai Ing-wen, urged her citizens this week to “stay in Taiwan” because it was safer than traveling overseas. “Taiwan has a very robust health system,” said ruling party lawmaker Lo Chih-cheng. “This is one area where I think the U.S. can learn from Taiwan.” Sean Kramer, a 32-year-old from the Seattle area who teaches at a junior high school in Taiwan, said friends and relatives messaged him in January to ask whether he’d be safe there. For a while, he considered flying home. But then he watched the numbers of infections in China skyrocket while those in Taiwan stayed flat. He saw people on the street instinctively don masks, the Taiwanese administration roll out a succession of helpful messages and authorities quickly decide to extend Lunar New Year holidays for three extra weeks in February. All the steps that appeared to Kramer like overreactions seemed to keep a lid on the epidemic. As the virus spreads across his home state, he tries to do his part for his family by logging on to Amazon from Taipei to buy masks and hand sanitizer for his sister in suburban Seattle. “We never got the whole lockdown status, so seeing everyone react at home now, I can’t relate to their emotions or their fear,” Kramer said. “That’s the scary part for me as an American.” The U.S. stumbles have also thrown a lifeline to Chinese President Xi Jinping, who was facing a rare spasm of dissent at home following his government’s initial attempts to paper over the outbreak in Wuhan, the capital of Hubei. As the total number of infections for the rest of the world has soared past those in China, Beijing has gone on a diplomatic and humanitarian offensive, pledging masks and medical equipment to dozens of countries — including the U.S. — in a bid to regain its global standing. Last week, Chinese billionaire Jack Ma sent a shipment of 1 million masks and 500,000 coronavirus test kits to “our friends in America.”  The first shipment of masks and coronavirus test kits to the US is taking off from Shanghai. All the best to our friends in America. ?? pic.twitter.com/LTn26gvlOl — Jack Ma (@JackMa) March 16, 2020 Such moves — and Trump’s repeated references to the “Chinese virus” — highlight how the outbreak has become yet another arena of competition between the two leading global powers. Both countries appear to be covering up their mishandling of the crisis, said Lemahieu of the Lowy Institute, who called the war of words “pathetic and unappealing on both sides.” Yet many Asian leaders retain faith that the U.S. will get a handle on its outbreak once social distancing orders and ramped-up health measures take hold, allowing it to resume a position of leadership in the global response. “The United States has got enormous resources at its disposal,” Singaporean Foreign Affairs Minister Vivian Balakrishnan told CNBC last week. “It’s a matter of getting it organized and getting it delivered. So let’s wait and see. You know, I would never count the Americans out.” Special correspondent Ralph Jennings in Taipei contributed to this report.
Mar 23, 2020	Gavin Newsom was the first governor to order his citizens to stay at home, shutting down California’s economy, the world’s eighth-largest, in the face of the COVID-19 pandemic. The next day, Friday, Andrew Cuomo, the governor of New York, followed suit. But not so in Texas and Florida, the nation’s second and third most populous states, where a small-government philosophy — less taxes, fewer regulation and a weaker safety net — has long held sway. About one-fifth of Texas’ 29 million people lacks health insurance, and nearly one-quarter of Florida’s 21 million residents are elderly. But the governors of those states have resisted stay-at-home orders, despite mounting criticism. Democratic mayors in both states have canceled events like Miami’s Ultra electronic music festival and Austin’s South by Southwest and have opened a handful of testing sites. They complain the patchwork of policies has made it nearly impossible to limit the disease’s spread. But the governors, who are Republican, fear overreacting. “The vast, vast majority of people are testing negative for this,” Florida Gov. Ron DeSantis said at a Sunday briefing at one of the state’s three coronavirus test sites. Texas Gov. Greg Abbott has pointed to the state’s vast rural stretches in arguing against ordering residents to stay home. “What may be right for places like the larger urban areas may not be right for the more than 200 counties that still have zero cases of COVID-19,” Abbott said. Officials in Houston, San Antonio and Dallas, the state’s largest cities, disagree. On Monday, San Antonio issued a stay-at-home order and Austin was expected to follow suit on Tuesday. “I’m hopeful the governor will reconsider,” Clay Jenkins, the Dallas County judge, or chief executive, said at a Sunday briefing. There, Jenkins displayed a chart showing the projected spread of the coronavirus far exceeded Texas’ available hospital beds. According to the projection, a statewide stay-at-home order could decrease coronavirus deaths from 430,000 to 5,000. He noted that Dallas has 250,000 uninsured residents, the most of any U.S. city. “Those folks aren’t going to the doctor. If we don’t do something it’s going to be very, very bad here,” he said. On Sunday, Abbott created a “strike force” of public and private sector officials to get Texas more medical supplies and deployed National Guard troops to assist local test sites. He promised that Texas would soon perform up to 20,000 coronavirus tests a week — but in Dallas County, just a couple of hundred of people had been tested, said Dallas Mayor Eric Johnson. “The availability of testing isn’t there,” he said. Johnson, a former state legislator elected mayor last year, has faced tough decisions since the start of the crisis, when he canceled the city’s St. Patrick’s Day parade. He and Houston’s mayor, Sylvester Turner, declared emergencies before the governor did, but he said the orders have been difficult to enforce without statewide support. “It makes all the economic pain you’re inflicting on one city a wasted effort if a neighboring city is doing something different — if people are continuing to congregate on the other side of an imaginary line,” he said. “The approach probably should have been statewide from the outset. I think the governor is there now.” Turner declined to issue a stay-at-home order Monday, citing the need for “economic balance.” “In some cases, for many people, that can be worse than the virus itself,” he said. Lina Hidalgo, the county judge for Harris County, which includes Houston, said local officials had planned to create 10 testing sites, but the federal government only sent enough supplies for four and they were delayed. As of Monday, three test sites had opened capable of testing up to 250 people a day with results taking several days. “We do expect there to be a waiting list,” Hidalgo said. “There is a triage process going on behind the scenes.” Hidalgo has been conferring with officials in California and Washington as she tries to increase testing capacity. With testing so limited, she said, “All we have left is the blunt tool of social distancing.” Hidalgo worries Texas will soon look like Italy, with rampant coronavirus infections and deaths, especially in places like the county jail. “Italy has an award-winning healthcare system. We have 20% uninsured,” she said. “They’re overwhelmed. You can bet we’d be overwhelmed if we saw the kind of spike they’ve seen.” In Texas, drive-through coronavirus testing just started Thursday and has been slow to expand, even in Dallas and Houston, where police and firefighters have tested positive for the virus. So far, 10,000 Texans have been tested, less than half of California’s number. New York is now testing 16,000 daily and has tested 75,000 total. Even Florida, a small-government state led by Republicans with a smaller population of about 20 million, had tested more people than Texas as of Sunday. “The unknown is whether every city is going to look like New York in a couple weeks, or whether we’ve interrupted community spread,” said Dr. Peter Hotez, dean of the School of Tropical Medicine at Baylor College of Medicine in Houston. “Without the testing, it’s hard to know.” The first coronavirus case was reported in a Houston suburb on March 4, about a month after California. Two days after California’s first confirmed COVID-19 fatality, Gov. Gavin Newsom convened top officials and ran a series of “scenarios for worst-case spread” and created pandemic response plans, he later said. Newsom declared a statewide emergency and sought both early federal assistance — asking for protective masks from the CDC — and community compliance through new rules for elder care and caution in attending large events. He ordered more help for seniors, renters and the homeless; delayed income tax filings and loosened rules on commercial trucking and election procedures. But in Texas, Abbott waited until Thursday to issue an order closing schools and dine-in restaurants and limiting gatherings to 10 people, as of Saturday. “The traditional disaster model we have applied for so long does not apply,” Abbott conceded in announcing the measures. “What we’re dealing with now is not a local disaster: It’s an international pandemic.” The same day, Newsom ordered all of California’s 40 million residents to stay home for two weeks. The next day, Cuomo issued a similar order covering 19 million residents of New York. In the last three days, other states have followed suit with stay-at-home orders: Illinois, New Jersey, Louisiana, Ohio, Delaware, Indiana, Michigan, Oregon, Washington and West Virginia. Louisiana’s governor, John Bel Edwards, a Democrat, warned coronavirus is spreading faster there than anywhere else in the world, with more cases per capita than any state other than Washington and New York. He said they were on pace to run out of hospital beds in as soon as a week. “There’s no reason the believe we won’t be the next Italy,” he said Sunday. Newsom has said California needs 20,000 additional hospital beds; Cuomo said New York needs an additional 50,000. Both said they don’t have enough life-saving ventilators needed to treat critical coronavirus patients. New York state has at least 5,000, but expects to need about 30,000, Cuomo has said. “Ventilators are to this war what missiles were to World War II,” he said Friday. Abbott has yet to address Texas’ ventilator supply. He has praised the president’s handling of the outbreak, waited to issue a disaster declaration and activate the National Guard and was still investigating Sunday how to add hospital beds. On Sunday, he ordered elective hospital procedures postponed (a day after Dallas County officials did) and suspended regulations limiting hospital room capacity. “These orders will free up countless hospital beds across the state of Texas to treat COVID-19 patients,” he said, although it wasn’t clear how many added beds would be provided. Texas has 2.9 hospital beds per 1,000 people, about the national average according to regulators. That’s less capacity than Italy (3.2 beds per 1,000 people) where hospitals have been overwhelmed by coronavirus, and far less than South Korea (12 beds per 1,000 people). The looming shortage has alarmed local Texas officials. While the California Legislature approved up to $1 billion in emergency spending on coronavirus efforts — a plan that was written and enacted in a matter of hours with broad bipartisan support — Abbott has yet to commit to tapping the state’s rainy day fund of more than $11 billion to help the unemployed or issue a special open enrollment for health insurance, as California and New York have. Texas’ legislature meets every other year — in the interest of small government — and isn’t due to reconvene until January unless Abbott calls a special session. “You’ve had a state government that for weeks has been hands off and trailing behind the crisis,” said Manny Garcia, executive director of the Texas Democratic Party. In Florida, DeSantis refused to issue a stay-at-home order, despite pleas from local leaders and Nikki Fried, the state agriculture commissioner, who warned in a letter last week that, “We cannot afford to lose another week.” Miami Mayor Francis Suarez closed dine-in restaurants and bars March 16 only to see people continue to party to the north on Fort Lauderdale beaches. “It’s frustrating, because you get blamed for things that you have no say over,” said Suarez, a Republican who is self-quarantined at home after testing positive for the virus. Suarez has posted videos online encouraging Floridians to stay at home, but said he’s not he can legally order them to do so the way the governor can. Some state parks and beaches remained open this weekend, including Pepper Park Beach on the Treasure Coast north of West Palm Beach. Jim Crist, 58, had heard about the first local coronavirus infection earlier that day. But he and his wife still came to the beach to celebrate his birthday, sharing subs and scotch with friends after their favorite seafood restaurant closed its dining room Friday. “We’re being safe. We’re distancing. Just let us have this,” Crist said. On Monday, the beach was closed along with all others in St. Lucie County. It’s not clear Florida and Texas officials realize how dire the situation already is. On March 15, North Texas nursing home resident Patrick James, 77, died at a Dallas-area hospital, a day after he was tested for COVID-19. “At the time we were in a little bit of a family panic to get some action,” said stepson Greg Brandt, 55. He said the state “sprang into action.” Abbott visited and “promised to get everyone tested,” including his mother Jean James, 75, a retired teacher who had self-quarantined. But the family didn’t receive results of James’ test until days after he died. Hennessy-Fiske reported from Houston and Kaleem from Miami. Times staff writers John Myers in Sacramento and Meredith Blake in New York contributed to this report. 
Mar 23, 2020	As people across the country were unable to get tested for COVID-19, a Santa Monica pediatrician emailed the parents of his patients with a pricey but tempting offer. For $250, they could buy a cheek-swab test for the virus to be administered at home, Dr. Jay Gordon wrote. The tests could be purchased by his patients’ parents even if they showed no symptoms or had no other reason to fear they were infected. Insurance most likely wouldn’t cover the cost, he wrote. Because he was getting only 100 kits, he asked that testing be limited to family members and “household staff.” Gordon said he sold out almost immediately and has ordered hundreds more. “People really wanted them,” he said. Though California is ramping up tests, a continuing shortage means that many people with symptoms are still desperate to get tested. But some private physicians and “concierge” doctors are offering tests to their patients at a price. It’s hard to know how widespread the practice is, but it has sparked outrage as celebrities and professional athletes without symptoms have gotten tested while others of lesser means wait. Gordon acknowledges that his offer underscores inequities in the healthcare system. “There’s no way in hell it should be so,” Gordon said. “This represents a massive failure of the federal government, of the healthcare system.” Gordon said he is selling the tests to his clients because he has a duty to give them the best medical care possible. “I think it’s in the best interests of my patients,” he said. Gordon — who has drawn criticism for defending the rights of parents who want to delay or refuse vaccinations for their children — said he believed the lack of testing was going to get “much much worse.” Some physicians are skeptical that all the tests being offered are effective and criticize doctors who are charging fees for clients who want to be tested and have the money to pay. The Food and Drug Administration on Friday publicly warned that it has not authorized any at-home tests for COVID-19, the disease caused by the novel coronavirus. “I think that it’s pretty horrible,” said Dr. Stanley Perlman, a pediatric infectious disease specialist at the University of Iowa who studies coronaviruses and their treatments. “You don’t want people who have more money to be able to get tested for something that everybody is worried about. It makes it seem like people who are rich are getting a break. I can’t think of anything good about this.” State Sen. Richard Pan (D-Sacramento), a pediatrician who has strongly criticized Gordon and other doctors over their position on vaccinations, said he believed the practice was not widespread but denounced selling the tests at high prices to whomever can afford them, saying it was unprofessional conduct that the Medical Board of California should investigate. Doctors, he said, should be following the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention guidelines that prioritize testing for people who have COVID-19 symptoms and are hospitalized; have compromised immune systems or other factors that put them at high risk; or recently traveled to countries with major outbreaks or had close contact with someone who has the virus. “So in a crisis, this is how we handle it? We auction these tests? Is this how we want our society to operate?” Pan asked. “Our response should not be based on auctioning off scarce resources to the highest bidder.” In Beverly Hills, Dr. David Nazarian, a primary care physician, said he’s been receiving an influx of calls since the coronavirus outbreak hit the U.S. But because he has a concierge medical practice — meaning he limits his clientele to “influential people, A-list celebrities, and CEOs” in exchange for more personalized care — he has been granting tests only to his existing clients. Nazarian’s yearly membership fee starts at $5,500 and can go up to $10,000. About a month ago, when COVID-19 cases were still primarily occurring overseas, Nazarian began looking into obtaining extra nasopharyngeal swabs and viral transport mediums — the materials needed to test for the coronavirus. As a result, he had about 50 available for his patients, which were administered during house calls by nurses wearing protective gear. Because of a “massive shortage” of testing kits, however, Nazarian decided to place an order for the rapid-test kits he said have been used in China and South Korea that produce results in a matter of minutes instead of days. Nazarian said he expects the rapid tests, which involve taking blood samples, to arrive from China this weekend, at which point he hopes to open a drive-through testing option available to any person willing to pay about $500 or $600. “We have had a lot of new patients contact us who money wasn’t a factor for; they were willing to pay whatever was needed,” he said. “But we’re not looking at this time in regards to ‘How can we make more money doing testing?’ or ‘Who we can charge more to do a test.’ It’s actually really trying to take care of the patients we already have and then figuring out how we can increase testing and do things for the good of the community.” Andrew Pekosz, a biologist at the Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health, said there has been a surge of foreign companies rushing to develop new coronavirus blood tests in recent weeks. He said he personally would not take such a test because of his concerns about their reliability. A blood antibody test can indicate only if a person has had the virus, whereas the CDC-approved nasal swab tests can detect a current infection, Pekosz said. If patients aren’t made aware of this key difference it could lead them to seek additional treatment, he said. “The last thing hospitals need right now are people who are healthy going in saying they need medical care,” Pekosz said. The CDC recommends nasal swabs for coronavirus testing and says oral swabs are a lower priority and should be collected only if a nasal test is not available. Oral swabs run a higher risk of people coughing or exposing the tester to the virus, Pekosz said. Some doctors whose private practices treat celebrities and the wealthy say they are following the CDC guidelines on tests. Dr. Gary Cohan, a Beverly Hills internal medicine physician, said he’s had to turn away numerous patients seeking testing. “Right now, I have to take care of my sickest people who could die,” Cohan said. Cohan said that roughly every 30 minutes, he checks with his nurse — “she’s got friends everywhere” — about when his office will be provided with additional testing supplies. “She rolls her eyes and says that Quest [Diagnostics] and LabCorp tell her, ‘any day now,’” he said. He said he doubted the reliability of some of the tests that are being offered to private patients and said doctors should not charge extra for them. Federal legislation passed this month would expand access to free COVID-19 testing to the public. Gordon, the Santa Monica pediatrician, said he is charging clients only $50 more per test than it costs him from the lab. He said he had been trying for a while, for the most part unsuccessfully, to get some of his patients tested for the virus. But then the parents of one of his patients told him about a lab in San Dimas, KorvaLabs, that was selling COVID-19 tests. Gordon said he vetted the lab and the test, and determined it was legitimate based on a small group study that he said showed the mouth swab test had the same results as the nasal sample. The test can be self-administered at home. Gordon said he sold the tests to clients whether or not they had symptoms but asked them to wait until they suspected they might be sick to use them. Dr. Jeffrey Klausner, who said he was a voluntary clinical consultant with KorvaLabs, said the tests meet standards set by federal regulations. KorvaLabs did not return a call for comment. Klausner said the lab was part of a broader effort to “scale up” testing capacity for COVID-19 in the U.S. He said if more testing were available, the country could “end this ill-informed, misguided, misdirected shut down.” He also said that notions about free testing being available are an “illusion” and that Americans have been unwilling to fund a healthcare system that might have been better prepared for the crisis. “We need to rely on the free market for our health response,” Klausner said. “That’s America.”
Mar 23, 2020	Michael Levitt, a Nobel laureate and Stanford biophysicist, began analyzing the number of COVID-19 cases worldwide in January and correctly calculated that China would get through the worst of its coronavirus outbreak long before many health experts had predicted. Now he foresees a similar outcome in the United States and the rest of the world. While many epidemiologists are warning of months, or even years, of massive social disruption and millions of deaths, Levitt says the data simply don’t support such a dire scenario — especially in areas where reasonable social distancing measures are in place. “What we need is to control the panic,” he said. In the grand scheme, “we’re going to be fine.” Here’s what Levitt noticed in China: On Jan. 31, the country had 46 new deaths due to the novel coronavirus, compared with 42 new deaths the day before. Newsletter Get our free Coronavirus Today newsletter Sign up for the latest news, best stories and what they mean for you, plus answers to your questions. Sign Me Up You may occasionally receive promotional content from the Los Angeles Times. Although the number of daily deaths had increased, the rate of that increase had begun to ease off. In his view, the fact that new cases were being identified at a slower rate was more telling than the number of new cases itself. It was an early sign that the trajectory of the outbreak had shifted. Think of the outbreak as a car racing down an open highway, he said. Although the car was still gaining speed, it’s not accelerating as rapidly as before. “This suggests that the rate of increase in number of the deaths will slow down even more over the next week,” Levitt wrote in a report he sent to friends Feb. 1 that was widely shared on Chinese social media. And soon, he predicted, the number of deaths would be decreasing every day. Three weeks later, Levitt told the China Daily News that the virus’ rate of growth had peaked. He predicted that the total number of confirmed COVID-19 cases in China would end up around 80,000, with about 3,250 deaths. This forecast turned out to be remarkably accurate: As of March 16, China had counted a total of 80,298 cases and 3,245 deaths — in a nation of nearly 1.4 billion people where roughly 10 million die every year. The number of newly diagnosed patients has dropped to around 25 a day, with no cases of community spread reported since Wednesday. Now Levitt, who received the 2013 Nobel Prize in chemistry for developing complex models of chemical systems, is seeing similar turning points in other nations, even ones that did not instill the draconian isolation measures that China did. He analyzed data from 78 countries that reported more than 50 new cases of COVID-19 every day and sees “signs of recovery” in many of them. He’s not focusing on the total number of cases in a country, but on the number of new cases identified every day — and especially on the change in that number from one day to the next. “Numbers are still noisy but there are clear signs of slowed growth.” In Iran, the number of newly confirmed COVID-19 cases remained relatively flat last week, going from 1,133 on Monday to 1,028 on Sunday. Although that’s still a lot of new cases, Levitt said the pattern suggests the outbreak there “is past the halfway mark.” Of course, recovering from an initial outbreak doesn’t mean the virus won’t come back: China is now fighting to stop new waves of infection coming in from places where the virus is spreading out of control. Other countries are bound to face the same problem as well. Levitt acknowledges that his figures are messy, and that the official case counts in many areas are too low because testing is spotty. But even with incomplete data, “a consistent decline means there’s some factor at work that is not just noise in the numbers,” he said. In other words, as long as the reasons for the inaccurate case counts remain the same, it’s still useful to compare them from one day to the next. The trajectory of deaths backs up his findings, he said, since it follows the same basic trends as the new confirmed cases. So do data from outbreaks in confined environments, such as the one on the Diamond Princess cruise ship. Out of 3,711 people on board, 712 were infected and eight died. This unintended experiment in coronavirus spread will help researchers estimate the number of fatalities that would occur in a fully infected population, Levitt said. For instance, the Diamond Princess data allowed him to estimate that being exposed to the new coronavirus doubles a person’s risk of dying in the next two months. Most people have an extremely low risk of death in a two-month period, so that risk remains extremely low even when doubled. Nicholas Reich, a biostatistician at the University of Massachusetts Amherst, said the analysis was thought-provoking, if nothing else. “Time will tell if Levitt’s predictions are correct,” Reich said. “I do think that having a wide diversity of experts bringing their perspectives to the table will help decision-makers navigate the very tricky decisions they will be facing in the upcoming weeks and months.” Levitt said he’s in sync with those calling for strong measures to fight the outbreak. The social-distancing mandates are critical — particularly the ban on large gatherings — because the virus is so new that the population has no immunity to it and a vaccine is still many months away. “This is not the time to go out drinking with your buddies,” he said. Getting vaccinated against the flu is important because a coronavirus outbreak that strikes in the middle of a flu epidemic is much more likely to overwhelm hospitals and increases the odds that the coronavirus goes undetected. This was probably a factor in Italy, a country with a strong anti-vaccine movement, he said. But he also blames the media for causing unnecessary panic by focusing on the relentless increase in the cumulative number of cases and spotlighting celebrities who contract the virus. By contrast, the flu has sickened 36 million Americans since September and killed an estimated 22,000, according to the CDC, but those deaths are largely unreported. He fears the public health measures that have shut down large swaths of the economy could cause their own health catastrophe, as lost jobs lead to poverty and hopelessness. Time and again, researchers have seen that suicide rates go up when the economy spirals down. The virus can grow exponentially only when it is undetected and no one is acting to control it, Levitt said. That’s what happened in South Korea last month, when it ripped through a closed-off cult that refused to report the illness. “People need to be considered heroes for announcing they have this virus,” he said. The goal needs to be better early detection — not just through testing but perhaps with body temperature surveillance, which China is implementing — and immediate social isolation. While the COVID-19 fatality rate appears to be significantly higher than that of the flu, Levitt says it is quite simply put, “not the end of the world.” “The real situation is not as nearly as terrible as they make it out to be,” he said. Dr. Loren Miller, a physician and infectious diseases researcher at the Lundquist Institute for Biomedical Innovation at Harbor-UCLA Medical Center, said it’s premature to draw any conclusions — either rosy or bleak — about the course the pandemic will take. “There’s a lot of uncertainty right now,” he said. “In China they nipped it in the bud in the nick of time. In the U.S. we might have, or we might not have. We just don’t know.”
Mar 23, 2020	As people across the country were unable to get tested for COVID-19, a Santa Monica pediatrician emailed the parents of his patients with a pricey but tempting offer. For $250, they could buy a cheek-swab test for the virus to be administered at home, Dr. Jay Gordon wrote. The tests could be purchased by his patients' parents even if they showed no symptoms or had no other reason to fear they were infected. Insurance most likely wouldn't cover the cost, he wrote. Because he was getting only 100 kits, he asked that testing be limited to family members and "household staff."  Gordon said he sold out almost immediately and has ordered hundreds more. "People really wanted them," he said. Though California is ramping up tests, a continuing shortage means that many people with symptoms are still desperate to get tested. But some private physicians and "concierge" doctors are offering tests to their patients at a price. It's hard to know how widespread the practice is, but it has sparked outrage as celebrities and professional athletes without symptoms have gotten tested while others of lesser means wait. Gordon acknowledges that his offer underscores inequities in the healthcare system. "There's no way in hell it should be so," Gordon said. "This represents a massive failure of the federal government, of the healthcare system." Gordon said he is selling the tests to his clients because he has a duty to give them the best medical care possible. "I think it's in the best interests of my patients," he said. Gordon -- who has drawn criticism for defending the rights of parents who want to delay or refuse vaccinations for their children -- said he believed the lack of testing was going to get "much, much worse." Some physicians are skeptical that all the tests being offered are effective and criticize doctors who are charging fees for clients who want to be tested and have the money to pay. The Food and Drug Administration on Friday publicly warned that it has not authorized any at-home tests for COVID-19, the disease caused by the novel coronavirus. "I think that it's pretty horrible," said Dr. Stanley Perlman, a pediatric infectious disease specialist at the University of Iowa who studies coronaviruses and their treatments. "You don't want people who have more money to be able to get tested for something that everybody is worried about. It makes it seem like people who are rich are getting a break. I can't think of anything good about this." State Sen. Richard Pan (D-Sacramento), a pediatrician who has strongly criticized Gordon and other doctors over their position on vaccinations, said he believed the practice was not widespread but denounced selling the tests at high prices to whomever can afford them, saying it was unprofessional conduct that the Medical Board of California should investigate. Doctors, he said, should be following the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention guidelines that prioritize testing for people who have COVID-19 symptoms and are hospitalized; have compromised immune systems or other factors that put them at high risk; or recently traveled to countries with major outbreaks or had close contact with someone who has the virus. "So in a crisis, this is how we handle it? We auction these tests? Is this how we want our society to operate?" Pan asked. "Our response should not be based on auctioning off scarce resources to the highest bidder." In Beverly Hills, Dr. David Nazarian, a primary care physician, said he's been receiving an influx of calls since the coronavirus outbreak hit the U.S. But because he has a concierge medical practice -- meaning he limits his clientele to "influential people, A-list celebrities, and CEOs" in exchange for more personalized care -- he has been granting tests only to his existing clients. Nazarian's yearly membership fee starts at $5,500 and can go up to $10,000. About a month ago, when COVID-19 cases were still primarily occurring overseas, Nazarian began looking into obtaining extra nasopharyngeal swabs and viral transport mediums -- the materials needed to test for the coronavirus. As a result, he had about 50 available for his patients, which were administered during house calls by nurses wearing protective gear. Because of a "massive shortage" of testing kits, however, Nazarian decided to place an order for the rapid-test kits he said have been used in China and South Korea that produce results in a matter of minutes, not days. Nazarian said he expected the rapid tests, which involve taking blood samples, to arrive from China over the weekend, at which point he hopes to open a drive-through testing option available to any person willing to pay about $500 or $600. "We have had a lot of new patients contact us who money wasn't a factor for; they were willing to pay whatever was needed," he said. "But we're not looking at this time in regards to 'How can we make more money doing testing?' or 'Who we can charge more to do a test.' It's actually really trying to take care of the patients we already have and then figuring out how we can increase testing and do things for the good of the community." Andrew Pekosz, a biologist at the Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health, said there has been a surge of foreign companies rushing to develop new coronavirus blood tests in recent weeks. He said he personally would not take such a test because of his concerns about their reliability. A blood antibody test can indicate only if a person has had the virus, whereas the CDC-approved nasal swab tests can detect a current infection, Pekosz said. If patients aren't made aware of this key difference it could lead them to seek additional treatment, he said. "The last thing hospitals need right now are people who are healthy going in saying they need medical care," Pekosz said. The CDC recommends nasal swabs for coronavirus testing and says oral swabs are a lower priority and should be collected only if a nasal test is not available. Oral swabs run a higher risk of people coughing or exposing the tester to the virus, Pekosz said. Some doctors whose private practices treat celebrities and the wealthy say they are following the CDC guidelines on tests. Dr. Gary Cohan, a Beverly Hills internal medicine physician, said he's had to turn away numerous patients seeking testing. "Right now, I have to take care of my sickest people who could die," Cohan said. Cohan said that roughly every 30 minutes, he checks with his nurse -- "she's got friends everywhere" -- about when his office will be provided with additional testing supplies. "She rolls her eyes and says that Quest [Diagnostics] and LabCorp tell her, 'any day now,' " he said. He said he doubted the reliability of some of the tests that are being offered to private patients and said doctors should not charge extra for them. Federal legislation passed this month would expand access to free COVID-19 testing to the public. Gordon, the Santa Monica pediatrician, said he is charging clients only $50 more per test than it costs him from the lab. He said he had been trying for a while, for the most part unsuccessfully, to get some of his patients tested for the virus. But then the parents of one of his patients told him about a lab in San Dimas, KorvaLabs, that was selling COVID-19 tests. Gordon said he vetted the lab and the test, and determined it was legitimate based on a small group study that he said showed the mouth swab test had the same results as the nasal sample. The test can be self-administered at home. Gordon said he sold the tests to clients whether or not they had symptoms but asked them to wait until they suspected they might be sick to use them. Dr. Jeffrey Klausner, who said he was a voluntary clinical consultant with KorvaLabs, said the tests meet standards set by federal regulations. KorvaLabs did not return a call for comment. Klausner said the lab was part of a broader effort to "scale up" testing capacity for COVID-19 in the U.S. He said if more testing were available, the country could "end this ill-informed, misguided, misdirected shut down." He also said that notions about free testing being available are an "illusion" and that Americans have been unwilling to fund a healthcare system that might have been better prepared for the crisis. "We need to rely on the free market for our health response," Klausner said. "That's America." Caption: PHOTO: A BOX of coronavirus kits at a private practice in Huntington Beach. The sale of tests at high prices has drawn the ire of doctors including state Sen. Richard Pan. PHOTOGRAPHER:Raul Roa Daily Pilot
Mar 22, 2020	California’s sweeping stay-at-home order to slow the spread of the coronavirus resulted in a weekend like no other, with people staying indoors and, when outside, keeping at least six feet apart. But there were exceptions — including at the state’s beloved beaches. For the record: 3:43 PM, Mar. 22, 2020 An earlier version of this story said Santa Monica was closing beaches. The city closed its beach parking lots to prevent crowds at beaches. Santa Monica closed its beach parking lots because of the crowds. “Today is not the day to go to the beach,” City Manager Rick Cole said in a statement. “We know that it’s difficult to stay at home when the weather is so nice and being close to the beach is one of the primary reasons why we love to call Santa Monica home. Yet this is a time when we must take the guidelines from our health officials to heart.” The Mountains Recreation and Conservation Authority also said Sunday that it was closing all of its parks and trails, which include the parkland owned by the Santa Monica Mountains Conservancy. Parking lots and access roads also will be closed. The Cleveland National Forest said that it was shutting down the Three Sisters Falls and Cedar Creek Falls trails in San Diego County after this weekend marked the highest usage numbers ever recorded at both. “Illegal parking was rampant and several people had to be airlifted out,” the national forest said on Twitter.  This weekend, we saw the highest usage numbers EVER at both Three Sisters and Cedar Creek Falls. Illegal parking was rampant and several people had to be airlifted out. For the sake of hiker and first responder safety, these trails will be closed until further notice pic.twitter.com/EySGSTSTwF — Cleveland NF (@ClevelandNF) March 22, 2020 Complaints of noncompliance have popped up on social media and apps such as the neighborhood forum Nextdoor.com. The Marin County Sheriff’s Office on Saturday tweeted out a photo of people who had congregated along the coastline and implored residents to stay home. “We understand the communities’ frustrations with the LARGE amount of people traveling to the Coast today and NOT practicing social distancing. We are working with the Public Health Officers to address the issue. Please stay at home!” the Sheriff’s Office said.  **PLEASE SHARE** We understand the communities frustrations with the LARGE amount of people traveling to the Coast today and NOT practicing social distancing. We are working with the Public Health Officers to address the issue. Please stay at home! #stayhomeandsavealife pic.twitter.com/2Vci7PFXEe — Marin County Sheriff (@MarinSheriff) March 21, 2020 Malibu city officials also have received reports of people flocking to beaches and hiking trails, the city said in an update posted to its website. The city pointed out that it did not own or operate county beaches, state parks or National Park Service areas such as Solstice Canyon but said it was working with state and county officials “and urging them to address the issue of people not abiding by social distancing guidelines while using outdoor spaces and stay at home orders.” And the city of Calabasas announced Sunday that it was closing city parks, playgrounds and all gathering spaces as a result of the stay-at-home order. At Torrance Beach on Sunday, people were well spread out on the sand, but a narrow walking path alongside the beach was jammed by 10 a.m. At Long Beach’s Junipero Beach, besides the occasional person in mask or gloves, all seemed like a typical spring day. The sun shone on beachgoers, young and old. Groups of basketball players used all three hoops. There were bikers, joggers and roller skaters, men doing pull-ups on the outdoor exercise machines and women exercising on the grass. And many were ignoring calls for social distancing, which recommend that people stay at least six feet apart. Along the shore, a family of three, wearing masks, took a walk. A lone fishermen waded knee deep in the water, with his family nearby. When he felt a tug, he called two children nearby to help pull the line. Strangers, including the family, gathered to see the spectacle up close. On Friday, Long Beach Mayor Robert Garcia expressed frustration at his fellow residents for not following guidance from city and state officials. “Seriously people, you need to practice social distancing. I am seeing tons of people out there acting like there’s no crisis,” he wrote on his personal Twitter page.  Seriously people, you need to practice social distancing. I am seeing tons of people out there acting like there’s no crisis. You could be carrying the virus, have no symptoms, and be responsible for the illness or worse of others. — Robert Garcia (@RobertGarciaLB) March 22, 2020 It could be that the stay-at-home order led people to visit the beach — to spend time outdoors in one of the few remaining places available. At least for Jaushay Rockett, 36, that was the case. “This may have sparked something,” he said. “This may have sparked people to be creative and go outside. It could be a good thing, or it could be a bad thing.” Rockett was playing basketball outside because “everything’s been closed,” including his usual indoor gyms and courts in Signal Hill and Compton, he said. Initially, he believed the order to stay indoors would be more strict, but he saw plenty of people outdoors, seemingly living their lives as usual. “I’m thinking it was gonna be like martial law,” he said. “Everybody is out … until they make it mandatory. They’re going to have to really lock down the city” for people to stay indoors. Rockett is taking precautions to stay safe. He said he made sure to keep his distance from people, other than the family friends with whom he was playing ball. After each game, he wipes his hands and the ball with Lysol and goes straight to the shower. Clifford Aquino and Ryan Castro, both 28, were also displaced from their typical gyms in Cerritos. They decided that Long Beach, where there are plenty of outdoor gyms and paths to run, would be a good replacement to get their workout in. “This is only Day 2,” Castro said. “It sucks.” “It does suck,” Aquino said, “but you have to find different ways to stay active.” Aquino said he felt safe using the workout machines because he could keep his distance from people. If one area was too busy, he found another, he said, or chose another activity to do. He wipes each bar with Lysol wipes before using them. Castro said he had been a consistent runner but stopped a while back. Now, because he has so few options, he’s getting back into it. Both have gone hiking and tried different, also busy, beaches. Maybe Californians just can’t help seeking out a little sunshine, Castro said. “A little bit of sun while we have it, it’s like their last chance before the rain comes down,” he said. “Huntington Beach was worse than this.” Rhonda Summerlin, 70, said she feared that the coronavirus situation would get worse, making a mandatory lockdown possible. As much as she would like to stay home to protect herself, she had to go out to pick up a prescription from her pharmacy because they don’t offer delivery. “I need a pharmacy that delivers,” she said. “I can’t be coming out in this.” The Carson resident relies on a wheelchair to get around. She has numerous ailments, including severe arthritis and a weak immune system, and it is difficult for her to move her hands and legs. Sunday morning, she picked up her prescription and two boxes of Raisin Bran cereal. Summerlin said she’s also worried about how hospitals could be affected by a possible surge of coronavirus patients. She is sick often, needs blood transfusions and has made a handful of hospital stays in a span of months. She worries whether she’ll get the care she needs if she gets sick again. “I worry that the hospitals, there’s not gonna be enough room,” she said. Others don’t feel the same urgency. Alexandra Doody, 27, visited Pedal Movement in Long Beach to get her bicycle tires inflated Sunday morning. Doody said she has mostly stayed indoors and watched Netflix, completed puzzles or done other activities with her friends indoors, but she still goes on her bike rides. Now more than ever, she said. “Definitely more,” she said, “Because when you have nothing to do in your whole day, you have to figure out what to do with a few hours.” She takes an eight-mile ride along the beach, coming back home via the streets in an attempt to avoid the crowds. But still, she feels safe because she is outdoors only a couple hours each day. “The only place I feel most uncomfortable is the grocery store, really,” Doody said. “You don’t know who’s wiping down what.” Farther south, outside the Long Beach Sagely Monastery at Ocean Boulevard and Redondo Avenue, worshipers gathered by a white statue of the Virgin Mary. The building was once a Catholic convent. For years, people from all over the region have traveled to pray to the Virgin Mary. Sitting on a folding chair was Donald Armstrong, 72, who wore a surgical mask. “I don’t get close to the crowd anymore because of what’s been going on,” he said. “I don’t touch the statue or stand near it.” Armstrong was aware of the state and local orders to remain indoors and only go out for groceries and other essential needs, but he wanted to visit the statue as he always had with his late mother. But he didn’t understand some fellow worshipers: “I see people wearing gloves and a mask, then they remove the mask to kiss the statue. That doesn’t doesn’t make sense to me. People have sneezed on that that.” He says some people touch and kiss the statue because they believe that it protects them. “It’s great to have a strong faith like that,” Armstrong said. “But I still believe God has given people common sense.” Nearby, a woman dropped off a bouquet of flowers. She took hand sanitizer out of her purse. Six other people stood more than six feet apart, praying. Not far away, along the bluffs, people lay on blankets getting a tan. They exercised. Traffic was starting to build. At the Belmont Veterans Memorial Pier, fishermen sat with their fishing poles leaning on the railing. One man, who declined to give his name, was fishing with his son and said he was surprised to see so many people outdoors. “It’s OK to be by themselves,” the man said, “but when you start seeing groups of people, then it becomes a problem.” As he fished, a small child ran over and picked up his net. The man became nervous and in broken Spanish told the mother of the child that he wanted some distance. “See, he touched that and his family may have [the coronavirus], and now I can’t touch it,” he said, grabbing a pair of gloves. Although traffic was free-flowing in much of Southern California, there were still some backups Saturday on Pacific Coast Highway in the Santa Monica area. The sense of fear seemed distant as the shadows lengthened over Santa Monica State Beach on Saturday afternoon. Alan Cohn, 90, and his partner, Elaine Cohen, 80, looked out over a scene of people tanning and working out. One man did yoga. A group of four played volleyball. “Would you believe we’re in the middle of a pandemic right now?” Cohen asked. The couple bemoaned the loss of their routine. No more improv comedy Tuesdays. Or feeding homeless residents Wednesdays. And no dancing at the Marina City Club on Fridays. But they were cheered by the people offering to run errands for one another and the vegan restaurant owner who was waiving his delivery fees. They didn’t see themselves getting sick, either. “Naw,” Cohn said. “I was in the Marines, fighting in North Korea.” Minutes later, a man sat down next to the couple, asking, “You mind if I sit here and take off my shoes?” Cohen scooted over. “Just don’t breathe on me.” Crowds were also reported at outdoor spaces farther north, in the San Francisco Bay Area. At Bedwell Bayfront Park in Menlo Park, the parking lot was jammed Sunday. Hundreds of people were walking, riding bikes and jogging at the city park built on top of an old landfill. Although most park users provided wide berth to passersby, the sheer number of people in the park was atypical. A similar situation was seen at Palo Alto’s Baylands park, set within the marsh along San Francisco Bay. Parking was difficult to find as scores of people navigated the few paths available for walking. San Diego’s beaches also saw an influx of people Saturday. Gov. Gavin Newsom on Saturday urged residents to take the stay-at-home order seriously. “Be a good neighbor. Be a good citizen. Those young people that are still out there on the beaches thinking this is a party time — grow up,” Newsom said during a news conference on Facebook and Twitter on Saturday afternoon. “It’s time to wake up, time to recognize it’s not just about the old folks. It’s about your impact on their lives. Don’t be selfish, recognize you have a responsibility to meet this moment.” The governor’s stay-at-home order will remain in effect until “further notice” and could be changed as conditions warrant, according to a statement released by the governor’s office. Issued under broad powers granted to the governor under the state’s Emergency Services Act, Newsom’s executive order is enforceable by law. Anyone who violates the order could be charged with a misdemeanor, but Newsom said he did not believe that would be necessary because social pressures to adhere to the directive had been largely successful. Times staff writers Susanne Rust and Hailey Branson-Potts contributed to this report. 
Mar 22, 2020	Michael Levitt, a Nobel laureate and Stanford biophysicist, began analyzing the number of COVID-19 cases worldwide in January and correctly calculated that China would get through the worst of its coronavirus outbreak long before many health experts had predicted. Now he foresees a similar outcome in the United States and the rest of the world. While many epidemiologists are warning of months, or even years, of massive social disruption and millions of deaths, Levitt says the data simply don’t support such a dire scenario — especially in areas where reasonable social distancing measures are in place. “What we need is to control the panic,” he said. In the grand scheme, “we’re going to be fine.” Here’s what Levitt noticed in China: On Jan. 31, the country had 46 new deaths due to the novel coronavirus, compared with 42 new deaths the day before. Newsletter Get our free Coronavirus Today newsletter Sign up for the latest news, best stories and what they mean for you, plus answers to your questions. Sign Me Up You may occasionally receive promotional content from the Los Angeles Times. Although the number of daily deaths had increased, the rate of that increase had begun to ease off. Essentially, although the car was still speeding up, it was not accelerating as rapidly as before. “This suggests that the rate of increase in number of the deaths will slow down even more over the next week,” Levitt wrote in a report he sent to friends Feb. 1 that was widely shared on Chinese social media. And soon, he predicted, the number of deaths would be decreasing every day. Three weeks later, Levitt told the China Daily News that the virus’ rate of growth had peaked. He predicted that the total number of confirmed COVID-19 cases in China would end up around 80,000, with about 3,250 deaths. This forecast turned out to be remarkably accurate: As of March 16, China had counted a total of 80,298 cases and 3,245 deaths — in a nation of nearly 1.4 billion people where roughly 10 million die every year. The number of newly diagnosed patients has dropped to around 25 a day, with no cases of community spread reported since Wednesday. Now Levitt, who received the 2013 Nobel Prize in chemistry for developing complex models of chemical systems, is seeing similar turning points in other nations, even ones that did not instill the draconian isolation measures that China did. He analyzed 78 countries with more than 50 reported cases of COVID-19 every day and sees “signs of recovery.” He’s not looking at cumulative cases, but the number of new cases every day — and the percentage growth in that number from one day to the next. “Numbers are still noisy but there are clear signs of slowed growth.” In Iran, for instance, the number of newly confirmed COVID-19 cases remained relatively flat last week, from 1,133 on Monday to 1,148 on Friday. Of course, recovering from an initial outbreak doesn’t mean the virus won’t come back: China is now fighting to stop new waves of infection coming in from places where the virus is spreading out of control. Other countries are bound to face the same problem as well. Levitt acknowledges that his figures are messy, and that the official case counts in many areas are too low because testing is spotty. But even with incomplete data, “a consistent decline means there’s some factor at work that is not just noise in the numbers,” he said. The trajectory of deaths backs up his findings, he said. So do data from outbreaks in confined environments, such as the one on the Diamond Princess cruise ship. Out of 3,711 people on board, 712 were infected and eight died. In his view, this unintended experiment in coronavirus spread will help researchers estimate the number of fatalities that would occur in a fully infected population. Levitt said the social-distancing mandates are critical — particularly the ban on large gatherings — because the virus is so new that the population has no immunity to it and a vaccine is still many months away. “This is not the time to go out drinking with your buddies.” Getting vaccinated against the flu is important because a coronavirus outbreak that strikes in the middle of a flu epidemic is much more likely to overwhelm hospitals and increases the odds that the coronavirus goes undetected. This was probably a factor in Italy, a country with a strong anti-vaccine movement, he said. But he also blames the media for causing unnecessary panic by focusing on the relentless increase in the cumulative number of cases and spotlighting celebrities who contract the virus. By contrast, the flu has sickened 36 million Americans since September and killed an estimated 22,000, according to the CDC, but those deaths are largely unreported. He fears the public health measures that have shut down large swaths of the economy could cause their own health catastrophe, as lost jobs lead to poverty and hopelessness. Time and again, researchers have seen that suicide rates go up when the economy spirals down. The virus can grow exponentially only when it is undetected and no one is acting to control it, Levitt said. That’s what happened in South Korea, when it ripped through a closed-off cult that refused to report the illness. “People need to be considered heroes for announcing they have this virus,” he said. The goal needs to be better early detection — not just through testing but perhaps with body temperature surveillance, which China is implementing — and immediate social isolation. While the COVID-19 fatality rate appears to be significantly higher than that of the flu, Levitt says it is quite simply put, “not the end of the world.” Based on the experience of the Diamond Princess, he estimates that being exposed to the new coronavirus doubles a person’s risk of dying in the next two months. However, most people have an extremely low risk of death in a two-month period, and that risk remains extremely low even when doubled. “The real situation is not as nearly as terrible as they make it out to be,” he said. 
Mar 22, 2020	The landmark Griffith Observatory may have been closed, but people came by the carloads anyway, smiling and chattering Saturday in the fresh air and sunny skies outside the Hollywood Hills landmark. Walkers packed the sidewalks and trails, wishing one another good health. From Los Angeles' Griffith Park to Westside beaches -- and from a Granada Hills Starbucks drive-through line, where customers "paid it backward," to a Laurel Canyon neighborhood where residents opened their windows for a "You've Got a Friend" singalong -- Southern California greeted its first weekend of a public health stay-at-home order with pluck, humor and notable kindness. Overflowing lines at markets and food giveaways continued to ratchet up anxiety and some harsh encounters. The first reported coronavirus infections among Los Angeles police officers, with three testing positive last week, gave reason for added worry. And Los Angeles city officials scrambled to open five more emergency shelters for homeless people.  But most Southern Californians who went looking for solace on the first weekend of a statewide order to stay at home -- spurred by the virus that causes COVID-19 -- found it in themselves, in their neighbors and in their friends. Janet Williamson, a lifelong Griffith Park neighbor, watched people filling the public space and said it was good. "It gives one hope. And hope is something that you can't buy," said Williamson, 73. "It has a great value, especially in these times." Los Angeles County reported a total of 353 confirmed cases and four deaths as of Saturday night from the novel coronavirus, while California had more than 1,400 known cases and 27 deaths. Public health experts stressed that many more people certainly had been infected but not detected because of limited testing. The biggest public health emergency in a century appeared to be in its nascent stages, with projections that the illness would spread exponentially. Public health officials warned that, even when seeking exercise and stress relief outdoors, people needed to maintain the six feet of social distancing that they have been recommending for more than a week. The admonition created an odd dichotomy Saturday: Southern Californians shrank from usually overcrowded tourist locales in favor of open spaces that then became not so open, given the crowds that sought relief from what had come to feel like house arrest. The Hollywood Walk of Fame, the Venice Beach Boardwalk, the Grove shopping center and Rodeo Drive in Beverly Hills all went mostly bereft of visitors. Crowded streets were mostly open, and parking spaces were free for the taking. But along the coast in Santa Monica and Pacific Palisades, cars lined up for parking lots at Will Rogers State Beach and nearby Temescal Gateway Park. A few roller skaters and cyclists wore masks and gloves, though none could be seen on the surfers enjoying a stunning blue-sky day with views all the way to Santa Catalina Island. Crowds also gathered in Griffith Park and in Runyon Canyon -- and, in Northern California, along the Marin County coastline, where the Sheriff's Office said it recognized "the LARGE amount of people traveling to the coast today and NOT practicing social distancing." Deputies were working with public health officers to address the issue. The Sheriff's Office added: "Please stay at home!" In the Hollywood Hills, the hiking trails of Runyon Canyon Park had become so crowded Saturday afternoon that the park was trending on Twitter, and some people were asking Gov. Gavin Newsom or L.A. Mayor Eric Garcetti to shut down the trails to preserve social distancing. Around the region, people found other ways to relieve their stress and lighten their neighbors' loads. At a drive-through Starbucks in Granada Hills, customers began paying for whoever ordered behind them. For public relations executive Brandon Shaw, that meant he got a $2.75 coffee and paid the $23 total for the car behind him. "It feels right," Shaw said, "during these troubled times." In a South Pasadena neighborhood, Ellen Main posted a note alongside her frontyard garden elf. "Would you like to hear a joke?" it read. Saturday's offering: "What do you call a pig that does karate? A pork chop." Torie Osborn, a 69-year-old aide to county Supervisor Sheila Kuehl, said she had been bombarded by people checking to make sure she was OK. "It's a riot of love," she said, "an outpouring of caring." Social media helped many others come together, while staying apart. The Laurel Canyon Residents Facebook group called for a 7 p.m. singalong of Carole King's "You've Got a Friend." They asked neighbors to open a door or window so the whole community -- and onetime home to many rock music greats -- would echo with the words of the folk classic. And scores of Alcoholics Anonymous and other 12-step recovery programs moved their meetings to videoconferencing services such as Zoom. "I'm sober almost 25 years, and this has been truly incredible to witness and be part of," said one L.A. communications executive, who declined to give her name. The size of the meetings has ranged from 10 to more than 100. One included members from New York, London and L.A. The meetings "give those with experience exposure to those who are new or struggling," said the exec, providing "experiences, strength, and hope." A Highland Park woman created a cooking group on Facebook. "I created this page to share what I'm making, what I'm thinking about, and what's challenging and joyful about this time," said Juliana Nocker-Ferry, inviting others to do the same. "Along with social distancing, we can create social expansion and connection. I send love and strength out to everyone." For all the goodwill, a fear of scarcity still provoked anxiety and crowds, especially at supermarkets, where customers lined up before opening, as they had for more than a week. Outside Honda Center in Anaheim, more than 4,000 families received three bags -- potatoes, apples and canned goods. The line of cars for the drive-through giveaway got so long that it jammed nearby intersections and triggered a traffic alert by Anaheim police. "The demand that we are receiving for food is very sad, in a word," said Harald Herrmann, chief executive of the Second Harvest Food Bank of Orange County. "But we are also seeing the best of humanity at the same time." In Chino, a pair of farm-fresh egg suppliers had long lines and expected to sell out by the afternoon. Despite having 64,000 chickens spread across three farms and supplies from neighboring farmers, Philip Maust said he could not keep up with the demand. "It's been going just berserk," said Maust, of Maust's California Poultry. "People want their eggs." In downtown Los Angeles, the Original Pantry Cafe was closed to dine-in patrons for one of the only times in its nearly 100-year history. Still, the 24-hour restaurant was serving takeout orders Saturday morning to a slow but steady stream of customers. "We are here for the community," said operations manager Charlotte Chacon. "We are all in this together." Chacon said she spoke daily with the restaurant's owner, former Los Angeles Mayor Richard Riordan. In a note to customers, Riordan said: "We hope that we can provide in-dining soon. Until then, please be kind and patient as we navigate these changes together." The sense of fear seemed distant as the shadows lengthened over Santa Monica State Beach on Saturday afternoon. Alan Cohn, 90, and his partner, Elaine Cohen, 80, looked over a scene of people tanning and working out. One man did yoga. A group of four played volleyball. "Would you believe we're in the middle of a pandemic right now?" Cohen asked. The couple bemoaned the loss of their routine. No more improv comedy Tuesdays. Or feeding homeless residents Wednesdays. And no dancing at the Marina City Club on Fridays. But they were cheered by the people offering to run errands for each other and the vegan restaurant owner who was waiving his delivery fees. They didn't see themselves getting sick, either. "Naw," Cohn said. "I was in the Marines, fighting in North Korea." Minutes later, a man sat down next to the couple, asking, "You mind if I sit here and take off my shoes?" Cohen scooted over. "Just don't breathe on me." -- Times staff writers Emily Alpert Reyes, Stuart Leavenworth and Richard Winton contributed to this report. Caption: PHOTO: THE LINE for farm-fresh eggs at Maust's California Poultry in Chino began to form early Saturday morning. PHOTOGRAPHER:Irfan Khan Los Angeles Times PHOTO:XIAO PING looks at the line of people waiting to buy eggs Saturday at Maust's California Poultry in Chino. "It's been going just berserk," the farm's owner said. PHOTOGRAPHER:Irfan Khan Los Angeles Times
Mar 22, 2020	We've all seen the unsettling images of what happens when the economy goes haywire. Bread lines, farmers abandoning the Dust Bowl, drivers queued up to fill their gas tanks, houses with foreclosure notices pounded into their front lawns. Add to that a rush-hour view of a Los Angeles freeway, typically jammed with commuters, but now more like a Sunday morning due to a virus that has wrecked the once-booming U.S economy just two months after the first confirmed domestic case of COVID-19, the disease caused by the novel coronavirus.  Stocks have collapsed, airlines have shed routes and businesses have closed. Millions of workers are being sent home and cautioned to minimize their interactions with their friends, neighbors and even family members -- a course of action the White House recommends Americans follow for 15 days. But just how much sheltering in place can the economy take before the damage is irreversible? The short answer is that experts are grappling with a situation as novel as the virus that caused it, and they really don't know how much our high-tech, interconnected and consumption-oriented economy can endure. "The longer this disruption goes on, the more likely it will have a permanent effect," said Roger Farmer, an economics professor at UCLA and the University of Warwick in England. "Three weeks we can bounce back from; three months is not so clear." Yet months, even a year or longer, it may be. The White House is preparing its response at least partially based on a frightening report from doctors and scientists at Imperial College London that concluded the virus could kill 2.2 million Americans if it is not contained. And the kind of suppression measures needed to control it, such as social distancing and school closings, could have to remain in place as long as 18 months until a vaccine is developed. That's a very long time, considering that last week it took the UCLA Anderson Forecast only four days to revise a quarterly prediction calling for slower economic growth into one stating that the U.S. had already slipped into a recession expected to last through September. The forecast was responding to rapidly changing conditions and fresh data. A survey released last week had already found some 18% of adults reporting that they had hours cut or had been laid off, with the workers in lower-income households hit hardest. On Thursday, the government reported new unemployment insurance claims jumped by 70,000, or about one-third, to 281,000, the highest level in 2 1/2 years. One analysis by Moody's Analytics found that nearly 80 million U.S. jobs are at varying levels of risk, though it's more likely some 10 million workers could either be laid off, furloughed or see their hours and wages cut. In China, with four times the population of the U.S., roughly 5 million people lost their jobs in the first two months of this year amid the outbreak. The areas of the economy expected to take the biggest hit are transportation and travel, hospitality and leisure, temporary help, and oil drilling and extraction. Outplacement firm Challenger, Gray & Christmas said 7.4 million jobs in hospitality and leisure alone could be lost or affected. Retail, manufacturing, construction and education are at moderate risk, Moody's said. Macy's, with 130,000 full- and part-time workers, last week announced it was closing its stores and moving all sales online, where it has struggled to compete with sites such as Amazon. Treasury Secretary Steven T. Mnuchin warned Republican senators on Tuesday that without bold government action the pandemic could push up U.S. unemployment to 20%. The numbers look scary, but economists take some comfort in the fact that the economy entered this crisis on a strong footing, with unemployment at a 50-year low. The U.S. also has social programs such as Social Security, unemployment insurance, food stamps, Medicare and Medicaid, put in place during the New Deal and the later Great Society initiative of President Lyndon B. Johnson -- even if they are constantly in danger of being cut back or don't measure up to European welfare-state standards. Yet what social insurance the country has wasn't predicated on a near- shutdown of the economy, which for all its strength was already displaying well-documented gaps likely to be exacerbated by the outbreak. That includes millions of low-income workers with little to no paid time off, a lack of affordable housing, a homelessness crisis, and rising levels of corporate debt that could send highly leveraged companies into default -- which is why the local, state and national governments are considering such measures as a halt on evictions, cash payments to citizens and more than $100 billion in loan guarantees to businesses. But trying to get a handle on how this may play out is tricky, partially because the cause is nonfinancial in origin, unlike, say, last decade's crisis, which was driven by subprime mortgage defaults. It's also challenging because the economy has rapidly evolved. The U.S. manufacturing sector has been in long decline, replaced as an economic engine by consumer spending on goods and services. Those are huge categories that include food, clothes, appliances, electronics, furniture, cars, movie tickets, transportation, investment advice and healthcare. It also all comes amid telecommunications and computing advances that have made home deliveries ubiquitous and working from your bedroom desk commonplace. They have also vaulted tech companies such as Amazon, Google, Facebook and Microsoft to the top of the economic food chain. "Our economy is altogether different now than 1975," said economist Chris Thornberg, founding partner of Beacon Economics, an L.A. consulting firm. "It's now service oriented. Service sectors tend to be more loose and limber." Indeed, on Monday, Amazon announced that due to "unprecedented" demand, it plans to hire 100,000 people across the U.S. to keep up with orders as workers stay home and shop online. It also plans to temporarily raise wages by $2 an hour through the end of April for hourly employees at its warehouses, delivery centers and Whole Food stores. Economist Edward Leamer, director emeritus of the Anderson Forecast, said that redirected spending can create an "automatic stabilizer" effect. Farmer said that the crisis will hasten economic changes that already were occurring due to technological advances, including telecommuting and online virtual meetings. "These disruptions will probably speed that up," he said, noting that climate advocates already had been pushing hard to reduce jet travel. "A lot of people will find that it is actually much easier." But many of those advantages would go to knowledge workers who sit in front of computers, such as programmers, lawyers and others in the white-collar workforce. Cashiers, waiters, construction workers and others in the blue-collar workforce don't have that luxury as they sit at home without pay. Farmer said that double-digit unemployment would make it hard for the economy to recover. "If [workers] lose those jobs it can take years to rebuild those skills. The danger is it becomes not only a temporary drop in employment but permanent," he said. For now, the government is focusing on ensuring the financial and credit markets don't seize up, preventing businesses from failing and getting cash into the hands of individuals. In an emergency session, the Federal Reserve dropped its key interest rate close to zero last weekend and said it would buy at least $700 billion of Treasury and mortgage-backed securities, similar to what it did during the financial crisis. It also announced plans Tuesday to shore up the commercial paper market that provides short-term liquidity to companies to help fund their short-term operations. The Trump administration, meanwhile, is proposing $1 trillion-plus in economic stimulus -- more than President Obama did after the financial crisis -- that would include checks of as much as $1,200 to individuals and hundreds of billions of dollars of loans or loan guarantees to small businesses and industry. Details were still being negotiated late Friday. Separately, President Trump signed a measure Wednesday to provide free coronavirus testing and guarantee sick leave for a significant chunk of the U.S. workforce in the event of COVID-19 and to provide expanded food aid and unemployment assistance for workers out of a job because of the pandemic. The president also invoked wartime powers to boost manufacturing of medical equipment needed to fight the pandemic, and the U.S. restricted border crossings, first from Canada, and later in the week from Mexico. Farmer supports the idea of giving every citizen a substantial check right now to help them put food on the table and buy other items. He also thinks the Treasury or Federal Reserve should take the extraordinary step of putting together a sovereign wealth fund to buy U.S. stocks and prop up the equities market, which is in full panic mode. On Friday, the Dow Jones industrial average capped off its worst week since the dark days of the 2008 financial crisis, erasing all of the gains it had made since Trump took office. "We want to keep normal income growing. There will be less goods, but we don't want to see businesses collapsing and bankrupt and permanent disruption," Farmer said. Beacon Economics issued a report Friday, written by Thornberg, that called the virus the greatest threat to the nation's economic expansion in more than a decade, with the next two weeks being crucial to getting an understanding of how far-ranging the effects will be. But the report said it was too soon to say a lengthy recession or depression was inevitable. The report noted the economy's underlying strength and the fact that China, South Korea and Japan appear to have gotten the virus under control within two months. It said that the economy could function with the outbreak limited to some hot spots and the nation largely "back to business albeit with a different modus operandum" -- but that a widespread Wuhan, China- or Italian-style lockdown would be another story. In an interview, Thornberg said that the best comparison for now is a hurricane or earthquake that temporarily disrupts a local economy -- though he acknowledged the analogy was far from perfect since such disasters are finite events that typically affect far smaller areas. "Time after time the economy bounces back after a natural disaster type of situation," Thornberg said. "And this to me sounds like a natural disaster, but here we have a situation where there is no endpoint." Caption: PHOTO: TRAFFIC ON THE 110 was light through downtown Los Angeles on a recent weekday afternoon, even before Gov. Gavin Newsom ordered Californians to stay home. PHOTOGRAPHER:Genaro Molina Los Angeles Times PHOTO:THE MACY'S parking lot at the Westfield Santa Anita mall in Arcadia sits empty. The retailer announced last week that it was moving all sales online for now. PHOTOGRAPHER:Frederic J. Brown AFP/Getty Images PHOTO:AMAZON says it is hiring 100,000 workers to meet the surge in demand for deliveries as the pandemic forces more people to stay home and shop online. PHOTOGRAPHER:Johannes Eisele AFP/Getty Images PHOTO:TREASURY SECRETARY Steven T. Mnuchin, left, warned Republican senators last week that unemployment could reach 20% without bold government action. PHOTOGRAPHER:Tom Williams CQ-Roll Call PHOTO:DEMAND is so high that Amazon plans to temporarily raise wages by $2 an hour through the end of April. PHOTOGRAPHER:Smith Collection Gado
Mar 21, 2020	Men are faring worse than women in the coronavirus pandemic, according to statistics emerging from across the world. On Friday, White House COVID-19 Task Force director Dr. Deborah Birx cited a report from Italy showing that men in nearly every age bracket were dying at higher rates than women. Birx called it a “concerning trend.” The apparent gender gap in Italy echoes earlier statistics from other hard-hit countries. While preliminary, early accounts have suggested that boys and men are more likely to become seriously ill than are girls and women, and that men are more likely to die. Italian health authorities last week reported that among 13,882 cases of COVID-19 and 803 deaths between Feb. 21 and Mar. 12, men accounted for 58% of all cases and 72% of deaths. Hospitalized men with COVID-19 were 75% more likely to die than were women hospitalized with the respiratory disease. Those figures are in line with early accounts from China, where the novel coronavirus first appeared, and from South Korea, where detection and tracking of coronavirus infections have been very comprehensive. Newsletter Get our free Coronavirus Today newsletter Sign up for the latest news, best stories and what they mean for you, plus answers to your questions. Sign Me Up You may occasionally receive promotional content from the Los Angeles Times. An analysis of all COVID-19 patient profile studies filed in China from December 2019 to February 2020 suggests that men account for roughly 60% of those who are infected and become sick. And in a detailed accounting of 44,600 cases in mainland China as of Feb. 11, China’s Center for Disease Control reported that the fatality rate among men with confirmed coronavirus infections was roughly 65% higher than it was among women. Even among children younger than 16, coronavirus may affect boys more than girls. In a recent report on 171 children and adolescents who were treated for COVID-19 at the Wuhan Children’s Hospital, 61% were male. In South Korea, men accounted for nearly 62% of all cases. And infected men were 89% more likely to die than were women. The emerging picture of male vulnerability to coronavirus may be easily explained by a clear gender disparity with social and cultural roots: Across the world, men are much more likely to smoke cigarettes. That damages their lungs and primes them for inflammation and further damage when they are battling an infection. In China, where cigarette smoking rates are among the highest in the world, 54% of men were current smokers in 2010, and 8.4% were ex-smokers. Yet only 3.4% of Chinese women had ever smoked, according to the same 2016 study. In South Korea, the disparity was almost as pronounced: half of adult men and 4% of women smoke. In Italy, 28% of adult males and 20% of females smoke. But that’s not the whole story, said Dr. Stanley Perlman, a pediatric infectious disease specialist at the University of Iowa who has studied coronavirus infection in mice. In a series of experiments in 2016 and 2017, a team led by Perlman infected male and female mice with the coronaviruses that caused severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS) and Middle East respiratory syndrome (MERS). At every age, male mice were more susceptible to infection than females. At the same time, the death rates of infected female mice shot up when their ovaries were removed, or when they got drugs that suppressed the activity of the hormone estrogen. To Perlman, those dual findings strongly suggest that there’s something about estrogen that protects against the ravages of deadly coronaviruses — and he suspects it’s true for the new SARS-CoV-19 virus as well. “Why does estrogen protect the woman, and how?” Perlman said. “We’d like to know.” Estrogen has so many important roles in the female body, “it’s hard to prove anything” about its specific protective powers, he said. For most other lung diseases, men have a distinct advantage. Women have long been known to suffer complications and die of influenza at higher rates than men. They’re much more likely to develop autoimmune diseases of the lungs. And after accounting for men’s higher rates of smoking, women appear to be more vulnerable than men to lung cancer and emphysema. “We don’t really understand why that is,” said UC Davis’s Kent E. Pinkerton, who studies gender differences in lung health. But Pinkerton and others suggest that humans’ responses to COVID-19 could reveal important distinctions between the way that men’s and women’s immune systems fight infection. They suspect that hormonal differences may be playing a key role in that immune response. And if scientists can uncover how that works, they could identify better strategies for fighting coronavirus infections in general, they said. Researchers will scour the records of COVID-19 cases for evidence that the immune system’s perimeter defenses — the body’s first response to infection — may react more robustly to this coronavirus in women than in men, said Susan Kovats, an immunologist at the Oklahoma Medical Research Foundation in Oklahoma City. If that “innate” immune response tends to be stronger in females, infected women may have more luck keeping their viral loads low, Kovats said. And they may not need to roll out an army of the immune system’s big guns — the T-cells and B-cells — for a major battle. Often, mounting such an assault after viral loads have shot up does double damage, she said. The infection itself damages delicate lung tissue. And then, the “adaptive” immune system overreacts, setting off dangerous levels of inflammation that cause further damage in the lungs. The result can be death. But if women are thwarting infection earlier and more effectively, they might be less likely to suffer that outcome, Kovats said. “I’m not surprised” that women’s immune systems may do things in ways that men could learn from, Pinkerton said. For years, immunologists only studied male mammals because the complexity of female hormones muddied their findings, he said. When it comes to fighting infection, he added, “we really need to study both sexes to understand susceptibility.”
Mar 21, 2020	The landmark Griffith Observatory may have been closed, but people came by the carloads anyway, smiling and chattering Saturday in the fresh air and sunny skies outside the Hollywood Hills landmark. Walkers packed the sidewalks and trails, wishing one another good health. From Los Angeles’ Griffith Park to Westside beaches — and from a Granada Hills Starbucks drive-through line, where customers “paid it backward,” to a Laurel Canyon neighborhood, where residents opened their windows for a “You’ve Got a Friend” singalong — Southern California greeted its first weekend of a public health stay-at-home order with pluck, humor and notable kindness. Overflowing lines at markets and food giveaways continued to ratchet up anxiety and some harsh encounters. The first reported coronavirus infections among Los Angeles police officers, with three testing positive this week, gave reason for added worry. And Los Angeles city officials scrambled to open five more emergency shelters for homeless people. But most Southern Californians who went looking for solace on the first weekend of a statewide order to stay at home — spurred by the virus that causes COVID-19 — found it in themselves, in their neighbors and in their friends. Janet Williamson, a lifelong Griffith Park neighbor, watched people filling the public space and said it was good. “It gives one hope. And hope is something that you can’t buy,” said Williamson, 73. “It has a great value, especially in these times.” Los Angeles County reported a total of 353 confirmed cases and four deaths as of Saturday night from the novel coronavirus, while California had more than 1,480 known cases and 27 deaths. Public health experts stressed that many more people certainly had been infected but not detected because of limited testing. The biggest public health emergency in a century appeared to be in its nascent stages, with projections that the illness would spread exponentially. Public health officials warned that, even when seeking exercise and stress relief outdoors, people needed to maintain the six feet of social distancing that they have been recommending for more than a week. The admonition created an odd dichotomy Saturday: Southern Californians shrank from usually overcrowded tourist locales in favor of open spaces that then became not so open, given the crowds that sought relief from what had come to feel like house arrest. The Hollywood Walk of Fame, the Venice Beach Boardwalk, the Grove shopping center and Rodeo Drive in Beverly Hills all went mostly bereft of visitors. Crowded streets were mostly open, and parking spaces were free for the taking. But along the coast in Santa Monica and Pacific Palisades, cars lined up for parking lots at Will Rogers State Beach and nearby Temescal Gateway Park. A few roller skaters and cyclists wore masks and gloves, though none could be seen on the surfers enjoying a stunning blue-sky day, with views all the way to Santa Catalina Island. Crowds also gathered in Griffith Park and in Runyon Canyon — and, in Northern California, along the Marin County coastline, where the Sheriff’s Office said it recognized “the LARGE amount of people traveling to the coast today and NOT practicing social distancing.” Deputies were working with public health officers to address the issue. The Sheriff’s Office added: “Please stay at home!” In the Hollywood Hills, the hiking trails of Runyon Canyon Park had become so crowded Saturday afternoon that the park was trending on Twitter, and some people were asking Gov. Gavin Newsom or L.A. Mayor Eric Garcetti to shut down the trails to preserve social distancing. Around the region, people found other ways to relieve their stress and lighten their neighbors’ loads. At a drive-through Starbucks in Granada Hills, customers began paying for whoever ordered behind them. For public relations executive Brandon Shaw, that meant he got a $2.75 coffee and paid the $23 total for the car behind him. “It feels right,” Shaw said, “during these troubled times.” In a South Pasadena neighborhood, Ellen Main posted a note alongside her frontyard garden elf. “Would you like to hear a joke?” it read. Saturday’s offering: “What do you call a pig that does karate? A pork chop.” Torie Osborn, a 69-year-old aide to county Supervisor Sheila Kuehl, said she had been bombarded by people checking to make sure she was OK. “It’s a riot of love,” she said, “an outpouring of caring.” Social media helped many others come together, while staying apart. The Laurel Canyon Residents Facebook group called for members to join a 7 p.m. singalong of Carole King’s “You’ve Got a Friend.” They asked neighbors to open a door or window so the whole community — and onetime home to many rock music greats — would echo with the words of the folk classic. And scores of Alcoholics Anonymous and other 12-step recovery programs moved their meetings to videoconferencing services such as Zoom. “I’m sober almost 25 years, and this has been truly incredible to witness and be part of,” said one Los Angeles communications executive, who declined to give her name. The size of the meetings has ranged from 10 to more than 100. One included members from New York, London and Los Angeles. The meetings “give those with experience exposure to those who are new or struggling,” said the exec, providing “experiences, strength, and hope.” A Highland Park woman created a COVID-19 cooking group on Facebook. “I created this page to share what I’m making, what I’m thinking about, and what’s challenging and joyful about this time,” said Juliana Nocker-Ferry, inviting others to do the same. “Along with social distancing, we can create social expansion and connection. I send love and strength out to everyone.” For all the goodwill, a fear of scarcity still provoked anxiety and crowds, especially at supermarkets, where customers lined up before opening, as they had for more than a week. Outside Honda Center in Anaheim, more than 4,000 needy families received three bags — potatoes, apples and canned goods. The line of cars for the drive-through giveaway got so long that it jammed nearby intersections and triggered a traffic alert by Anaheim police. “The demand that we are receiving for food is very sad, in a word,” said Harald Herrmann, chief executive of the Second Harvest Food Bank of Orange County. “But we are also seeing the best of humanity at the same time.” In Chino, a pair of farm-fresh egg suppliers had long lines and expected to sell out by the afternoon. Despite having 64,000 chickens spread across three farms and additional supplies from neighboring farmers, Philip Maust said he could not keep up with the demand. “It’s been going just berserk,” said Maust of Maust’s California Poultry. “People want their eggs.” In downtown Los Angeles, the Original Pantry Cafe was closed to dine-in patrons for one of the only times in its nearly 100-year history. Still, the 24-hour restaurant was serving to-go orders Saturday morning to a slow but steady stream of customers. “We are here for the community,” said operations manager Charlotte Chacon. “We are all in this together.” Chacon said she spoke daily with the restaurants owner, former Los Angeles Mayor Richard Riordan. In a note to customers, Riordan said: “We hope that we can provide in-dining soon. Until then, please be kind and patient as we navigate these changes together.” While public acceptance of the social limits appeared widespread, a lively debate continued online, with some insisting that restrictions overreached. Many of the critics pointed to a posting by a Stanford researcher that was skeptical about the reported parameters of the coronavirus contagion. The article by John P.A. Ioannidis, a professor of disease prevention at Stanford University’s School of Medicine, drew 2 million hits this week. But Ioannidis rejected suggestions, including by some conservative media, that the public health restrictions went too far. “I did not say not to take measures,” Ioannidis said in an email Saturday. “I was clear we need to take measures and act swiftly.” In fact, he said, “I am in shelter-in-place myself and I would never advise anyone to defy the law and break the shelter-in-place.” The sense of fear seemed distant as the shadows lengthened over Santa Monica State Beach on Saturday afternoon. Alan Cohn, 90, and his partner, Elaine Cohen, 80, looked over a scene of people tanning and working out. One man did yoga. A group of four played volleyball. “Would you believe we’re in the middle of a pandemic right now?” Cohen asked. The couple bemoaned the loss of their routine. No more improv comedy Tuesdays. Or feeding homeless residents Wednesdays. And no dancing at the Marina City Club on Fridays. But they were cheered by the people offering to run errands for each other and the vegan restaurant owner who was waiving his delivery fees. They didn’t see themselves getting sick, either. “Naw,” Cohn said. “I was in the Marines, fighting in North Korea.” Minutes later, a man sat down next to the couple, asking, “You mind if I sit here and take off my shoes?” Cohen scooted over. “Just don’t breathe on me.” Times staff writers Emily Alpert Reyes, Stuart Leavenworth and Richard Winton contributed to this report. 
Mar 20, 2020	In January, as Singapore racked up the highest numbers of coronavirus infections outside China, an alarmed Shasta Grant searched for flights back home to Indianapolis. The 44-year-old American writer, who moved to this island city-state with her family eight years ago, worried that their adopted home would be ravaged again by a runaway disease and that the school where her husband teaches and their 12-year-old son studies would be closed. She feared food shortages, overwhelmed hospitals and travel bans. But her husband persuaded her not to flee. Two months later, Singapore and other Asian nations have largely corralled their outbreaks while the virus roars across North America and Europe, leaving Grant dumbstruck at how quickly the U.S. went from a distant spectator of the epidemic to one of its primary victims. “It feels very strange to say that I feel safer here than in my home country,” Grant said. “That sinking feeling that it was really going to get awful, that we were all going to get infected, that just didn’t happen. Things never really got bad in Singapore, and obviously they’re a mess in America.” In Asian countries that initially faced the gravest risk from the coronavirus, the shambolic U.S. response to the pandemic has elicited confusion, horror and even a measure of pity. Suddenly, it seems, the U.S. is the basket case, an aloof, inward-looking power that has weakened its alliances, failed to lead on global emergencies such as climate change and shrunk in a crisis. The U.S. was quick to restrict travel from China in the early weeks of the outbreak; now travelers from the U.S. are exporting a “second wave” of infections to China, Hong Kong and Singapore. President Trump, who once said the virus would disappear “like a miracle,” has watched it explode in California, Washington state and New York while vigilant testing and contact tracing brought it under control in Taiwan and South Korea. As commercial shutdowns and shelter-in-place orders grind life to a halt in the United States’ biggest cities, restaurants, bars, shopping malls and subway trains have operated virtually without interruption in Singapore and Taipei, Taiwan — the occasional mask and thermometer gun the only obvious signs of a pandemic. Emerging outbreaks in India and Indonesia, huge populations where little testing has been done, now worry experts more than China and its immediate surroundings. Though the number of confirmed infections in the U.S. now exceeds 17,000 health experts warn that many more coronavirus cases are going unrecorded because of a scarcity of tests. Hospitals nationwide lack enough ventilators, beds and medication to treat an expected onslaught of critically ill patients. Hervé Lemahieu, an Asia expert at the Lowy Institute, an Australian think tank, drew comparisons to Hurricane Katrina, another calamitous emergency response that laid bare the cracks in the U.S. political system and the widening inequities in American society. “That was the first time that the world saw images broadcast from the U.S. that resembled those of a developing country, and that’s something that for most of us was surprising,” Lemahieu said. “These kinds of moments have a psychological impact on the way the U.S. is perceived abroad.” They are having a financial impact, too, as fears of a prolonged U.S. slump drag down Asian stock markets, threatening to plunge some of the world’s fastest-growing economies into recession. “This stock market fall is serious,” said Freddy Lim, a legislator in Taiwan, where the stock exchange has lost 20% of its value over the last month. “So we hope the U.S. will get this under control as soon as possible.” That the U.S. would look riskier in a pandemic than parts of Asia would have been unthinkable not long ago. In 2002 and 2003, an outbreak of severe acute respiratory syndrome, or SARS, killed almost 800 people — nearly all in China, Hong Kong, Taiwan and Singapore — and erased an estimated $40 billion from the global economy. Aggressive public health measures helped stop the disease before it spread in the U.S., while chastened leaders in China and Singapore pledged to invest in health infrastructure and epidemic surveillance. Although China initially concealed the extent of this coronavirus outbreak — as it did with SARS — the Communist Party swiftly blanketed the epicenter of the virus, Hubei province, in a draconian lockdown that the World Health Organization praised as “extraordinary” in slowing the virus. Through a mixture of strict quarantining, contact tracing, temperature checks and diligent testing, Singapore, South Korea, Taiwan and Hong Kong also bought time for other countries to prepare. Health officials say the U.S. and other Western governments failed to anticipate the coronavirus reaching their shores. “Just because Singapore or Hong Kong experienced SARS while other places didn’t, there’s still lessons to be learned,” said Dale Fisher, a Singapore-based expert on infectious disease who traveled to China last month as part of a WHO-led mission. “You don’t have to be in a car accident to know that car accidents happen. I’m saddened that the world couldn’t use that lead time to prepare better.” Others were blunter. “Trump was saying this virus is no big deal, and now suddenly he’s changed his tune,” said PN Balji, a veteran Singaporean journalist and commentator. “It shows a callous disregard for your own citizens — and, to a certain extent, the world.” Taiwan, less than 90 miles from the Chinese mainland and visited by as many as 2,000 Chinese tourists daily, had recorded 135 infections as of Friday — or roughly 1 of every 170,000 people, among the lowest rates of any of the more than 150 countries affected by the virus. Compare that with the U.S., where 1 in 23,000 Americans has tested positive for the virus, add universal healthcare, and it’s easy to see why Taiwan’s president, Tsai Ing-wen, urged her citizens this week to “stay in Taiwan” because it was safer than traveling overseas. “Taiwan has a very robust health system,” said ruling party lawmaker Lo Chih-cheng. “This is one area where I think the U.S. can learn from Taiwan.” Sean Kramer, a 32-year-old from the Seattle area who teaches at a junior high school in Taiwan, said friends and relatives messaged him in January to ask whether he’d be safe there. For a while, he considered flying home. But then he watched the numbers of infections in China skyrocket while those in Taiwan stayed flat. He saw people on the street instinctively don masks, the Taiwanese administration roll out a succession of helpful messages and authorities quickly decide to extend Lunar New Year holidays for three extra weeks in February. All the steps that appeared to Kramer like overreactions seemed to keep a lid on the epidemic. As the virus spreads across his home state, he tries to do his part for his family by logging on to Amazon from Taipei to buy masks and hand sanitizer for his sister in suburban Seattle. “We never got the whole lockdown status, so seeing everyone react at home now, I can’t relate to their emotions or their fear,” Kramer said. “That’s the scary part for me as an American.” The U.S. stumbles have also thrown a lifeline to Chinese President Xi Jinping, who was facing a rare spasm of dissent at home following his government’s initial attempts to paper over the outbreak in Wuhan, the capital of Hubei. As the number of infections in the rest of the world has soared past those in China, Beijing has gone on a diplomatic and humanitarian offensive, pledging masks and medical equipment to dozens of countries — including the U.S. — in a bid to regain its global standing. This week, Chinese billionaire Jack Ma sent a shipment of 1 million masks and 500,000 coronavirus test kits to “our friends in America.”  The first shipment of masks and coronavirus test kits to the US is taking off from Shanghai. All the best to our friends in America. ?? pic.twitter.com/LTn26gvlOl — Jack Ma (@JackMa) March 16, 2020 Such moves — and Trump’s repeated references to the “Chinese virus” — highlight how the outbreak has become yet another arena of competition between the two leading global powers. Both countries appear to be covering up their mishandling of the crisis, said Lemahieu of the Lowy Institute, who called the war of words “pathetic and unappealing on both sides.” Yet many Asian leaders retain faith that the U.S. will get a handle on its outbreak once social distancing orders and ramped-up health measures take hold, allowing it to resume a position of leadership in the global response. “The United States has got enormous resources at its disposal,” Singaporean Foreign Affairs Minister Vivian Balakrishnan told CNBC last week. “It’s a matter of getting it organized and getting it delivered. So let’s wait and see. You know, I would never count the Americans out.” Special correspondent Ralph Jennings in Taipei, Taiwan, contributed to this report. 
Mar 20, 2020	We’ve all seen the unsettling images of what happens when the economy goes haywire. Bread lines, farmers abandoning the Dust Bowl, drivers queued up to fill their gas tanks, houses with foreclosure notices pounded into their front lawns. Add to that a rush-hour view of a Los Angeles freeway, typically jammed with commuters, but now more like a Sunday morning due to a virus that has wrecked the once-booming U.S economy just two months after the first confirmed domestic case of COVID-19, the disease caused by the novel coronavirus. Stocks have collapsed, airlines have shed routes and businesses have closed. Millions of workers are being sent home and cautioned to minimize their interactions with their friends, neighbors and even family members — a course of action the White House recommends Americans follow for 15 days. But just how much sheltering in place can the economy take before the damage is irreversible? The short answer is that experts are grappling with a situation as novel as the virus that caused it, and they really don’t know how much our high-tech, interconnected and consumption-oriented economy can endure. “The longer this disruption goes on, the more likely it will have a permanent effect,” said Roger Farmer, an economics professor at UCLA and the University of Warwick in England. “Three weeks we can bounce back from, three months is not so clear.” Yet months, even a year or longer, it may be. The White House is preparing its response at least partially based on a frightening report from doctors and scientists at Imperial College London that concluded the virus could kill 2.2 million Americans if it is not contained. And the kind of suppression measures needed to control it, such as social distancing and school closings, could have to remain in place as long as 18 months until a vaccine is developed. That’s a very long time, considering that it took the UCLA Anderson Forecast this week only four days to revise a quarterly prediction calling for slower economic growth into one stating that the U.S. had already slipped into a recession expected to last through September. The forecast was responding to rapidly changing conditions and fresh data. A survey released Tuesday had already found some 18% of adults reporting that they had hours cut or had been laid off, with the workers in lower-income households hit hardest. On Thursday, the government reported new unemployment insurance claims jumped by 70,000, or about one-third, to 281,000, the highest level in 2½ years. One analysis by Moody’s Analytics found that nearly 80 million U.S. jobs are at varying levels of risk, though it’s more likely some 10 million workers could either be laid off, furloughed or see their hours and wages cut. In China, with four times the population of the U.S., roughly 5 million people lost their jobs in the first two months of this year amid the outbreak. The areas of the economy expected to take the biggest hit are transportation and travel, hospitality and leisure, temporary help, and oil drilling and extraction. Outplacement firm Challenger, Gray & Christmas said 7.4 million jobs in hospitality and leisure alone could be lost or affected. Retail, manufacturing, construction and education are at moderate risk, Moody’s said. Macy’s, with 130,000 full- and part-time workers, announced this week it was closing its stores and moving all sales online, where it has struggled to compete with competitors such as Amazon. Treasury Secretary Steven T. Mnuchin warned Republican senators on Tuesday that without bold government action the pandemic could push up U.S. unemployment to 20%. The numbers look scary, but economists take some comfort in the fact that the economy entered this crisis on a strong footing, with unemployment at a 50-year low. The U.S. also has social programs such as Social Security, unemployment insurance, food stamps, Medicare and Medicaid put in place during the New Deal and the later Great Society initiative of President Lyndon B. Johnson — even if they are constantly in danger of being cut back or don’t measure up to European welfare state standards. Yet what social insurance the country has wasn’t predicated on a near shutdown of the economy, which for all its strength was already displaying well-documented gaps likely to be exacerbated by the outbreak. That includes including millions of low-income workers with little to no paid time off, a lack of affordable housing, a homelessness crisis, and rising levels of corporate debt that could send highly leveraged companies into default — which is why the local, state and national governments are considering such measures as a halt on evictions, cash payments to citizens and more than $100 billion in loan guarantees to businesses. But trying to get a handle on how this may play out is tricky, partially because the cause is non-financial in origin, unlike, say, last decade’s crisis, which was driven by subprime mortgage defaults. More on coronavirus’ economic impact  It’s also challenging that the economy has rapidly evolved. The U.S. manufacturing sector has been in long decline, replaced as an economic engine by consumer spending on goods and services. Those are huge categories that include food, clothes, appliances, electronics, furniture, cars, movie tickets, transportation, investment advice and healthcare. It also all comes amid telecommunications and computing advances that have made home deliveries ubiquitous and working from your bedroom desk commonplace. They have also vaulted tech companies such as Amazon, Google, Facebook and Microsoft to the top of the economic food chain. “Our economy is altogether different now than 1975,” said economist Chris Thornberg, founding partner of Beacon Economics, an L.A. consulting firm. “It’s now service oriented. Service sectors tend to be more loose and limber.” Indeed, on Monday, Amazon announced that due to “unprecedented” demand, it plans to hire 100,000 people across the U.S. to keep up with orders as workers stay home and shop online. It also plans to temporarily raise wages by $2 an hour through the end of April for hourly employees at its warehouses, delivery centers and Whole Food stores. Economist Edward Leamer, director emeritus of the Anderson Forecast, said that redirected spending can create an “automatic stabilizer” effect. Farmer said that the crisis will hasten economic changes that already were occurring due to technological advances, including telecommuting and online virtual meetings. “These disruptions will probably speed that up,” he said, noting that climate advocates already had been pushing hard to reduce jet travel. “A lot of people will find that it is actually much easier.” But many of those advantages would go to knowledge workers who sit in front of computers, such as programmers, lawyers and others in the white-collar workforce. Cashiers, waiters, construction workers and others in the blue-collar workforce don’t have that luxury as they sit at home without pay. Farmer said that double digit unemployment would make it hard for the economy to recover. “If {workers} lose those jobs it can take years to rebuild those skills. The danger is it becomes not only a temporary drop in employment but permanent,” he said. For now, the government is focusing on ensuring the financial and credit markets don’t seize up, preventing businesses from failing and getting cash into the hands of individuals. In an emergency session, the Federal Reserve dropped its key interest close to zero last weekend and said it would buy at least $700 billion of Treasury and mortgage-backed securities, similar to what it did during the financial crisis. It also announced plans Tuesday to shore up the commercial paper market that provides short-term liquidity to companies to help fund their short-term operations. The Trump administration, meanwhile, is proposing $1 trillion plus in economic stimulus, larger in size than President Obama’s after the financial crisis that would include checks of as much as $1,200 to individuals and hundreds of billions of dollars of loans or loan guarantees to small businesses and industry. Details were still being negotiated late Friday. Separately, President Trump on Wednesday signed a measure to provide free coronavirus testing and guarantee sick leave for a significant chunk of the U.S. workforce in the event of illness from the virus and provide expanded food aid and unemployment assistance for workers out of a job because of the pandemic. The president also invoked wartime powers to boost manufacturing of medical equipment needed to fight the pandemic and the U.S. restricted its border with Canada. Farmer supports the idea of giving every citizen a substantial check right now to help them put food on the table and buy other items. He also thinks the Treasury or Federal Reserve should take the extraordinary step of putting together a sovereign wealth fund to buy U.S. stocks and prop up the equities market, which is in full panic mode. On Friday, the Dow Jones industrial average capped off its worst week since the dark days of the 2008 financial crisis, erasing all the gains it had made since the time Trump took office. “We want to keep normal income growing. There will be less goods but we don’t want to see businesses collapsing and bankrupt and permanent disruption,” he said. Beacon Economics issued a report Friday, written by Thornberg, that called the virus the greatest threat to the nation’s economic expansion in more than a decade, with the next two weeks crucial in getting an understanding of how far-ranging the effects will be. But the report said it was too soon to say a lengthy recession or depression was inevitable. The report noted the economy’s underlying strength and the fact that China, South Korea and Japan appear to have gotten the virus under control within two months. It said the economy could function with the outbreak limited to some hot spots and the nation largely “back to business albeit with a different modus operandum” — but a widespread Wuhan, China- or Italian-style lockdown would be another story. In an interview, Thornberg said that the best comparison for now is a hurricane or earthquake that temporarily disrupts a local economy — though he acknowledged the analogy was far from perfect since such disasters are finite events that typically affect far smaller areas. “Time after time the economy bounces back after a natural disaster type of situation,” Thornberg said. “And this to me sounds like a natural disaster, but here we have a situation where there is no endpoint.” 
Mar 20, 2020	Over the last week, after Major League Baseball announced it had suspended operations and delayed the start of the regular season because of the COVID-19 pandemic, players across the majors and minors dispersed. Players on 40-man rosters were given three options: remain where their clubs hold spring training — in Arizona or Florida — travel to their club’s base city or travel home. Some major leaguers — and, left with little choice, nearly all minor leaguers — elected to return home to wait out the crisis. Home for the majority of players is the United States. Home for many more is in Latin America, where the spread of the coronavirus, weeks behind the U.S., could overwhelm the region’s countries and territories. And home for a handful of players are countries in Asia and Europe, where the virus has spread. There have been an array of responses. They all present a potential problem some people in baseball already fear: What happens if players, coaches and other personnel aren’t allowed to return to the U.S. due to restricted travel once MLB establishes a start date for its season? In a way, it’s a dilemma MLB would love to face because it would mean the 2020 season wasn’t canceled entirely. But it would be a daunting challenge. MLB and the players’ union have advised players on 40-man rosters to stay in the continental United States, according to people with knowledge of the situation, but not all have followed the advice. Players on 40-man rosters have returned home to the Dominican Republic, Puerto Rico, Mexico and Nicaragua, among other places. Minor leaguers, most of whom weren’t receiving paychecks during the shutdown before MLB announced Thursday a plan to pay them at least until April 8, have overwhelmingly returned home if the area is not considered high risk. The Dodgers were among a few organizations that continued paying their minor leaguers the allowances and stipends they received during spring training before MLB’s payment plan was announced Thursday. While most of their minor leaguers, with a few exceptions, returned home, the club strongly recommended that players on its 40-man roster remain in the continental U.S. and all have stayed, according to two people with knowledge of the situation. Angels manager Joe Maddon said Wednesday he was not sure which Latinos on his club went home. He said catching coach José Molina and first base coach Jesus Feliciano both returned home to Puerto Rico. Two-way star Shohei Ohtani received clearance to return home to Japan but said he would stay in Southern California. On Monday, following the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention’s recommendation to cease gatherings of over 50 people for eight weeks, MLB announced it was pushing back opening day at least until the middle of May. Starting the season in May, however, is widely viewed as unrealistic as uncertainty continues coloring the immediate future. Estimates in the industry for opening day vary from June to August — if the 2020 season is played at all. MLB wants to play as many games as possible, but a condensed schedule appears likelier by the day. The chances of the All-Star Game being held as scheduled — on July 14 at Dodger Stadium — have greatly diminished over the last week. Figuring out a schedule is atop the list of MLB’s priorities. From there, the league and the union can resolve other logistical matters such as pay, roster size and service-time calculation — the most contentious issue in discussions between the two sides, according to people with knowledge of the situation. But the timeline MLB and the players’ union are using as a guideline is not universal. Other countries and territories, some of which lack the infrastructure and resources the United States has in place to combat an outbreak, are at different stages of the virus’ spread. Latin America, which supplied over a quarter of players on opening day major league rosters last season, is just beginning to see coronavirus cases spike and enacting different responses. A total of 251 players represented 20 different countries and territories outside the U.S. on 2019 opening day 25-man rosters and inactive lists. That was 28.5% of the total players. The Dominican Republic had a record 102 players representing 11.6% of the total. Venezuela ranked second with 68 players. Cuba, Puerto Rico, Mexico, Japan, Canada, Curaçao, South Korea and Colombia each had at least four players on rosters. Nine other countries and territories had one player. Those numbers do not include players on the 40-man rosters who did not make the opening day 25-man rosters, coaches or team personnel. Colombia had 75 confirmed coronavirus cases as of Tuesday and is scheduled to block entry to everyone traveling from abroad starting Monday. Puerto Rico, a U.S. territory, implemented a curfew across the island through March 31, banned cruise ships, closed schools, and shut down all nonessential business. The island’s governor has requested that domestic and international flights to Puerto Rico be suspended for 14 days. Puerto Rico had six confirmed cases as of Wednesday. Mexico, on the other hand, has declined to curtail travel, even from countries with significant outbreaks. The country confirmed its first coronavirus-related death Wednesday. Venezuelans across the spectrum, from minor leaguers to superstars, have overwhelmingly elected not to return to their country, where political unrest and safety concerns have discouraged players from spending much time at home in recent years. MLB effectively shut down clubs’ Dominican academies and told teams that some players, including Venezuelans, should stay in the U.S. rather than be sent to the academies, according to a person with knowledge of the situation. The league also imposed a temporary prohibition on international scouting. On Thursday, two days after reporting 21 confirmed coronavirus cases, the Dominican Republic closed its land, sea and air borders for 15 days. Last week, the U.S. embassy in Santo Domingo announced it was indefinitely limiting consular services, including canceling routine immigrant and nonimmigrant visa appointments. Among the possibilities to avoid having players in the Dominican Republic and other countries encounter travel obstacles is establishing contingency plans with the embassies in the various countries, according to people with knowledge of the situation. Players could use their previous visas and be screened for the virus traveling back to the U.S. For now, MLB and the union are focused on tackling other, more pressing issues, but it’s a potential solution to a potential problem down the road. Times staff writer Maria Torres contributed to this report. 
Mar 20, 2020	As thousands continue to pour into LAX, many international travelers have complained about haphazard health screenings, being required to stand or sit near others who have returned from countries with known outbreaks of the coronavirus, or not being screened at all. Travelers who were identified as high-risk by the White House but were not screened have taken to social media to decry the process, expressing alarm over the fact that they were so easily able to slip through the cracks amid an extraordinary global health crisis. Kitty Horowitz said she and her husband also weren't screened when they arrived at Los Angeles International Airport from London on Sunday.  The couple had been vacationing in Europe since late February and had visited Austria and Germany -- both on the list of countries that fell under President Trump's no-travel order. Horowitz said they were given a form on the plane asking whether they had traveled through the Schengen area of Europe, where the coronavirus has quickly spread. Several people sitting near them on the plane were coughing. "We were terrified," she said. When they landed, no one came to collect the form and they were not directed to submit the form anywhere, she said. Several others interviewed by The Times also said their forms were not collected. "We saw no one getting screened. No one took the form from us. Nothing," she said. "We've never gotten through as fast as we did." Public health experts, however, say the screenings offer a false sense of security and are largely futile at this point in the pandemic. The process -- particularly corralling travelers from high-risk countries into lines and holding areas to await screening -- endangers passengers and those with whom they will come into contact, experts said. "This to me is the very definition of what we should not be doing," said Carolyn Cannuscio, director of research at the Center for Public Health Initiatives at the University of Pennsylvania. "We're creating a risk there," she added. "And we're very likely to miss people who are in fact infected, and may also be transmitting the virus but haven't yet had symptoms." The Trump administration has been slow to ramp up screening at international airports, even for travelers reentering the United States from coronavirus hot spots. On March 12, the administration dramatically narrowed the number of places where American citizens returning from Europe could enter the U.S. -- currently just 13 airports, including LAX. Customs and Border Protection and health officials began conducting "enhanced screenings" -- consisting of temperature checks and questions about travel history and symptoms -- for those passengers the day after. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention said returning travelers "may be screened" if they visited countries with widespread transmission and would be told to stay home for 14 days and practice social distancing. The bottleneck of travelers scrambling to get back to the U.S. created chaos at some airports last weekend. At O'Hare International Airport in Chicago, throngs of people stood shoulder to shoulder, in some cases for several hours, as they waited to be screened. LAX reported much shorter screening lines, with the airport estimating about 30 minutes being tacked onto the average wait time for passengers who were flagged for testing. The Times spoke with several travelers who should have been screened at LAX under the White House's criteria but were not. The Department of Homeland Security, which is in charge of the screening process, did not respond to requests for comment. Ron Nehring, the director of international programs for a nonprofit group, flew into LAX from London's Heathrow Airport on Monday night. Trump's order adding the United Kingdom and Ireland to the list of European nations identified as "Level 3" countries hadn't taken effect yet, but Nehring had visited two countries already on the list, Germany and Poland, so he assumed that he'd be screened. He wasn't, he said. The colleague he'd been traveling with, who flew into Dulles International Airport outside Washington, D.C., was screened there, he said. "I walked off the plane and was expecting someone to ask me what countries I'd been to," Nehring said. "I was expecting to be flagged and for my temperature to be taken." Some travelers, though concerned by the lack of screening, were grateful to avoid cramped waiting lines. Cannuscio, the public health expert from the University of Pennsylvania, said such lines do more harm than good. One of her students flew into John F. Kennedy International Airport this week and spent three hours in a crowd waiting to be screened. "That is so upsetting, because it's a perfect environment for sharing the virus among travelers of very many points of origin," Cannuscio said. LAX travelers interviewed by The Times said neither airport officials nor the Department of Homeland Security encouraged social distancing among those waiting to be screened. Jerome Snell, who also flew into LAX from London on Sunday, was among those flagged for a screening. During his trip to Europe, Snell had visited France, another of the 26 countries in the Schengen area under Trump's original travel restrictions. He was asked to go to the airport's passport-control area, where he waited briefly for an initial evaluation, he said. Very few people stood in line with him, though later that line become longer and more cramped. An airport employee took his passport and asked him if he had experienced any COVID-19 symptoms -- dry cough, shortness of breath -- or had been around anyone with the illness. Snell felt fine. But he was told he needed a second screening and was asked to wait in a small sitting area, where eventually about 50 other people joined him, he said. Snell, who recently went into remission for neck cancer, made sure to keep a few feet between himself and others. After 45 minutes, he said, a customs employee called him to a counter and returned his passport, telling him he was "good to go." No further health evaluation took place. "I don't know how they made the determination that I didn't need my temperature checked, but somebody else did," said Snell. "We're not doing enough to prevent the spread of this disease." Jeffrey Klausner, an adjunct professor of epidemiology at UCLA, said airport screenings make sense only if the goal is to identify people who need medical help and give them care. He said a rigorous screening program would be costly and would need to be checked by a secret-shopper sort of system, where people exhibiting symptoms are sent through to see if the screenings are being done properly. Such a screening might have helped save the first person to die of COVID-19 in L.A. County. A couple, Loretta and Roddy, had layovers in South Korea en route to the Philippines and back. They landed at LAX on March 8. But according to Rowena, Loretta's daughter, the couple were not screened for symptoms at the airport in South Korea or in Los Angeles. (The family asked that their last names not be used for fear of being shunned or targeted.) The White House has repeatedly said that all passengers on direct flights from South Korea would be screened in that country before boarding planes to the U.S. Vice President Mike Pence said passengers would receive "multiple temperature checks." Rowena, who lives in South Carolina, said she thinks a screening could have saved her mom's life. Public health experts have warned that screenings can fail to detect many who have COVID-19, as they may not develop symptoms for days, if ever. And some people may not be truthful about contact with an infected person for fear of being quarantined. Caption: PHOTO: TRAVELERS head out from the Tom Bradley International Terminal at LAX. Some international flight passengers say they were told to expect a screening for the coronavirus upon landing but were not checked. PHOTOGRAPHER:Kent Nishimura Los Angeles Times PHOTO:TRAVELERS at Los Angeles International Airport don't all observe the call to keep their distance from others. And some arriving passengers say they did not receive the virus screenings they expected on landing. PHOTOGRAPHER:Kent Nishimura Los Angeles Times 
Mar 20, 2020	In a sign of how difficult it will be to contain the coronavirus over time, Asia is reporting surges in new cases of the disease known as COVID-19 after weeks of relative calm. Hong Kong, Singapore and Taiwan recorded new highs for daily cases this week and South Korea reported its highest daily tally in eight days on Thursday. The development should worry policymakers in the United States and Europe, which are now the centers of a growing pandemic that began in China.  Asia has been viewed as a model for the West to follow because of its rampant testing and the seriousness with which its populations have followed health guidelines. For instance, China for the first time on Thursday reported no new domestic transmissions of the virus. Authorities there did record 34 new cases, however, all from abroad. After tamping down domestic transmissions of the virus, Asia is finding itself vulnerable to travelers returning from hot spots overseas. Thirty-three of the record 47 new cases in Singapore on Wednesday were linked to travel in Europe, North America and Asia. Of the record 25 new cases Hong Kong reported Wednesday, 22 involved people who had also recently traveled, including 18 to Europe and one to the United States. Both Hong Kong and Singapore have substantial expatriate communities whose links to Europe and the U.S. are now sources of risk, similar to that posed by links to China earlier in the outbreak. The pandemic, which started in Wuhan, China, has infected more than 242,000 people worldwide and killed more than 9,800, according to Johns Hopkins University. Taiwan, which had been lauded for its containment of the virus much like Singapore and Hong Kong, recorded 23 new cases of the coronavirus Wednesday, the most the government has reported in a day. Taiwan's health minister, Chen Shih-chung, said 21 of the new cases were linked to travel in Asia, Europe and the United States. "We are seeing worrying numbers of imported cases," said Ben Cowling, an epidemiologist at the University of Hong Kong, "worrying because we know only a minority of imported cases will be picked up and many will never be detected." "I am expecting to see increases in unlinked local cases within the next two weeks -- cases in Hong Kong or Singapore who do not know how they got infected," Cowling added. "These could be the third or fourth generation of infections from undetected imported cases." Cowling cited a recent study from the U.S. that estimated screeners at airports missed more than half of infected people because carriers of the disease can appear asymptomatic. "We find that most cases missed by screening are fundamentally undetectable, because they have not yet developed symptoms and are unaware they were exposed," the study said. Some governments are trying to mitigate that risk by mandating 14-day quarantines for all arrivals from abroad. Hong Kong and Taiwan introduced the measure Thursday. Singapore will do the same starting Friday -- after prohibiting entry for short-term visitors with recent travel history in China, France, Germany, Iran, Italy, South Korea and Spain. It's unclear how many of South Korea's 152 new cases reported Thursday -- the country's most in one day since March 11 -- were due to overseas travel. The increase in cases were largely linked to a new outbreak at a nursing home in Daegu. The southeastern city has nearly three-quarters of South Korea's confirmed cases of COVID-19 because of an outbreak at a local church. South Korea had won plaudits for slashing the number of infections after issuing stringent lockdowns and testing hundreds of thousands of its citizens for the virus. Caption: PHOTO: PEDESTRIANS in Hong Kong. After reporting a record 25 new cases Wednesday, Hong Kong is mandating 14-day quarantines for all arrivals from abroad. PHOTOGRAPHER:Anthony Kwan Getty Images
Mar 19, 2020	In a sign of how difficult it will be to contain the coronavirus over time, Asia is reporting spikes in new cases of the disease known as COVID-19 after weeks of relative calm. Hong Kong, Singapore and Taiwan recorded new highs for daily cases this week and South Korea reported its highest daily tally in eight days on Thursday. The development should worry policymakers in the United States and Europe, which are now the centers of a growing pandemic that began in China. Asia has been viewed as a model for the West to follow because of its rampant testing and the seriousness in which its populations have followed health guidelines. For instance, China for the first time on Thursday reported no new domestic transmissions of the virus. Authorities there did record 34 new cases, however, all from abroad. After tamping down domestic transmissions of the virus, Asiais finding itself vulnerable to travelers returning from hot spots overseas. Thirty-three of the record 47 new cases Singapore recorded Wednesday were linked to travel in Europe, North America and Asia. Of the record 25 new cases Hong Kong reported Wednesday, 22 involved people who had also recently traveled, including 18 to Europe and one to the U.S. Both Hong Kong and Singapore have substantial expatriate communities whose links to Europe and the U.S. are now sources of risk in a similar way links to China were earlier in the outbreak. The pandemic, which started in Wuhan, China, has infected over 200,000 people worldwide and killed at least 8,657, according to the World Health Organization. Taiwan, which had been lauded for its containment of the virus much like Singapore and Hong Kong, recorded 23 new cases of the coronavirus Wednesday, the most the country has reported in a single day. Taiwan’s health minister, Chen Shih-chung, said 21 of the new cases were linked to travel in Asia, Europe and the U.S. “We are seeing worrying numbers of imported cases,” said Ben Cowling, an epidemiologist at the University of Hong Kong, “worrying because we know only a minority of imported cases will be picked up and many will never be detected.” Newsletter Get our free Coronavirus Today newsletter Sign up for the latest news, best stories and what they mean for you, plus answers to your questions. Sign Me Up You may occasionally receive promotional content from the Los Angeles Times. “I am expecting to see increases in unlinked local cases within the next two weeks — cases in Hong Kong or Singapore who do not know how they got infected,” Cowling added. “These could be the third or fourth generation of infections from undetected imported cases.” Cowling cited a recent study from the U.S. that estimated screeners at airports missed more than half of infected people because carriers of the disease can appear asymptomatic. “We find that most cases missed by screening are fundamentally undetectable, because they have not yet developed symptoms and are unaware they were exposed,” the study said. Some governments are trying to mitigate that risk by mandating 14-day quarantines for all arrivals from abroad. Hong Kong and Taiwan introduced the measure Thursday. Singapore will do the same starting Friday — after prohibiting entry for short-term visitors with recent travel history in China, France, Germany, Iran, Italy, South Korea and Spain. It’s unclear how many of South Korea’s 152 new cases reported Thursday — the country’s most in a single day since March 11 — were due to overseas travel. The increase in cases were largely linked to a new outbreak at a nursing home in Daegu. The southeastern city has nearly three-quarters of South Korea’s confirmed cases of COVID-19 because of an outbreak at a local church. South Korea had won plaudits for slashing the number of infections after issuing stringent lockdowns and testing hundreds of thousands of its citizens for the virus.
Mar 19, 2020	C.A. Lim woke Friday in her Venice apartment with a fever, dry cough, aching muscles, and a tightness in her chest like a corset she couldn’t take off. At a Kaiser urgent care clinic, a physician and an infectious disease specialist told the 33-year-old nonprofit executive that she “clearly” had COVID-19, but that they couldn’t spare a test to confirm the diagnosis because she was not elderly or otherwise a high-risk patient. “The doctor encouraged me to reach out to everyone I have been within six feet of within the past 10 days, and let them know I have COVID,” Lim recounted in an email. She and her husband immediately quarantined themselves and began calling, texting and emailing friends, colleagues and relatives, ultimately alerting some 60 to 70 people about the potential exposure. Two co-workers she had crossed paths with at a training session in New York subsequently told her they also had come down with the coronavirus, she said. Despite the illness of her associates and the strong opinion of her doctors, Lim is not included in the government tally of confirmed virus cases. Her experience is troublingly common, according to healthcare workers and patients. Due to a shortage of tests, many people identified by their doctors as probably or possibly stricken with COVID-19 are not being reported to authorities. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention reserved tests until recently for those who were severely ill and those with direct connections to afflicted regions or individuals, and the tests remain very difficult to obtain. For months, younger and healthier people who had symptoms of the virus have been told they don’t qualify for a screening and sent home by medical professionals with varying advice about what precautions to take. The failure to test and quarantine this group is believed to be a major factor in the rapid growth of cases nationwide that has prompted the closures of schools and businesses. While people on ventilators and in intensive care units were tested and their contacts traced, local health agencies were not informed about those with milder symptoms and they were not subject to government monitoring aimed at stopping the spread of the virus. Widespread testing has allowed some countries like South Korea to contain the epidemic by identifying infected citizens, whether or not they had symptoms, and strictly quarantining them. Newsletter Get our free Coronavirus Today newsletter Sign up for the latest news, best stories and what they mean for you, plus answers to your questions. Sign Me Up You may occasionally receive promotional content from the Los Angeles Times. In L.A. County, which has a population of about 10 million, only about 1,100 people had been tested by Tuesday, though the number is expected to rise rapidly in the coming days as more labs come online, officials say. At least 8,200 people had been tested in California, according to state public health figures released Tuesday. “This is good news for all of us, we desperately needed to be able to increase our lab capacity,” county health department director Barbara Ferrer said Tuesday. Not every dry cough or fever is COVID-19. The symptoms of the virus are similar to those of the flu and the outbreak began as the US flu season was peaking, making testing even more critical for physicians to identify coronavirus. Dr. Natalie Marino, a family medicine doctor at a Los Angeles County urgent care, said she had seen many patients with symptoms of coronavirus over the last two months, but her clinic did not have access to a single test until this week. The tests simply weren’t available. “If we had tested more mild people in the community there would have at least been a chance for people to really take this seriously from the beginning,” Marino said. “I think that would’ve been better than what we know is happening right now.” She said she told people she suspected of having the virus to keep themselves at home for at least 14 days, but acknowledged there was no way to enforce their behavior. “You are trusting the patient to keep themselves at home ... and at least six feet from elderly family members,” she said. Marcia Santini, an emergency room nurse at the Ronald Reagan UCLA Medical Center, echoed that assessment: “It’s blind trust, honey,” People who showed up at the UCLA ER with a dry cough and a fever in recent weeks were not tested unless they were so ill they needed to be hospitalized. Patients could be screened for the flu, but if the results were negative, providers told them they might have the virus and sent them home with a four-page printout about proper hand-washing and how to manage household tasks while self-quarantining. In Lim’s case, a Kaiser doctor recorded in her chart that while she did not meet the strict criteria for a test, “this patient is high suspicion for local transmission based on presentation and symptoms.” Kaiser spokesman Terry Kanakri said that unfortunately the health provider was unable to say how many other untested patients were suspected of having the virus. In a statement, Kaiser said while it only reported positive tests to the local public health officials, untested patients with COVID-19 symptoms are “told to self-isolate at home, and they are monitored virtually.” Health authorities seem to know little about these patients. Asked if they are tracking cases where a medical professional believes an untested person had coronavirus, a spokesperson for the California Department of Public Health said in a statement that “the department does not collect information on a provider’s clinical decision on whether or not to test a patient.” Lim said she has not left her 500-square-foot studio apartment since receiving the diagnosis and stays on the other side of the room from her husband, who doctors said was probably positive but asymptomatic. “We just have to do this weird little dance where we trade places if we need to be in the other’s ‘space,’” she explained. What You Can Do About Coronavirus  Her husband emerges only briefly to walk their toy poodles, wearing a mask and staying within 40 feet of the apartment. For others, that level of isolation hasn’t been possible. One L.A. mother, who spoke on the condition of anonymity, said her doctor told her March 3 that he suspected her high fever and pneumonia were coronavirus. He told her to self-quarantine while waiting for the public health department to test her. But despite making “a million calls to a bunch of different people,” she was never tested. Last week, her doctor told her she didn’t qualify and there was nothing he could do. As the days drew on, she struggled to avoid family members whom she lives with, including her school-age child, and ultimately feared she might have passed the virus to her child’s classmates. “If there are more cases like mine, these are the reasons this is spreading so much,” she said. Times staff writer Emily Baumgaertner contributed to this report.
Mar 19, 2020	As thousands continue to pour into LAX, many international travelers have complained about haphazard health screenings, being required to stand or sit near others who have returned from countries with known outbreaks of the coronavirus, or not being screened at all. Travelers who were identified as high-risk by the White House but were not screened have taken to social media to decry the process, expressing alarm over the fact that they were so easily able to slip through the cracks amid an extraordinary global health crisis. Kitty Horowitz said she and her husband also weren’t screened when they arrived at LAX from London on Sunday. The couple had been vacationing in Europe since late February, and had visited Austria and Germany — both on the list of countries that fell under Trump’s order. Horowitz said they were given a form on the plane asking whether they had traveled through the Schengen Area of Europe, where the coronavirus has quickly spread. Several people sitting near them on the plane were coughing. “We were terrified,” she said. When they landed, no one came to collect the form and they were not directed to submit the form anywhere, she said. Several others interviewed by The Times also said their forms were not collected. “We saw no one getting screened. No one took the form from us. Nothing,” she said. “We’ve never gotten through as fast as we did.” Public health experts, however, say the screenings offer a false sense of security and are largely futile at this point in the pandemic. The process — particularly corralling travelers from high-risk countries into lines and holding areas to await screening — endangers passengers and those with whom they will later come into contact, experts said. “This to me is the very definition of what we should not be doing,” said Carolyn Cannuscio, director of research at the Center for Public Health Initiatives at the University of Pennsylvania. “We’re creating a risk there,” she added. “And we’re very likely to miss people who are in fact infected, and may also be transmitting the virus but haven’t yet had symptoms.” The Trump administration has been slow to ramp up screening at international airports, even for travelers re-entering the United States from coronavirus hot spots. On March 12, the Trump administration dramatically narrowed the number of places where American citizens returning from Europe could enter the U.S. — currently just 13 airports, including LAX. Customs and Border Protection and health officials began conducting “enhanced screenings” — consisting of temperature checks and questions about travel history and symptoms — for those passengers the day after. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention said returning travelers “may be screened” if they visited countries with widespread transmission and would be told to stay home for 14 days and practice social distancing. The bottleneck of travelers scrambling to get back to the U.S. created mass chaos at some airports last weekend. At O’Hare International Airport in Chicago, throngs of people stood shoulder-to-shoulder, in some cases for several hours, as they waited to be screened. LAX reported much shorter screening lines, with the airport estimating about 30 minutes being tacked onto the average wait time for passengers who were flagged for testing. The Times spoke with several travelers who should have been screened at LAX under the White House’s criteria but were not. The Department of Homeland Security, which is in charge of the screening process, did not respond to requests for comment. More coverage on coronavirus in California  Ron Nehring, the director of international programs for a nonprofit, flew into LAX from London’s Heathrow Airport on Monday night. Trump’s order adding the United Kingdom and Ireland to the list of European nations identified as “Level 3" countries hadn’t taken effect by then, but Nehring had visited two countries already on the list, Germany and Poland, so he assumed that he’d be screened. He wasn’t, he said. The colleague he’d been traveling with, who flew into Dulles International Airport outside of D.C., was screened there, he said. “I walked off the plane and was expecting someone to ask me what countries I’d been to,” Nehring said. “I was expecting to be flagged and for my temperature to be taken.” Some travelers, though concerned by the lack of screening, were grateful to avoid cramped waiting lines. Cannuscio, the public health expert from the University of Pennsylvania, said such lines do more harm than good. One of her students flew into John F. Kennedy International Airport this week and spent three hours in a crowd waiting to be screened. “That is so upsetting, because it’s a perfect environment for sharing the virus among travelers of very many points of origin,” Cannuscio said. LAX travelers interviewed by The Times said neither airport officials nor the Department of Homeland Security encouraged social distancing among those waiting to be screened. Jerome Snell, who also flew into LAX from London on Sunday, was among those flagged for a screening. During his trip to Europe, Snell had visited France, another of the 26 European countries in the Schengen Area. He was asked to go to the passport-control area of the airport, where he waited briefly for an initial evaluation, he said. Very few people stood in line with him, though later he would watch that line become longer and more cramped. An airport employee took his passport and asked him if he had experienced any COVID-19 symptoms — dry cough, shortness of breath — or had been around anyone with the illness. Snell felt fine. But he was told he needed a second screening and was asked to wait in a small sitting area, where eventually about 50 other people joined him, he said. Snell, who recently went into remission for neck cancer, made sure to keep a few feet between himself and others. After 45 minutes, he said, a customs employee called him to a counter and returned his passport, telling him he was “good to go.” No further health evaluation took place. “I don’t know how they made the determination that I didn’t need my temperature checked, but somebody else did,” said Snell. “We’re not doing enough to prevent the spread of this disease.” Jeffrey Klausner, an adjunct professor of epidemiology at UCLA, said airport screenings only make sense if the goal is to identify people who need medical help and give them care. He said a rigorous screening program would be costly and would need to be checked by a secret-shopper sort of system, where people exhibiting symptoms are sent through to see if the screenings are being done properly. “For it to work, they’ll really need to invest in a comprehensive, high-quality system,” Klausner said. Such a screening might have helped save the first person to die of COVID-19 in L.A. County. Loretta and Roddy had layovers in South Korea on their way to the Philippines and back. They landed at Los Angeles International Airport on March 8. But according to Rowena, Loretta’s daughter, the couple was not screened for symptoms at the airport in South Korea or in Los Angeles. (The family asked that their last names not be used for fear of being shunned or targeted.) The White House has repeatedly said that all passengers on direct flights from South Korea would be screened in that country before boarding planes to the U.S. Vice President Mike Pence said passengers would receive “multiple temperature checks,” among other measures. Rowena, who lives in South Carolina, said she thinks a screening could have saved her mom’s life. “If they would’ve caught her, she wouldn’t have gone home, gone to sleep and not woken up again,” she said. “It’s just crazy.” Public health experts have warned that screenings can fail to detect many who are infected with COVID-19, as they may not develop symptoms for several days, if ever. And some people may not be truthful when asked if they’d had contact with an infected person because they fear being quarantined. “The current process will identify the highest risk potential active cases — many of which may turn out to be false positives because a high temperature may be associated with other illnesses or situations,” said Jay Wolfson, senior associate dean for health policy and practice at the University of South Florida’s college of medicine. And because the coronavirus is already spreading in the U.S. through community-level transmission, health screenings at airports will not curb the effects of the pandemic and could give citizens a false sense of security, experts say. “It’s not the optimal message you want to send, that you can only get the virus from being outside of the country,” said Amesh Adalja, senior scholar at Johns Hopkins University’s Center for Health Security. Such screenings are also a poor use of limited public resources, Cannuscio said, which should instead be used to keep tabs on travelers from high-risk countries once they get home, to test symptomatic people for the virus, and to make sure that those with positive results remain in quarantine. To prevent further spread of the virus in the U.S., officials at every level should implement rigorous social distancing strategies as soon as possible, Cannuscio said. This could mean advising people against air travel completely. “I think all nonessential travel should be canceled,” she said.
Mar 19, 2020	A woman who flew last week from Massachusetts to Los Angeles — then to Beijing, where she tested positive for the new coronavirus — is under investigation on allegations of concealing her symptoms and putting fellow travelers at risk of infection. The woman took fever-reducing medication before boarding a plane and lied to flight attendants, according to Beijing’s disease control center and an Air China representative, who held a news conference on Monday. The woman, who was hospitalized and is receiving treatment, is under investigation for the crime of “impeding prevention of infectious diseases.” According to Chinese law, she could face up to three years of imprisonment or detention with possible forced labor, or up to seven years of prison if there are “serious consequences.” As the pandemic worsens around the world but slows in China, authorities in Beijing are tightening controls. All passengers arriving in Beijing from abroad, including Chinese nationals, are required to quarantine in government centers for 14 days. Shanghai and other cities have enacted similar measures for travelers from a growing list of high-risk countries with coronavirus outbreaks, including Iran, Italy, South Korea, France, Spain, Germany, England, Switzerland, Sweden, Belgium, Norway, Holland, Denmark, Austria and the United States. In recent days, coronavirus infection cases in other countries have outnumbered new domestic infections. While Chinese diplomats and propaganda authorities have boasted in recent weeks of China’s victory over the coronavirus and its superiority to other countries’ responses, doctors and scientists warn that a resurgence of cases is possible as people return to work and others fly back home to China from abroad. “We need to be highly alert toward imported infection cases,” Zhong Nanshan, a Chinese doctor and government advisor, said at a news conference in Guangzhou on Wednesday. “For this first wave of imported cases from highly affected countries, we should not just look at their symptoms; we should test them.” On Monday, a joint statement on strengthening “border health and quarantine work” was issued by China’s highest court, the prosecutor general and other officials. They identified six crimes tied to national health and quarantine measures, including refusal to implement quarantine measures (such as medical inspection and temperature monitoring), reporting false information on health declaration forms, hiding one’s disease symptoms or refusing to accept customs health checks. Wang Jun, director-general of customs policies and regulations, said the crimes are serious threats to public health and safety. “Those who try to test their luck and evade customs and quarantine not only will bear the whole society’s shaming and condemnation, but will also face the scourge of imprisonment,” he said. At least 25 other people in China have been punished or investigated for concealing their symptoms of coronavirus infection or travel history. In Qinghai province, a man who took a train with his son from Wuhan to Xining — but claimed they’d been home for the last 40 days — tested positive for the coronavirus. Nine hundred others had to be quarantined as a result. He was sentenced to one year in prison. In Inner Mongolia, two women reportedly lied about having traveled back to China from Turkey via Abu Dhabi, then broke home quarantine and ate at several restaurants. They were charged with “impeding prevention of infectious diseases” and put under forced isolation and observation. In Henan, a man reportedly went to a hospital feeling unwell but concealed his travel to Wuhan. He later tested positive for the coronavirus. Eight medical workers had to be quarantined as a result and at least one close contact was also infected. He was sentenced to eight months in prison. The woman from Massachusetts, surnamed Li, reportedly began showing signs of the coronavirus disease, known as COVID-19, after attending a “company meeting” in late February, Chinese authorities said. Li, 37, is suspected of having attended or been in close contact with attendees of a leadership conference hosted by Boston biotech company Biogen. The conference dates match the dates of Li’s “company meeting” reported by health authorities. At least 104 coronavirus infection cases in Massachusetts have been linked to the Biogen conference. There were guests from Italy, where the death toll from the virus has surpassed 2,500, but there were no guests who had been to China, according to the Boston Globe. COVID-19 cases in Tennessee, North Carolina, Indiana, New Jersey, Washington, D.C., and Norway — and suspected cases in Germany, Austria, and Argentina — have been linked to the same conference. Biogen did not immediately respond to a request from The Times for confirmation of whether Li was a Biotech employee at the conference. On Tuesday, Beijing health authorities said that Li’s husband, surnamed Hong, had also tested positive for the coronavirus. Hong, 37, is a university professor who also is originally from Chongqing and a longtime resident of Massachusetts. Nicole Liu of The Times’ Beijing bureau contributed to this report. 
Mar 19, 2020	C.A. Lim woke Friday in her Venice apartment with a fever, dry cough, aching muscles, and a tightness in her chest like a corset she couldn't take off. At a Kaiser urgent care clinic, a physician and an infectious disease specialist told the 33-year-old nonprofit executive that she "clearly" had COVID-19, but that they couldn't spare a test to confirm the diagnosis because she was not elderly or otherwise a high-risk patient. "The doctor encouraged me to reach out to everyone I have been within six feet of within the past 10 days, and let them know I have COVID," Lim recounted in an email. She and her husband immediately quarantined themselves and began calling, texting and emailing friends, colleagues and relatives, ultimately alerting some 60 to 70 people about the potential exposure.  Two co-workers she had crossed paths with at a training session in New York subsequently told her they also had come down with the coronavirus, she said. Despite the illness of her associates and the strong opinion of her doctors, Lim is not included in the government tally of confirmed virus cases. Her experience is troublingly common, according to healthcare workers and patients. Due to a shortage of tests, many people identified by their doctors as probably or possibly stricken with COVID-19 are not being reported to authorities. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention reserved tests until recently for those who were severely ill and those with direct connections to afflicted regions or individuals, and the tests remain very difficult to obtain. For months, younger and healthier people who had symptoms of the virus have been told they don't qualify for a screening and sent home by medical professionals with varying advice about what precautions to take. The failure to test and quarantine this group is believed to be a major factor in the rapid growth of cases nationwide that has prompted the closures of schools and businesses. While people on ventilators and in intensive care units were tested and their contacts traced, local health agencies were not informed about those with milder symptoms and they were not subject to government monitoring aimed at stopping the spread of the virus. Widespread testing has allowed some countries like South Korea to contain the epidemic by identifying infected citizens, whether or not they had symptoms, and strictly quarantining them. In L.A. County, which has a population of about 10 million, only about 1,100 people had been tested by Tuesday, though the number is expected to rise rapidly in the coming days as more labs come online, officials say. At least 8,200 people had been tested in California, according to state public health figures released Tuesday. "This is good news for all of us, we desperately needed to be able to increase our lab capacity," county health department director Barbara Ferrer said Tuesday. Not every dry cough or fever is COVID-19. The symptoms of the virus are similar to those of the flu and the outbreak began as the U.S. flu season was peaking, making testing even more critical for physicians to identify coronavirus. Dr. Natalie Marino, a family medicine doctor at a Los Angeles County urgent care, said she had seen many patients with symptoms of coronavirus over the last two months, but her clinic did not have access to a single test until this week. The tests simply weren't available. "If we had tested more mild people in the community there would have at least been a chance for people to really take this seriously from the beginning," Marino said. "I think that would've been better than what we know is happening right now." She said she told people she suspected of having the virus to keep themselves at home for at least 14 days, but acknowledged there was no way to enforce their behavior. "You are trusting the patient to keep themselves at home ... and at least six feet from elderly family members," she said. Marcia Santini, an emergency room nurse at the Ronald Reagan UCLA Medical Center, echoed that assessment: "It's blind trust, honey." People who showed up at the UCLA ER with a dry cough and a fever in recent weeks were not tested unless they were so ill they needed to be hospitalized. Patients could be screened for the flu, but if the results were negative, providers told them they might have the virus and sent them home with a four-page printout about proper hand-washing and how to manage household tasks while self-quarantining. In Lim's case, a Kaiser doctor recorded in her chart that while she did not meet the strict criteria for a test, "this patient is high suspicion for local transmission based on presentation and symptoms." Kaiser spokesman Terry Kanakri said that unfortunately the health provider was unable to say how many other untested patients were suspected of having the virus. In a statement, Kaiser said that while it reported only positive tests to local public health officials, untested patients with COVID-19 symptoms are "told to self-isolate at home, and they are monitored virtually." Health authorities seem to know little about these patients. Asked if they are tracking cases where a medical professional believes an untested person had coronavirus, a spokesperson for the California Department of Public Health said in a statement that "the department does not collect information on a provider's clinical decision on whether or not to test a patient." Lim said she has not left her 500-square-foot studio apartment since receiving the diagnosis and stays on the other side of the room from her husband, who doctors said was probably positive but asymptomatic. "We just have to do this weird little dance where we trade places if we need to be in the other's 'space,' " she said. Her husband emerges only briefly to walk their toy poodles, wearing a mask and staying within 40 feet of the apartment. For others, that level of isolation hasn't been possible. One L.A. mother, who spoke on the condition of anonymity, said her doctor told her March 3 that he suspected her high fever and pneumonia were due to the coronavirus. He told her to self-quarantine while waiting for the public health department to test her. But despite making "a million calls to a bunch of different people," she was never tested. Last week, her doctor told her she didn't qualify and there was nothing he could do. As the days drew on, she struggled to avoid family members she lives with, including her school-age child, and ultimately feared she might have passed the virus to her child's classmates. "If there are more cases like mine, these are the reasons this is spreading so much," she said. -- Times staff writer Emily Baumgaertner contributed to this report. Caption: PHOTO: BRIAN BOWLAND is a senior clinical lab specialist in microbiology at UCLA Health working on testing to detect COVID-19. Tests have been in short supply. PHOTOGRAPHER:Al Seib Los Angeles Times 
Mar 17, 2020	Federal and state officials on Monday said they had finally turned a corner on the coronavirus pandemic and promised a massive expansion of testing, but hopes remained dim in hospitals and clinics as patients still awaited results and overworked doctors sharply questioned the government’s latest pledge. Some physicians in Los Angeles County said it is still nearly impossible to order a coronavirus test because the process is slowed by bureaucratic hurdles and shortages of key materials. “The testing spigot has definitely not opened up,” said one L.A. County emergency room doctor. She still faces tight restrictions on which patients qualify for testing and then has to wait for results for five days, she said. Leigha Hodnet, 42, said she was still waiting for test results nearly one week after she and her partner were tested at a lab in Burbank. “We’re trying to self-quarantine, but it’s just really crazy,” said Hodnet, who lives in Echo Park and said her symptoms included a fever, cough and extreme fatigue. “One way to stop it is to make sure everyone can get tested and self-quarantine. But if they can’t, that’s how this becomes a pandemic.” The ongoing problems come as the nation approaches a critical moment in its battle against the pandemic, with infections mounting, schools and businesses closing, and the economy at risk of tipping into a recession. If widespread testing doesn’t accelerate, health experts fear more extreme safety measures, such as mandatory home isolation and city lockdowns, may be necessary. “I’ve said many times, and I’ll repeat it: The worst is, yes, ahead for us. It is how we respond to that challenge that’s going to determine what the ultimate endpoint is going to be,” said Dr. Anthony Fauci, director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, part of the National Institutes of Health. The lack of widespread testing early on in the U.S. made it nearly impossible to track the virus and ultimately forced the closure of schools and businesses in many cities nationwide in a desperate attempt to stop the spread of the contagion. Officials insist change is coming. By the end of the week, more than 2,000 commercial labs across the nation will be performing coronavirus tests using high-speed machines that can process many samples at once, federal officials said Sunday. About 1.9 million tests would be available by the end of the week, officials said. California will be running 8,000 tests a day in about a week, when the commercial lab company Quest opens up two more labs, said Gov. Gavin Newsom in a news conference Sunday. “We are increasing our capacity on an hourly basis, not just a daily basis,” Newsom said. The acceleration comes as officials attempt to compensate for a cascade of federal missteps and delays that experts say left the United States far behind other countries in its tracking of the novel coronavirus. As of Monday, the U.S. had tested roughly 40,000 people for the virus, while South Korea, a country six times smaller, had tested more than 260,000. “You cannot fight a fire blindfolded, and we cannot stop this pandemic if we do not know who is infected,” said World Health Organization director Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus on Monday. “We have a simple message for all countries: test, test, test.” As of Sunday, 8,316 coronavirus tests had been conducted in California. And less than one-third of those were processed in the state’s 19 public health laboratories, which are suffering shortages of testing components and lack of machinery and staffing. The rest have been analyzed in commercial facilities and labs at universities and private hospitals, including Stanford and several University of California facilities. The U.S. testing problems began early in the outbreak, when the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention distributed a faulty test to public health labs around the country. Once the issue was remedied, it took weeks to supply states with adequate test kits, as the number of suspected patients who required testing continued to climb. A shortage in basic testing chemicals, called reagents, slowed the process down further. That issue persists for local officials who are struggling to contain the spread of the virus. L.A. County public health chief Barbara Ferrer said that though the county’s testing capacity had “increased dramatically” in recent days, to a rate of about 300 samples per day, the county is still waiting for the federal government to supply more reagent. “If we don’t fix that reagent shortage very soon, then our capacity for testing at the public health labs will be dramatically reduced again,” Ferrer said at a news conference Monday. About 1,100 people in total have been tested in the county, the public health department said. The Bay Area is experiencing similar problems. One physician experienced the COVID-19 testing mess firsthand last week. Officials told him that his high fever, chills and cough did not qualify him for a COVID-19 test but that he could get tested for the flu, since he hadn’t had contact with anyone who had traveled to a country with an outbreak. “The tests are so preciously few in availability that the only people who can get tested are the only people who meet very stringent criteria, and in my opinion that criteria are kind of ridiculous,” he said. “It’s a circular thing because how do you know if you’ve been having any contact with COVID-19 patients if hardly anyone is getting tested.” In L.A. County, doctors said it seemed like the testing restrictions were intended to avoid overwhelming the commercial labs, Quest and LabCorp. “It’s very cautious and restrictive,” said one emergency room doctor in the county, who was not authorized to speak to the media. “We don’t know if it’s an issue of machines, manpower, reagents, or what. But it seems like Quest and LabCorp do not actually have the capacity for all these samples pouring in, and we don’t want to overwhelm them.” Dr. Anthony Cardillo, chief executive of Mend, the urgent care clinic that treated Hodnet, the Echo Park woman, said the delay in receiving her test results stems from a backlog at Quest. The company, he said, was overloaded with people sending in tests to be run when the lab came online last week. Quest decided to freeze the samples and run them this week and next week, prioritizing people with more severe symptoms, Cardillo said. He said that Quest reduced the backlog over the weekend, but Mend staff still tell patients it could take up to two weeks for their results to come back. “There’s no way to predict that — there’s no hard answer,” he said. “It’s like trying to ask a pilot who’s circling in the fog, when they’re going to land — whenever the fog clears.” Thus far, Quest has been running 1,200 tests daily at a single lab in San Juan Capistrano. Two additional labs will come online within the next week, together running up to 5,500 samples a day, Newsom said Sunday. Quest cited even more ambitious estimates Monday. Officials said daily testing capacity could be as high as 10,000 by the end of the week, and planned to double that rate by April 1. “We’re now in a new phase of testing,” said Adm. Brett P. Giroir, assistant secretary for health at the Department of Health and Human Services, at the Sunday White House briefing. But the weeks-long testing debacle continues to affect Californians, including Renee Schwartz, who was sick for weeks with a fever and dry cough, the hallmarks of COVID-19. After weeks of being unable to get tested, she visited UCLA last week to meet with an infectious disease doctor to be evaluated for testing. But she was denied again because her fever had broken, though she still had a nasty cough. “Everything else got ruled out, it’s the only thing it can be,” said Schwartz, who lives in North Hills. “If somebody could tell me where to go, I’d go. I think it’s a total cluster you-know-what.” Her symptoms are improving, but she says she still has only about 70% of her normal energy level. She had been holing up in her home, but has now stopped, hoping she is no longer contagious. “I don’t know what else to do. It’s been 20 days,” Schwartz said. Times staff writers Phil Willon and Colleen Shalby contributed to this report. 
Mar 17, 2020	Federal and state officials on Monday said they had finally turned a corner on the coronavirus pandemic and promised a massive expansion of testing, but hopes remained dim in hospitals and clinics as patients still awaited results and overworked doctors sharply questioned the government's latest pledge. Some physicians in Los Angeles County said it is still nearly impossible to order a coronavirus test because the process is slowed by bureaucratic hurdles and shortages of key materials. "The testing spigot has definitely not opened up," said one L.A. County emergency room doctor. She still faces tight restrictions on which patients qualify for testing and then has to wait for results for five days, she said. Leigha Hodnet, 42, said she was still waiting for test results nearly one week after she and her partner were tested at a lab in Burbank. "We're trying to self-quarantine, but it's just really crazy," said Hodnet, who lives in Echo Park and said her symptoms included a fever, cough and extreme fatigue. "One way to stop it is to make sure everyone can get tested and self-quarantine. But if they can't, that's how this becomes a pandemic."  The ongoing problems come as the nation approaches a critical moment in its battle against the pandemic, with infections mounting, schools and businesses closing, and the economy at risk of tipping into a recession. If widespread testing doesn't accelerate, health experts fear more extreme safety measures, such as mandatory home isolation and city lockdowns, may be necessary. "I've said many times, and I'll repeat it: The worst is, yes, ahead for us. It is how we respond to that challenge that's going to determine what the ultimate endpoint is going to be," said Dr. Anthony Fauci, director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, part of the National Institutes of Health. The lack of widespread testing early on in the U.S. made it nearly impossible to track the virus and ultimately forced the closure of schools and businesses in many cities nationwide in a desperate attempt to stop the spread of the contagion. Officials insist change is coming. By the end of the week, more than 2,000 commercial labs across the nation will be performing coronavirus tests using high-speed machines that can process many samples at once, federal officials said Sunday. About 1.9 million tests would be available by the end of the week, officials said. California will be running 8,000 tests a day in about a week, when the commercial lab company Quest opens up two more labs, said Gov. Gavin Newsom in a news conference Sunday. "We are increasing our capacity on an hourly basis, not just a daily basis," he said. The acceleration comes as officials attempt to compensate for a cascade of federal missteps and delays that experts say left the United States far behind other countries in its tracking of the novel coronavirus. As of Monday, the U.S. had tested roughly 40,000 people for the virus, while South Korea, a country six times smaller, had tested more than 260,000. "You cannot fight a fire blindfolded, and we cannot stop this pandemic if we do not know who is infected," said World Health Organization director Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus on Monday. "We have a simple message for all countries: test, test, test." As of Sunday, 8,316 coronavirus tests had been conducted in California. And less than one-third of those were processed in the state's 19 public health laboratories, which are suffering shortages of testing components and lack of machinery and staffing. The rest have been analyzed in commercial facilities and labs at universities and private hospitals, including Stanford and several University of California facilities. The U.S. testing problems began early in the outbreak, when the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention distributed a faulty test to public health labs around the country. Once the issue was remedied, it took weeks to supply states with adequate test kits, as the number of suspected patients who required testing continued to climb. A shortage in basic testing chemicals, called reagents, slowed the process down further. That issue persists for local officials who are struggling to contain the spread of the virus. L.A. County public health chief Barbara Ferrer said that though the county's testing capacity had "increased dramatically" in recent days, to a rate of about 300 samples per day, the county is still waiting for the federal government to supply more reagent. "If we don't fix that reagent shortage very soon, then our capacity for testing at the public health labs will be dramatically reduced again," Ferrer said at a news conference Monday. About 1,100 people in total have been tested in the county, the public health department said. The Bay Area is experiencing similar problems. One physician experienced the COVID-19 testing mess firsthand last week. Officials told him that his high fever, chills and cough did not qualify him for a COVID-19 test but that he could get tested for the flu, since he hadn't had contact with anyone who had traveled to a country with an outbreak. "The tests are so preciously few in availability that the only people who can get tested are the only people who meet very stringent criteria, and in my opinion that criteria are kind of ridiculous," he said. "It's a circular thing because how do you know if you've been having any contact with COVID-19 patients if hardly anyone is getting tested." In L.A. County, doctors said it seemed as if the testing restrictions were intended to avoid overwhelming the commercial labs, Quest and LabCorp. "It's very cautious and restrictive," said one emergency room doctor in the county, who was not authorized to speak to the media. "We don't know if it's an issue of machines, manpower, reagents, or what. But it seems like Quest and LabCorp do not actually have the capacity for all these samples pouring in, and we don't want to overwhelm them." Dr. Anthony Cardillo, chief executive of Mend, the urgent care clinic that treated Hodnet, the Echo Park woman, said the delay in receiving her test results stems from a backlog at Quest. The company, Cardillo said, was overloaded with people sending in tests to be run when the lab came online last week. Quest decided to freeze the samples and run them this week and next week, prioritizing people with more severe symptoms, Cardillo said. He said that Quest reduced the backlog over the weekend, but that Mend staff still tell patients it could take up to two weeks for their results to come back. "There's no way to predict that -- there's no hard answer," he said. "It's like trying to ask a pilot who's circling in the fog, when they're going to land -- whenever the fog clears." Thus far, Quest has been running 1,200 tests daily at a single lab in San Juan Capistrano. Two additional labs will come online within the next week, together running up to 5,500 samples a day, Newsom said Sunday. Quest cited even more ambitious estimates Monday. Officials said daily testing capacity could be as high as 10,000 by the end of the week, and planned to double that rate by April 1. "We're now in a new phase of testing," said Adm. Brett P. Giroir, assistant secretary for health at the Department of Health and Human Services, at the Sunday White House briefing. But the weeks-long testing debacle continues to affect Californians, including Renee Schwartz, who was sick for weeks with a fever and dry cough, the hallmarks of COVID-19. After weeks of being unable to get tested, she visited UCLA last week to meet with an infectious disease doctor to be evaluated for testing. But she was denied again because her fever had broken, though she still had a nasty cough. "Everything else got ruled out, it's the only thing it can be," said Schwartz, who lives in North Hills. "If somebody could tell me where to go, I'd go. I think it's a total cluster you-know-what." Her symptoms are improving, but she says she still has only about 70% of her normal energy level. She had been holing up in her home, but has now stopped, hoping she is no longer contagious. "I don't know what else to do. It's been 20 days," Schwartz said. -- Times staff writers Phil Willon and Colleen Shalby contributed to this report. Caption: PHOTO: A DRIVE-THROUGH coronavirus test facility in San Francisco. The U.S. has tested 40,000 people so far. South Korea -- six times smaller -- has tested 260,000. PHOTOGRAPHER:Josh Edelson AFP/Getty Images PHOTO:MEDICAL workers at a drive-through test clinic at the San Mateo County Event Center on Monday. PHOTOGRAPHER:Justin Sullivan Getty Images 
Mar 17, 2020	The neighbors were free at last. After weeks of confinement to their apartments because one person in the building had tested positive for coronavirus, they were throwing a party to celebrate his recovery and their release. It was Feb. 24, and Mr. Wang, a resident of Xuzhou, in Jiangsu province, appeared to have emerged victorious from a monthlong battle with the illness. Sixty-five residents of his building gathered downstairs to greet Wang with bouquets of pink flowers, a cake with a flamingo on it, and a red banner that read: "With strong neighborly feelings, we welcome you home."  They pressed in close around him for a group photo that was captured in a local news video. Three days later, though, Wang tested positive for the coronavirus again. He was re-hospitalized and his neighbors were locked down once more. His current condition is unknown. Wang, whose full name has not been disclosed for privacy reasons, is one of more than 100 reported cases of Chinese patients who have been released from hospitals as survivors of the new coronavirus -- only to test positive for it a second time in the bewildering math of this mysterious illness. The science surrounding these apparent reinfections is further complicated by China's handling of the outbreak, which since January has been marred by faulty testing procedures and questionable case counting methods with shifting definitions. In addition, the overburdened healthcare system has put pressure on doctors to discharge people who may not have fully recovered to free up beds for newly infected patients. China has been praised in recent weeks by the World Health Organization for containing the virus. But the Communist Party's early moves to suppress public knowledge on the extent of infections prompt concerns over the accuracy of information about recovered patients who retest positive but may have been misdiagnosed in the first place. Such cases account for less than 0.2% of China's total infections -- not enough to cause alarm. But they are raising questions in China about the reliability of diagnostic tests, the possibility of reinfection and whether patients are wrongly designated as "recovered" and released too early from hospitals. Although most patients who retest positive do not display clinical symptoms, some have developed fevers and other signs of the virus. One such patient, a 36-year-old man, died in Wuhan on March 2, five days after being declared recovered. His diagnosis, according to hospital reports published in local media before they were censored, was respiratory tract obstruction, respiratory failure and COVID-19, the official name for the illness caused by the coronavirus. China's National Health Commission says 68,799 out of 81,116 confirmed COVID-19 patients have recovered, and 3,231 have died. There is no official record of how many recovered patients have retested positive and returned to hospitals, but such cases have been reported in the provinces of Hubei, Guangdong, Hainan, Sichuan and Jiangsu, and the cities of Tianjin and Chongqing. Officials responsible for the coronavirus response in Guangdong announced Feb. 25 that 14% of declared recoveries in the province had later retested positive. The dynamic is also playing out in other countries: Two such cases have emerged in Japan and South Korea, though the Korean patient has been released from hospital after retesting negative five times. Scientists in and outside China agree that reinfection is a highly unlikely explanation for the patients who retest positive. They say testing errors are more likely to blame -- either false negatives that resulted in patients being discharged too early, or false positives when they retested and were taken back into hospital. Those errors could be attributed to contaminated test samples, human error while taking swabs, or an oversensitive nucleic acid test that detects strands of virus. When a person gets sick with any kind of viral infection, their immune system naturally develops antibodies that should protect them from contracting the illness again after they've recovered. Even in cases where that immunity wears off, it shouldn't be as quick as within a few days or weeks, said Dr. Keiji Fukuda, director of Hong Kong University's School of Public Health. "If you get an infection, your immune system is revved up against that virus," he said. "To get reinfected again when you're in that situation would be quite unusual unless your immune system was not functioning right." What's more likely is that people are being released from hospitals while still carrying dormant fragments of the disease that are not infectious but resemble the virus when put through a nucleic acid test, he said. "The test may be positive, but the infection is not there," he said. Another possibility is that the level of virus fell below the threshold that tests could detect but then resurfaced, said Dr. Clifford Lane, deputy director for Clinical Research and Special Projects at the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases. "So it looks like they cleared the virus and then the virus came back," Lane said. "But they never really cleared it and they had a more prolonged course of infection." Lane was one of only two U.S. experts in a World Health Organization delegation that visited China in February. He said Chinese experts told the visitors that there were no examples of people who became "reinfected." The best way to prove reinfection, Lane said, would be to sequence the genomes of the initial and subsequent viruses that circulated in a patient. If there is a difference between the two, that would suggest that the virus had mutated enough to evade the patient's antibodies and prompt a second infection. Developing a vaccine would be significantly more difficult if the virus is changing fast enough to cause true reinfections. It would undermine the immunity patients develop from natural infections. It's too early to know the true cause of these apparent reinfections, Lane said, especially because cases are so rare. "These are exceptions," he added. "These are not the rule." Another potential explanation is that some patients may also have been discharged too early because of pressure on hospitals to free up beds for new patients. "If you don't discharge them, who's going to save the other patients? You need to make trade-offs," one unnamed doctor said in a report by the Paper, a Shanghai-based news outlet. A doctor at a Wuhan hospital told the Paper that he'd seen discharged patients still using oxygen tanks, having trouble walking and displaying obvious clinical symptoms, including serious lung infections, in February. Some of the recovered patients had worse clinical symptoms than the new, mild cases entering the hospitals, he said. But the situation improved in late February, when fewer patients turned up at Wuhan's hospitals, enabling them to keep patients longer. Chinese authorities claim that none of the patients who tested positive again have infected others. If true, it's an encouraging sign that even if some discharged patients are still carrying low levels of the virus, they are not contagious. But one study by Chinese scientists published last month in the Journal of the American Medical Assn. raised questions about testing. The study examined four medical workers in Wuhan, all infected with coronavirus and then declared recovered according to national criteria. But five to 13 days after the four were released from quarantine, they all tested positive again. They were then each given three repeat tests over the next four to five days. All were positive. Dr. Dale Fisher, professor of medicine at the National University of Singapore and another participant in the WHO's China delegation, said the apparent reappearance of coronavirus in recovered patients was probably because of "excessive" testing and follow-up on discharged cases in China. "The outbreak is being driven by people who are spreading it in those first five days while they're symptomatic and before they're isolated ... when people are going around coughing and undiagnosed, infecting people," he said. "The things to worry about are at the other end of the illness." -- Times staff writer Victoria Kim in Seoul and Nicole Liu of The Times' Beijing bureau contributed to this report. Caption: PHOTO: AT A hospital in Wuhan, medical staffers speak with a COVID-19 patient. China, Japan and South Korea have reported cases in which patients declared recovered have tested positive after being discharged from hospitals. PHOTOGRAPHER: AFP/Getty Images PHOTO:CHINESE President Xi Jinping speaks to hospital workers in Wuhan by video earlier this month. PHOTOGRAPHER:Xie Huanchi New China News Agency 
Mar 17, 2020	Talk swirling around the 2020 Tokyo Olympics in recent weeks, some people suggesting the coronavirus outbreak will force a postponement, might seem reasonable. Professional sports leagues around the globe have suspended play. The NCAA canceled March Madness. Even President Trump has weighed in on the fate of the upcoming Summer Games. "I would say maybe they postpone it for a year," he told reporters. "I like that better than having empty stadiums all over the place."  But the response from Olympic leaders and Japanese officials has been adamant, a repeated insistence on forging ahead. At a Saturday news conference, Prime Minister Shinzo Abe said: "We will overcome the spread of the infection and host the Olympics without problem, as planned." This reaction underscores two important points: The Games are still more than four months away and, just as significantly, shifting them to another date would be very tricky business. "This is a global event, the staging of it is massive," said Mark Dyreson, a sports historian at Penn State. "It's a really tough decision because it has all sorts of ripple effects." Since the modern Olympics began in 1896, they have remained largely immune to outside forces. They were not delayed in the waning days of the 1918 Spanish flu pandemic that killed tens of millions or when the Seine River flooded shortly before the 1924 Paris Games. The Zika virus could not stop them in 2016. Only the first and second World Wars were big enough to force a cancellation on three occasions, including once in Tokyo. The contract that host cities must sign gives the International Olympic Committee almost total say over any such actions without a penalty for violating terms. If the Games were to proceed, there might be a huge obstacle when it comes to deciding who gets to participate because a growing list of international federations and national committees have canceled or postponed qualifying events. Depending on when the virus subsides, there might not be time to pick teams in the traditional manner. The IOC also has standards -- minimum times or scores required to qualify -- which might go by the wayside if athletes aren't given a reasonable chance to compete. But, for now, most of the focus has been on when, or whether, to hold the Olympics. When longtime IOC member Dick Pound recently spoke with the Associated Press about a potential change, he suggested that cancellation -- as opposed to relocation or postponement -- would be the most likely outcome. "This is the new war and you have to face it," he said of the coronavirus outbreak, adding that he and his colleagues must ask themselves: "Is this under sufficient control that we can be confident about going to Tokyo or not?" In the Japanese capital, a government minister faced immediate pushback when she suggested the host-city contract might allow for a short delay, say two or three months. There was similar reaction last week when the head of the organizing committee called a news conference to chastise one of his board members, who had mentioned the possibility of waiting one or two years. "There is no plan now to change our plans," Yoshiro Mori told reporters, adding that the board member had apologized. The biggest problem with a postponement is timing. There are dozens of international federations that govern each summer sport; many of them step aside for the Olympics but, in other years, hold major world championships. From badminton to track, these federations have already picked host cities for 2021 and beyond. Venues have been chosen, preparations begun. Television and sponsorship contracts have been signed. Finding an open date from spring through fall -- three weeks that do not intrude on one or more of these competitions -- would be difficult. It would be close to impossible in 2022, when the Winter Games in Beijing and the World Cup in Qatar are scheduled to take place. Another major concern is television. In the U.S., NBCUniversal has paid billions for broadcast rights. If, as the Japanese minister suggested, the Games were shifted by even a couple of months, they would land in the middle of football season. Globally, foreign networks have other popular sports to think about. "They want the summer," Dyreson said. "That's when there is a lot of broadcast time open." Corporate sponsors have planned advertising campaigns and, perhaps, product launches. Even athletes might struggle with a change, which would disrupt their long-range training schedule. The situation in Japan is similarly complex. From an economic standpoint, a cluster of high-rise buildings has been constructed for the athlete's village; those thousands of units are scheduled to be sold off as expensive condominiums after the Games. Having them sit vacant for a year or more would be costly. Yet holding the Games this summer could also be problematic if the spread of the virus does not abate. Tokyo could fall well short of expected tourism revenues. "It's too close to China and South Korea," said George Belch, a San Diego State marketing professor and senior associate dean. "I just don't think you're going to see as many people willing to go there." As deliberations continue, Sens. Jerry Moran (R-Kan.) and Richard Blumenthal (D-Conn.) have sent a letter to IOC President Thomas Bach, asking for details about preventing the transmission of coronavirus among athletes and fans at the Games. The legislators worried that "many questions remain unanswered." It is equally unclear how much time the IOC has to assess the situation. Pound estimates that a final determination could wait until late May, two months before the scheduled July 24 opening ceremony. But over the weekend, fellow IOC member John Coates of Australia said there is no set time frame. "It's never been the IOC's position," Coates told the Sydney Morning Herald. "It was Dick's idea. There is four months to go." Coates and his colleagues are hoping the situation improves before summer. "I can see the IOC delaying the decision for as long as possible," Dyreson said. "Because moving the Games would be such a headache." Caption: PHOTO: ACTOR Gerard Butler runs during the Olympic torch relay of the 2020 Tokyo Olympic Games in Sparta, Greece. The remaining torch relay has been suspended. PHOTOGRAPHER: Associated Press
Mar 16, 2020	Talk swirling around the 2020 Tokyo Olympics in recent weeks, some people suggesting the coronavirus outbreak will force a postponement, might seem reasonable. Professional sports leagues around the globe have suspended play. The NCAA canceled March Madness. Even President Trump has weighed in on the fate of the upcoming Summer Games. “I would say maybe they postpone it for a year,” he told reporters. “I like that better than having empty stadiums all over the place.” But the response from Olympic leaders and Japanese officials has been adamant, a repeated insistence on forging ahead. At a Saturday news conference, Prime Minister Shinzo Abe said: “We will overcome the spread of the infection and host the Olympics without problem, as planned.” This reaction underscores two important points: The Games are still more than four months away and, just as significantly, shifting them to another date would be very tricky business. “This is a global event, the staging of it is massive,” said Mark Dyreson, a sports historian at Penn State. “It’s a really tough decision because it has all sorts of ripple effects.” Since the modern Olympics began in 1896, they have remained largely immune to outside forces. They were not delayed in the waning days of the 1918 Spanish flu pandemic that killed tens of millions or when the Seine River flooded shortly before the 1924 Paris Games. The Zika virus could not stop them in 2016. Newsletter Get our free Coronavirus Today newsletter Sign up for the latest news, best stories and what they mean for you, plus answers to your questions. Sign Me Up You may occasionally receive promotional content from the Los Angeles Times. Only the first and second World Wars were big enough to force a cancellation on three occasions, including once in Tokyo. The contract that host cities must sign gives the International Olympic Committee almost total say over any such actions without a penalty for violating terms. If the Games were to proceed, there might be a huge obstacle when it comes to deciding who gets to participate because a growing list of international federations and national committees have canceled or postponed qualifying events. Depending on when the virus subsides, there might not be time to pick teams in the traditional manner. The IOC also has standards – minimum times or scores required to qualify – which might go by the wayside if athletes aren’t given a reasonable chance to compete. But, for now, most of the focus has been on when, or whether, to hold the Olympics. When longtime IOC member Dick Pound recently spoke with the Associated Press about a potential change, he suggested that cancellation — as opposed to relocation or postponement — would be the most likely outcome. “This is the new war and you have to face it,” he said of the coronavirus outbreak, adding that he and his colleagues must ask themselves: “Is this under sufficient control that we can be confident about going to Tokyo or not?” In the Japanese capital, a government minister faced immediate pushback when she suggested the host-city contract might allow for a short delay, say two or three months. There was similar reaction last week when the head of the organizing committee called a news conference to chastise one of his board members, who had mentioned the possibility of waiting one or two years. “There is no plan now to change our plans,” Yoshiro Mori told reporters, adding that the board member had apologized. The biggest problem with a postponement is timing. There are dozens of international federations that govern each summer sport; many of them step aside for the Olympics but, in other years, hold major world championships. From badminton to track, these federations have already picked host cities for 2021 and beyond. Venues have been chosen, preparations begun. Television and sponsorship contracts have been signed. Finding an open date from spring through fall — three weeks that do not intrude on one or more of these competitions — would be difficult. It would be close to impossible in 2022, when the Winter Games in Beijing and the World Cup in Qatar are scheduled to take place. Another major concern is television. In the U.S., NBCUniversal has paid billions for broadcast rights. If, as the Japanese minister suggested, the Games were shifted by even a couple of months, they would land in the middle of football season. Globally, foreign networks have other popular sports to think about. “They want the summer,” Dyreson said. “That’s when there is a lot of broadcast time open.” Corporate sponsors have planned advertising campaigns and, perhaps, product launches. Even athletes might struggle with a change, which would disrupt their long-range training schedule. The situation in Japan is similarly complex. From an economic standpoint, a cluster of high-rise buildings has been constructed for the athlete’s village; those thousands of units are scheduled to be sold off as expensive condominiums after the Games. Having them sit vacant for a year or more would be costly. Yet holding the Games this summer could also be problematic if the spread of the virus does not abate. Tokyo could fall well short of expected tourism revenues. “It’s too close to China and South Korea,” said George Belch, a San Diego State marketing professor and senior associate dean. “I just don’t think you’re going to see as many people willing to go there.” As deliberations continue, Senators Jerry Moran (R-Kan.) and Richard Blumenthal (D-Conn.) have sent a letter to IOC President Thomas Bach, asking for details about preventing the transmission of coronavirus among athletes and fans at the Games. The legislators worried that “many questions remain unanswered.” It is equally unclear how much time the IOC has to assess the situation. Pound estimates that a final determination could wait until late May, two months before the scheduled July 24 opening ceremony. But over the weekend, fellow IOC member John Coates of Australia said there is no set time frame. “It’s never been the IOC’s position,” Coates told the Sydney Morning Herald. “It was Dick’s idea. There is four months to go.” Coates and his colleagues are hoping the situation improves before summer. “I can see the IOC delaying the decision for as long as possible,” Dyreson said. “Because moving the Games would be such a headache.”
Mar 16, 2020	In mid-February, as a surprise snowstorm swept across the Korean peninsula and the country basked in the afterglow of "Parasite's" Oscar win, South Korea's coronavirus spread was looking manageable. The country had about 30 infections, largely from known contact with travelers from China. None had died. South Korean President Moon Jae-in -- as it turns out, quite prematurely -- told a group of business leaders the threat from the virus would be over "before long." All the while, behind the scenes, a network of laboratories was quietly ramping up capacity for the possibility of widespread transmission. They were ready.  In the first weeks of February, the country had tested nearly 10,000 patients for the novel coronavirus -- the vast majority of them getting the all-clear -- in an effort to detect as many cases as possible. In the weeks since, South Korea has been on average testing 12,000 patients a day -- about as many as the U.S. has managed to test over the last two weeks. Authorities here have collected samples at 50 drive-through clinics across the country. A South Korean innovation that's sprung up in Germany, the U.K. and Australia and has also been embraced by President Trump, the setup allows drivers to remain in their cars as they answer a brief questionnaire, have their temperature taken and get swabbed inside the nose. It takes about 10 minutes, compared with the hour or so walk-in clinics can take, while minimizing exposure to health workers and other patients in waiting rooms. South Korea has also set up mobile testing stations and home visits, and can conclude in a matter of hours whether someone has been infected. Even as the ranks of the infected swelled by several thousand, the aggressive testing has given health officials here the ability to spot outbreaks as they emerge, focus resources on those areas and isolate those with the potential to spread the virus. "The enormous testing capability allows us to identify patients early and minimize the harmful effects," Vice Minister of Health and Welfare Kim Gang-lip told reporters. "This is the most important means of fending off a contagious disease outbreak." As of Sunday, South Korea had confirmed more than 8,000 coronavirus patients and 75 deaths -- after having tested more than 250,000 in about a month and a half. The early detection, isolation and treatment have translated into a low mortality rate of less than 1%, compared with more than 3% worldwide. In the U.S., with six times the population of South Korea, more than 3,700 infections had been reported and 69 have died as of Sunday. But even more concerning is what's unknown. With the limited availability of testing, doctors and public health officials are having to pick and choose whom to test -- raising concern about the untold others unknowingly spreading the deadly virus. "The system is not really geared to what we need right now," Dr. Anthony Fauci, director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, said of the U.S.'s testing capabilities at a hearing before the House Oversight and Reform Committee last week. "That is a failing. Let's admit it." How South Korea accelerated its coronavirus testing, while early missteps left the U.S. lagging far behind, is a story of flexibility, preparedness and painful lessons from a past fumble. Much of South Korea's current disease control response system was forged after a 2015 local outbreak of Middle East respiratory syndrome, or MERS, caused by a different coronavirus. At the time, the Korea Centers for Disease Control and Prevention found itself unable to handle the abrupt surge in demand for tens of thousands of tests amid the largest outbreak outside Saudi Arabia, which ultimately killed 38 patients and infected nearly 200. The experience led the country to overhaul its CDC and pass laws to prepare for the next epidemic. Central to the changes was the ability to cut through a bureaucratic months-long process to get test kits rapidly approved and working during an emergency. The Zika virus epidemic of 2016 served as a small-scale dry run of the new system. As luck would have it, last December, the South Korean government held a mock disease response drill -- under the premise of a coronavirus outbreak. By Jan. 11, when China had reported just 41 cases and the World Health Organization was discounting the prospect of human-to-human transmission, South Korea was distributing tests even though it wasn't yet possible to test for the specific strand of the novel coronavirus causing the outbreak in Wuhan. By Jan. 31, with seven known cases in South Korea, test kits based on the virus' genetic code released by China had been distributed to local government labs across the country. By the time authorities discovered a large cluster of thousands of infections in the southeastern city of Daegu in late February, the network of public health institutions and private labs and hospitals was prepared. Early on, officials dropped the requirement that patients had to have traveled abroad in order to be tested, a criteria that has been an impediment to testing in America. When it became clear many of those who had attended the services of an obscure religious sect had been infected, authorities tested all of those with symptoms among the church's more than 200,000 members. When outbreaks developed at a psych ward and at a call center, authorities called for a nationwide survey of all locked psych wards and all call centers. Officials also began screening all pneumonia patients with no known causes for the novel coronavirus. Hong Ki-ho, director of laboratory medicine at Seoul Medical Center, who is also a member of the COVID-19 task force at the Korean Society for Laboratory Medicine, said the country's CDC, private labs and manufacturers had all contributed to the unprecedented scale-up of testing. "It feels like a miracle that it all came together like this," he said, noting the chaos and confusion the delays in testing caused during the MERS outbreak. "It's so many times the scale of what it was during MERS, and we had so little time to prepare." Another key component of South Korea's response is making tests free for the vast majority of those who have been screened, and covering the cost of their hospitalization and treatment. Even those who request a test without a doctor's note can do so at the moderate cost of about $130. After a peak in late February, when the number of infections was rising by as many as 900 cases a day, the pace of new infections in South Korea has slowed to 76 new cases reported Sunday. With new clusters being discovered in the densely packed Seoul metropolitan area last week, South Korea still faces challenges. That hasn't stopped the country from holding itself out as a model for other nations, highlighting the fact that it appears to be gaining a handle on the outbreak without the drastic travel restrictions China, the U.S. and other countries have imposed on their citizens. "Public trust can only be earned and harnessed through full openness and transparency," Lee Tae-ho, vice minister of foreign affairs, told reporters. "This public trust has resulted in a very high level of civic awareness and voluntary cooperation that strengthens our collective effort to overcome this public health emergency." Caption: PHOTO: ANIMAL RESEARCH facility supervisor Kim Seung-yeon prepares to enter a testing lab last week at the International Vaccine Institute in Seoul. PHOTOGRAPHER:Ed Jones AFP/Getty Images 
Mar 16, 2020	A Chinese citizen living in Massachusetts became ill this month, with symptoms consistent with the coronavirus. She went to a local hospital and asked to be tested three times, but her request was denied. Frustrated, she flew to China -- and tested positive upon arrival. According to Chinese officials, who provided the details, she is one of the nation's 114 imported coronavirus cases, the newest concern for the country where the coronavirus pandemic began. Seven weeks ago, 5 million people fled Wuhan and an unknown number left the country as China went into lockdown in a move to combat the deadly virus' spread.  But with many governments abroad failing to act swiftly to implement testing, prepare hospitals and medical workers or implement tough social distancing practices, infections and deaths are mounting worldwide. And now, in an ironic twist, some Chinese living abroad are returning to China for testing and medical help. The case from Massachusetts was reported by Beijing health authorities at a news conference Saturday. The woman, who was identified only by her surname, Li, was originally from Chongqing, Chinese authorities said, without specifying what work she did or how long she'd lived in Massachusetts. She'd attended a Feb. 26-27 company meeting where another attendee later tested positive for coronavirus, she told Chinese authorities. She said she began exhibiting symptoms on March 1: chills, then a fever of 102 degrees, then a cough, runny nose, nausea, muscle aches and fatigue. Chinese officials said that Li went to a hospital in Massachusetts on March 3 and she was given oseltamivir, an antiviral medication used for the flu. She returned to the same hospital on March 5 and Tuesday for chest scans, which turned out normal. On Wednesday, Chinese health authorities said, Li returned to the hospital for another chest scan, and it showed that her lungs were infected. But she was not admitted to the hospital. She requested to be tested for the coronavirus three times, but was rejected. On Thursday, Li flew with her husband and son from Los Angeles International Airport to Beijing on the 1 a.m. Air China flight, CA988. A flight attendant surnamed Sun told the Beijing News that Li was seated in an isolation area in the back of the plane, blocked from other passengers by a curtain, after she told the attendant she had low blood sugar. Li and her family were taken to a hospital upon arrival: She had a fever, fatigue and dry cough at the time. Her husband had fatigue and her son had no symptoms. She was tested and confirmed positive for coronavirus on Friday. Beijing authorities said 59 people who'd come into close contact with Li were all being monitored as well. The World Health Organization has praised China's tough measures of virus control for "flattening the curve" of the coronavirus outbreak through social distancing, contact tracing and strict quarantine of suspected and confirmed virus patients and their contacts. In recent days, China has reported new infections in the single digits. Beijing is now loosening domestic restrictions on movement, with downgraded emergency response levels in many provinces and an increasing number of companies slowly allowed to go back to work. But at the same time, concern is rising over imported cases, many of them Chinese nationals returning from other countries now struggling with coronavirus outbreaks. The first imported case was a 23-year-old translator who returned from Iran -- where nearly 14,000 people have been infected and more than 700 have died so far -- to his hometown in the Ningxia Hui Autonomous Region. The translator flew from Iran to Shanghai via Moscow on Feb. 19, according to local official reports, arrived on Feb. 20 and took consecutive trains to Lanzhou, the capital of Gansu province, then to his home in Zhongwei. Local reports recounted the flight and train numbers as well as seats he'd been in on every leg of the journey, and requested any close contacts to come forward. After that case, Beijing found several other imported cases from Iran of people who had been in close contact with the translator. Shanghai city and Zhejiang province, meanwhile, reported imported infections among Chinese nationals who returned from Italy, where more than 24,000 people have been infected and more than 1,800 have died. Guangdong province recently found an imported infection in a returnee from the Philippines, while Gansu reported imported cases from Saudi Arabia and Iran. On Sunday, China reported 20 new infections, 16 of which were imported, including five cases in Beijing: three travelers from Spain, one from Italy and the other from Thailand. The capital is now cracking down on arrivals from abroad: Beijing authorities announced Sunday that anyone flying into Beijing from abroad, starting at midnight March 16, would be subject to 14 days of quarantine in government centers. Those put in quarantine would have to pay for it themselves, authorities said. Anhui province and the city of Sanya in Hainan province have implemented similar measures, according to local reports. Other regions including Guangzhou, Shanghai, and several cities in Shandong province, close to South Korea, have required all incoming travelers to home quarantine for 14 days. Zhang Wenhong, head of the infectious diseases department at Shanghai's Huashan hospital, wrote in a widely shared article analyzing other countries' COVID-19 responses Sunday that the rise in cases abroad and imported cases brought "great risk" to China. "China has already been through the darkest hour. At first we believed that if China controlled [the outbreak] well, the world would also implement simultaneous controls, like Singapore, Japan, South Korea and other East Asian countries did very well," Zhang said. "Looking at the global virus response situation, it is basically impossible to control this outbreak by the end of summer," he said.
Mar 16, 2020	Interior Secretary David Bernhardt Friday tweeted a video of President Trump's declaration of a national emergency and lauded his boss for taking "decisive -- even unprecedented -- actions to protect the American people" from the coronavirus. But just two days earlier, Bernhardt's office had sent talking points to Interior officials that downplayed the virus threat. "While the situation could change rapidly, the threat to the American public today remains low ... Americans don't need to change their day-to-day lives but should stay informed and practice good hygiene," stated the two-page memo, which was obtained by The Times.  One of the points emphasized that "in South Korea, no one under the age of 30 has died from Coronavirus." After outlining steps the Trump administration had taken to deal with the coronavirus, the March 11 memo closed with paragraphs highlighting the strength of the nation's economy and advice on holding "large scale events (rallies)." "If there is an event tomorrow in a place where there is no community spread, I think the judgment to have it might be a good judgment. This is a decision that should be made by local leaders in these communities." The talking points were not signed, and the Interior Department did not respond to requests for comment Friday. The memo was dispatched even as leading health authorities were criticizing the Trump administration's mixed messages on the coronavirus threat and its halting response, which has lagged behind efforts by state and local governments. The same day that senior Interior officials received the talking points, Gov. Gavin Newsom asked Californians to cancel all gatherings of more than 250 people, after Washington Gov. Jay Inslee issued a similar order in his state. Los Angeles Mayor Eric Garcetti pushed the number down to 50, setting off a wave of cancellations of entertainment and sporting events. Los Angeles school officials on Friday announced that the nation's second-largest school system will shut down its 900 campuses starting Monday. While many private companies days ago nixed nonessential air travel and instructed most employees to work from home, federal agencies have taken a less aggressive posture. It wasn't until Thursday night that the White House officially advised federal agencies to let workers telecommute if they were in higher-risk groups or live in areas where the virus had spread through community contact. Hundreds of Defense Department employees attended the annual National Military Fish and Wildlife Assn. meeting in Omaha last week. At the Interior Department, some employees are still flying for work. An agency spokesperson said the department is reviewing "nonessential travel on a case-by-case basis." On Friday, the National Conservation Training Center in West Virginia announced it was postponing all courses and events through the end of March. A spokesperson for the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, which runs the center, said the move came in response to cancellations and customer concerns about the virus. -- Boxall reported from Los Angeles and Phillips from Washington, D.C. Caption: PHOTO: PRESIDENT Trump speaks on the virus Friday. A March 11 Interior memo said Americans "don't need to change their day-to-day lives but should stay informed." PHOTOGRAPHER:Jim Watson AFP/Getty Images
Mar 15, 2020	A Chinese citizen living in Massachusetts became ill this month, with symptoms consistent with the coronavirus. She went to a local hospital and asked to be tested three times, but was denied. Frustrated, she flew to China — and tested positive upon arrival. According to Chinese officials, who provided the details, she is one of the nation’s 114 imported coronavirus cases, the newest concern for the country where the coronavirus global pandemic began. Seven weeks ago, 5 million people fled Wuhan and an unknown number left the country as China went into lockdown in a move to combat the deadly virus’ spread. But with many governments abroad failing to act swiftly to implement testing, prepare hospitals and medical workers or implement tough social distancing practices, infections and deaths are mounting worldwide. And now, in an ironic twist, some Chinese living abroad are returning to China for testing and medical help. The imported case from Massachusetts was reported by Beijing health authorities at a news conference Saturday. The woman, who was identified only by her surname, Li, was originally from Chongqing, Chinese authorities said, without specifying what work she did or how long she’d lived in Massachusetts. She’d attended a Feb. 26-27 company meeting where another attendee later tested positive for coronavirus, she told Chinese authorities. She said she began exhibiting symptoms on March 1: chills, then a fever of 102 degrees, then a cough, runny nose, nausea, muscle aches and fatigue. Chinese officials said that Li went to a hospital in Massachusetts on March 3 and she was given oseltamivir, an antiviral medication used for the flu. She returned to the same hospital on March 5 and Tuesday for chest scans, which turned out normal. On Wednesday, Chinese health authorities said, Li returned to the hospital for another chest scan, and it showed that her lungs were infected. But she was not admitted to the hospital. She requested to be tested for the coronavirus three times, but was rejected. On Thursday, Li flew with her husband and son from Los Angeles International Airport to Beijing on the 1 a.m. Air China Flight 988. A flight attendant surnamed Sun told the Beijing News that Li was seated in an isolation area in the back of the plane, blocked from other passengers by a curtain, after she told the attendant she had low blood sugar. Li and her family were taken to a hospital upon arrival: She had a fever, fatigue and dry cough at the time. Her husband had fatigue and her son had no symptoms. She was tested and confirmed positive for coronavirus on Friday. Beijing authorities said 59 people who’d come into close contact with Li were all being monitored as well. The World Health Organization has praised China’s tough measures of virus control for “flattening the curve” of the coronavirus outbreak through social distancing, contact tracing, and strict quarantine of suspected and confirmed virus patients and their contacts. In recent days, China has reported new infections in the single digits. Beijing is now loosening domestic restrictions on movement, with downgraded emergency response levels in many provinces and an increasing number of companies slowly allowed to go back to work. But at the same time, concern is rising over imported cases, many of Chinese nationals returning from other countries now struggling with coronavirus outbreaks. The first imported case was of a 23-year-old translator who returned from Iran — where more than 12,000 people have been infected and more than 600 have died so far — to his hometown in the Ningxia Hui Autonomous Region. The translator flew from Iran to Shanghai via Moscow on Feb. 19, according to local official reports, arrived on Feb. 20 and took consecutive trains to Lanzhou, the capital of Gansu province, then to his home in Zhongwei. Local reports recounted the flight and train numbers as well as seats he’d been in on every leg of the journey, and requested any close contacts to come forward. After that case, Beijing found several other imported cases from Iran of people who had been in close contact with the translator. Shanghai city and Zhejiang province, meanwhile, reported imported infections among Chinese nationals who returned from Italy, where more than 21,000 people have been infected and more than 1,400 have died. Guangdong province recently found an imported infection in a Chinese national returned from the Philippines, while Gansu reported imported cases from Saudi Arabia and Iran. On Sunday, China reported 20 new infections, 16 of which were imported, including five cases in Beijing: three of travelers from Spain, one from Italy and the other from Thailand. The capital is now cracking down on arrivals from abroad: Beijing authorities announced Sunday that anyone flying into Beijing from anywhere abroad, starting at midnight March 16, would be subject to 14 days of quarantine in government centers. Those put in quarantine would have to pay for it themselves, authorities said. Anhui province and the city of Sanya in Hainan province have implemented similar measures, according to local reports. Other regions including Guangzhou, Shanghai and several cities in Shandong province, close to South Korea, have required all incoming travelers to home quarantine for 14 days. Zhang Wenhong, head of the infectious diseases department at Shanghai’s Huashan hospital, wrote in a widely shared article analyzing other countries’ COVID-19 responses Sunday that the rise in cases abroad and imported cases brought “great risk” to China. “China has already been through the darkest hour. At first we believed that if China controlled [the outbreak] well, the world would also implement simultaneous controls, like Singapore, Japan, South Korea and other East Asian countries did very well,” Zhang said. “But now Europe has suddenly become the new center of the epidemic, bringing us immense uncertainty. Looking at the global virus response situation, it is basically impossible to control this outbreak by the end of summer,” he said. 
Mar 15, 2020	Amid the new coronavirus, the freeways of the San Francisco Bay Area are less clogged than usual, and shelves of grocery stores look apocalyptically ransacked -- byproducts of California being part of an international pandemic. It also comes with some advantages: If Bay Area residents belong to a certain healthcare plan, they can easily drive through the region's unusually free-flowing roads to visit a drive-through test site for COVID-19. They just open their mouth. Get tested. Then put their car in gear.  Two days later, they get their results. On Friday, a drive-through coronavirus testing facility was set up in one of several outdoor parking lots owned by Kaiser Permanente in Redwood City. It represented a fragment of the aggressive drive-through testing that South Korea conducted to help stem COVID-19; but for California, it was a start. Under a blue pop-up tent, a team that rotated between six and seven staff members waited for patients to drive up. At 4:20 on a blustery but sunny afternoon, a dark gray Toyota Prius, driven by a woman in sunglasses, rolled up to the cordoned-off parking lot, and was waved in by a uniformed security guard. She pulled cautiously up to the tent, rolled down her window and took off her shades. Bustling into action, a nurse helped Rod Mokhtari, Kaiser's assistant chief of medicine in Redwood City, don a yellow paper gown. The nurse then helped him slip his hands into a pair of purple latex gloves. Properly adorned, with smock, gloves, a mask and protective glasses, Mokhtari stepped out from the tent and approached the driver's side window -- sampling kit in hand. Patient and doctor exchanged a few words, before she tilted her head back slightly and opened her mouth wide. Mokhtari, cotton swab in hand, reached in and with small, circular motions, swabbed the inside of her mouth. Satisfied, he pulled the utensil out and dropped it into a container. He then grabbed a new one, and with her head still tilted back, he inserted it into her left nostril -- which caused her to blink a few times -- removed it and dropped it into a container. She then drove off. Start to finish: no more than 5 minutes. Ten minutes later another patient arrived, and the process was repeated. Mokhtari was not available for an interview. The name of the nurse was not provided. But the procedure provided a small glimpse of how South Korea, with its government-run healthcare system, could test so many people so fast. As of this week, South Korea, a nation of 51 million, had tested about 250,000 people since Jan. 20, when the outbreak occurred there. In the United States, with a far higher population, fewer than 15,000 had been tested by Friday, according to published reports. California's lack of statewide testing, compounded by the federal government's inability to procure key chemicals needed for the tests, is one reason Silicon Valley has become ground zero for the virus statewide. As of Saturday afternoon, Santa Clara County had at least 91 confirmed cases, and surrounding counties had reported many more. Marc Brown, director of national communications for Kaiser, said the medical group has set up only three drive-up testing sites. Besides the one in Redwood City, there was one each in San Francisco and San Leandro. The facilities are not permanent and change from day to day. Brown said no sites have yet been set up in Southern California, and he had no information about plans to do so. However, he said other regional centers, such as those in Colorado and the Washington, D.C., will be trying them out as early as this weekend. "These aren't for the general public," he said, noting that only Kaiser members and have been provided an appointment with the facility by their doctor are permitted access. The sites are not publicly disclosed, Brown said, because the point of the procedure is to reduce the risk of exposure that occurs in hospital or clinic waiting rooms -- where several people can come into contact with one another and the virus can be transmitted. "We don't want crowds showing up," he said. Caption: PHOTO: KAISER PERMANENTE workers test a patient for the novel coronavirus Wednesday in San Francisco. PHOTOGRAPHER:Josh Edelson AFP/Getty Images 
Mar 14, 2020	Amid the new coronavirus, the freeways of the Bay Area are less clogged than usual, and shelves of grocery stores look apocalyptically ransacked — byproducts of California being part of an international pandemic. It also comes with some advantages: If Bay Area residents belong to a certain healthcare plan, they can easily drive through the region’s unusually free-flowing roads to visit a drive-through test site for COVID-19. They just open their mouth. Get tested. Then put the car in gear. Two days later, they get their results. On Friday, a drive-through coronavirus testing facility was set up in one of several outdoor parking lots owned by Kaiser Permanente in Redwood City. It represented a fragment of the aggressive drive-through testing that South Korea conducted to help stem COVID-19; but for California, it was a start. Under a blue pop-up tent, a team that rotated between six and seven staff members waited for incoming automobile-steering patients. At 4:20 on a blustery but sunny afternoon, a dark gray Toyota Prius, driven by a woman in sunglasses, rolled up to the cordoned-off parking lot, and was waved in by a uniformed security guard. She pulled gingerly up to the pop tent, rolled down her window and took off her shades. Bustling into action, a nurse helped Rod Mokhtari, Kaiser’s Redwood City assistant chief of medicine, don himself with a yellow paper gown. The nurse then helped him swaddle his hands with a pair of purple latex gloves. Properly adorned, with smock, gloves, a mask and protective glasses, Mokhtari stepped out from the tent, and approached the driver’s side window — sampling kit in hand. Patient and doctor exchanged a few words, before she tilted her head back slightly and opened her mouth wide. Mokhtari, cotton swab in hand, reached in and with small, circular motions, swabbed the inside of her mouth. Satisfied, he pulled the utensil out, and dropped it into a container. He then grabbed a new one, and with her head still tilted back, he inserted it into her left nostril — which caused her to blink a few times — extruded it, and also dropped it into a container. She then drove off. Start to finish: no more than 5 minutes. Ten minutes later another patient arrived, and the process was repeated. Mokhtari was not available for an interview. The name of the nurse was not provided. But the procedure provided a small glimpse of how South Korea, with its government-run healthcare system, could test so many people so fast. As of this week, South Korea, a nation of 51 million, had tested about 250,000 people since Jan. 20, when the outbreak occurred there. In the United States, with a far higher population, less than 15,000 had been tested by Friday, according to published reports. California’s lack of statewide testing, compounded by the federal government’s inability to procure key chemicals needed for the tests, is one reason Silicon Valley has become ground zero for the virus statewide. As of Friday, Santa Clara County had reported 79 confirmed cases, and surrounding counties had reported many more. According to Marc Brown, director of national communications for Kaiser, the medical group has set up only three of these drive-up testing sites. One in San Francisco, another in San Leandro, and this one, here in Redwood City. The facilities are not permanent and change from day-to-day. He said no sites have yet been set up in Southern California, and had no information about plans to do so. However, he said other regional centers, such as those in Colorado and the Washington, D.C., will be trying them out as early as this weekend. “These aren’t for the general public,” he said, noting that only patients who are Kaiser members and have been provided an appointment with the facility by their doctor are permitted access. The sites are not publicly disclosed, he said, because the point of the procedure is to reduce the risk of exposure that occurs in hospital or clinic waiting rooms — where several people can come into contact with one another and the virus can be transmitted. “We don’t want crowds showing up.” Drive-through testing is also being tried in New Rochelle, N.Y. — where a large cluster of COVID 19 cases are located — and Philadelphia. The number of people tested are low, but New York’s governor was optimistic Friday. “We’re partnering with Northwell and BioReference to run the state’s first drive-through testing facility and ensure the highest-risk population gets the tests they need to help us contain and combat this pandemic,” Gov. Andrew Cuomo said.
Mar 14, 2020	In mid February, as a surprise snowstorm swept across the Korean peninsula and the country basked in the afterglow of “Parasite’s” Oscar win, South Korea’s coronavirus spread was looking manageable. The country had about 30 infections, largely from known contact with travelers from China. None had died. South Korean President Moon Jae-in — as it turns out, quite prematurely — told a group of business leaders the threat from the virus would be over “before long.” All the while, behind the scenes, a network of laboratories was quietly ramping up capacity for the possibility of widespread transmission. They were ready. In the first weeks of February, the country had tested nearly 10,000 patients for the novel coronavirus — the vast majority of them getting the all-clear — in an effort to detect as many cases as possible. In the weeks since, South Korea has been on average testing 12,000 patients a day — about as many as the U.S. has managed to test over the last two weeks. Authorities here have collected samples at 50 drive-through clinics across the country. A South Korean innovation that’s sprung up in Germany, the U.K. and Australia and has also been embraced by President Trump, the set-up allows drivers to remain in their cars as they answer a brief questionnaire, have their temperature taken and get swabbed inside the nose. It takes about 10 minutes, compared to the hour or so walk-in clinics can take, while minimizing exposure to health workers and other patients in waiting rooms. South Korea has also set up mobile testing stations and home visits, and can conclude in a matter of hours whether someone has been infected. Even as the ranks of the infected swelled by several thousand, the aggressive testing has given health officials here the ability to spot outbreaks as they emerge, focus resources on those areas and isolate those with the potential to spread the virus.  At a S. Korean gov't briefing on COVID-19 response: "The gov't is covering the financial costs for related testing and treatment instead of saddling individuals with those expenses. The gov't is also reimbursing medical facilities for losses incurred from imposed quarantines." — Victoria Kim (@vicjkim) March 9, 2020 “The enormous testing capability allows us to identify patients early and minimize the harmful effects,” Vice Minister of Health and Welfare Kim Ganglip told reporters this week. “This is the most important means of fending off a contagious disease outbreak.” As of Saturday, South Korea had confirmed more than 8,000 coronavirus patients and 72 deaths — after having tested more than 240,000 in about a month and a half. The early detection, isolation and treatment has translated into a low mortality rate of about 0.7%, compared to more than 3% worldwide. In the U.S., with six times the population of South Korea, about 2,000 have been infected and 43 have died as of Friday. But even more concerning is what’s unknown. With the limited availability of testing, doctors and public health officials are having to pick and choose whom to test — raising concern about the untold others unknowingly spreading the deadly virus. “The system is not really geared to what we need right now,” Dr. Anthony Fauci, director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, said of the U.S.'s testing capabilities at a hearing before the House Oversight and Reform Committee this week. “That is a failing. Let’s admit it.” How South Korea accelerated its coronavirus testing, while early missteps left the U.S. lagging far behind, is a story of flexibility, preparedness and painful lessons from a past fumble. Much of South Korea’s current disease control response system was forged after a 2015 local outbreak of Middle East respiratory syndrome, or MERS, caused by a different coronavirus. At the time, the Korea Centers for Disease Control and Prevention found itself unable to handle the abrupt surge in demand for tens of thousands of tests amid the largest outbreak outside of Saudi Arabia, which ultimately killed 38 patients and infected nearly 200. The experience prompted the country to overhaul its CDC and pass laws to prepare for the next epidemic. Central to the changes was the ability to cut through a bureaucratic months-long process to get test kits rapidly approved and working during an emergency. The Zika virus epidemic of 2016 served as a small-scale dry run of the new system. As luck would have it, last December, the South Korean government held a mock disease response drill — under the premise of a coronavirus outbreak. By Jan. 11, when China had reported just 41 cases and the WHO was discounting the prospect of human-to-human transmission, South Korea was distributing tests even though it wasn’t yet possible to test for the specific strand of the novel coronavirus causing the outbreak in Wuhan. By Jan. 31, with seven known cases in South Korea, test kits based on the virus’ genetic code released by China had been distributed to local government labs across the country. By the time authorities discovered a large cluster of thousands of infections in the southeastern city of Daegu in late February, the network of public health institutions and private labs and hospitals was prepared. Early on, officials dropped the requirement that patients had to have traveled abroad in order to be tested, a criteria that has been an impediment to testing in America. When it became clear many of those who had attended the services of an obscure religious sect had been infected, authorities tested all of those with symptoms among the church’s more than 200,000 members. When outbreaks developed at a psych ward and at a call center, authorities called for a nationwide survey of all locked psych wards and all call centers. Officials also began screening all pneumonia patients with no known causes for the novel coronavirus. Hong Ki-ho, director of laboratory medicine at Seoul Medical Center, who is also a member of the COVID-19 task force at the Korean Society of Laboratory Medicine, said Korea’s CDC, private labs and manufacturers had all contributed to the unprecedented scale-up of testing. “It feels like a miracle that it all came together like this,” he said, noting the chaos and confusion the delays in testing caused during the MERS outbreak. “It’s so many times the scale of what it was during MERS, and we had so little time to prepare.” Another key component of South Korea’s response is making tests free for the vast majority of those who have been screened, and covering the cost of their hospitalization and treatment. Even those who request a test without a doctor’s note can do so at the moderate cost of about $130. After a peak in late February, when the number of infections was jumping by as many as 900 cases a day, the pace of new infections in South Korea has slowed to about 100 new cases reported Saturday. With new clusters being discovered in the densely packed Seoul metropolitan area this week, South Korea still faces challenges. That hasn’t stopped the country from holding itself out as a model for other nations, highlighting the fact that it appears to be gaining a handle on the outbreak without the drastic travel restrictions China, the U.S. and other countries have imposed on their citizens. “Public trust can only be earned and harnessed through full openness and transparency,” Lee Tae-ho, vice minister of foreign affairs, told reporters. “This public trust has resulted in a very high level of civic awareness and voluntary cooperation that strengthens our collective effort to overcome this public health emergency.”
Mar 14, 2020	Homework delivered via WhatsApp. "Minecraft" and Netflix instead of lectures and gym classes. Refrigerators as blackboards, harried parents, bored children -- and no end in sight to what one 7-year-old calls a "nightmare." School closures are just beginning to ripple across the United States as authorities try to contain the spreading coronavirus, but across swaths of Asia, the Middle East and Europe, children have already been kept home from classes for several nerve-racking weeks. Thirty-nine countries, including China, South Korea and Japan, have imposed nationwide school closures affecting more than 421 million students from elementary school through the university level, according to UNESCO.  "I was kind of happy to stay home, but now I really want to go to school," said O Hyun-jin, an 11th-grader in Daegu, the epicenter of South Korea's coronavirus outbreak, where the typical March 2 start of the school year has been pushed back at least three weeks. O hasn't set foot on campus since winter break began in December. In an additional 22 countries that have announced localized closures -- from India and France to the U.S. -- millions more out-of-school children are studying online or missing lessons altogether, forgoing sports and other extracurricular pursuits, not seeing friends and facing less time to prepare college applications. All of it is forcing working parents to make difficult compromises. "I'm not happy about missing school. I want this to end," said 13-year-old Yeung Tak-shing of Hong Kong, where public and government-subsidized schools have been closed since the Lunar New Year vacation started Jan. 22. The schools are not due to reopen until April 20. Attending the prestigious Carmel Divine Grace Foundation Secondary School was a dream come true for Yeung. The seventh-grader is a member of the institution's celebrated robotics team, which sent 20 students to the International Robot Olympiad in Thailand last year, winning a bevy of medals. Yeung has spent much of the last six weeks confined to his family's sixth-floor, 500-square-foot public housing unit, which is cluttered with his medals and trophies from middle school science and robotics competitions. Before the outbreak, Yeung would wake up at 6:50 a.m., put on his tie and uniform and take a 35-minute subway ride to school. On days the robotics team met, he wouldn't get home until 6:30 p.m. Now, Yeung rolls out of bed at 9 a.m. and plays "Minecraft" online or "Grand Theft Auto 5" on his PlayStation 4 before doing a few hours of schoolwork online -- sometimes interrupted by his unreliable Wi-Fi connection. He rarely gets out of his pajamas, though he musters the motivation to do a few sit-ups on instructions from his PE teacher. His mother, Paula, a 50-year-old waitress, has had to ask her mother and other relatives to occasionally take turns watching her son at home while she and her husband, a repairman, go to work. Business at her cafe has tanked in the last two months, giving her more time to worry. As working-class immigrants from mainland China, she said, they felt it was important that their son seize the opportunity to go to university. She fears the current academic year could be wasted. "He's really clever," she said. "He's always had good grades. I know he's going to succeed in technology one day. I just hope we can all stay healthy." Among teenagers steeped in South Korea's hyper-competitive, education- focused culture, the school closures affecting more than 10 million students brought anxiety about whether the late start to the school year would jeopardize their college admission prospects. Even more than missing school, 16-year-old O said she feared not being able to go to hagwon, the private cram schools where she typically spends 40 hours a week preparing for next year's college entrance exam. Many of the hagwons in her neighborhood were in an area with a high number of infections. Some of her friends were placing academics over health risks and still attending cram-school classes. Her parents wouldn't let her. So she's been parked at her desk at home for eight to 10 hours a day studying. Occasionally, she'll take breaks to play "Battleground," meeting up with her friends in the virtual world of video games. "I'm trying not to fall behind," she said. Although children have so far appeared less susceptible to the disease known as COVID-19 -- which has sickened at least 140,000 people worldwide and killed more than 5,300 -- medical research suggests that closing schools has helped slow down outbreaks in the past. One of the reasons is that more parents stay home, reducing the levels of social contact that can transmit disease. But closures come with huge social and economic costs, particularly if they drag on. Even as affordable home and mobile internet access has expanded to much of the world, the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization warns that online learning is not accessible for all children and that extended closures can eat into families' incomes and raise dropout rates. For several days this week, Fahmida Riaz set aside her work as a freelance journalist in Karachi, Pakistan's largest city, to stay home and supervise her 17-year-old son Shiraz's high school exams. With no online testing capability, the school couriered the test sheets to their house after authorities closed the schools Feb. 26. "She is very strict," Shiraz said. "She doesn't allow me extra time and sent the papers back to the school as soon as I finished them." Both he and his fifth-grade brother, whose school also lacks e-learning facilities, busy themselves playing video games late into the night. Neither goes out much because of virus fears, said their father, 50-year-old Riaz Sohail. "My wife's work is affected as she spends almost all day with the children," he said. And with a new coronavirus case surfacing in Karachi this week, he added, he didn't see schools reopening anytime soon. In Hanoi, Vietnam's capital, Chi Cong and his wife, Dung, who run an airline ticketing agency, have taken turns staying home with their three children since schools were closed Feb. 3. Their 15 employees have taken on added responsibility -- though that has been offset somewhat by a 50% decline in business due to the virus, said the 38-year-old Chi. "I have to organize the company and the family to work together to solve this," he said. The hardest thing, he said, was the disruption to the children's schedules. They are sad at home, missing their friends, struggling to focus on online homework and their teachers' video lessons. But he believed the closures were appropriate because the outbreak "is becoming more and more complex. At this time, closing [schools] will be better." Facing one of the severest outbreaks, authorities in Iran have shut schools across more than a dozen provinces. In Khuzestan province, a photo of a teacher using the side of her refrigerator as a whiteboard went viral. In Tehran, 7-year-old Amir Mahdi uploads homework via WhatsApp, sings songs with friends over video chat and watches livestreams of classes each morning, but it's still not enough to keep him from feeling restless. "He was crying at noon, saying that he hates this house and this nightmare," said Amir's mother, Nura Hosseini. She bought him arts and crafts supplies, encourages him to cook and clean with her and makes him do spelling drills online. But after being cooped up for nearly three weeks inside their two-story house that they share with extended family, both are feeling claustrophobic and are struggling to fill the days. "I am worried about his health. I am trying to make him tired by physically doing house chores, but I'm so tired because I cannot entertain him," she said. "I even repaired an old cellphone so that he can play with it." In the United Arab Emirates, the typical places that children congregate when not at school -- at play dates and mega-malls -- are considered off-limits as families practice social distancing. Yasmine Khayal, a corporate lawyer in Dubai who has three children ages 6 to 11, said she was using the time to upload lesson plans, videos and other educational materials to ramp up virtual learning. "It all sounds good in theory, but we won't have interactions with the teachers," she said. "I'll have to be more involved, and I'm not sure how that will affect me with work, and everyone is unsure how it's going to be in practice." Back in Hong Kong, 13-year-old Yeung has occasional flashes of panic about contracting the coronavirus. But it's the solitude in his three-bedroom flat that tests him most days. He often stares out his window at a park that's mostly empty. His connection to the outside world is a desktop computer surrounded by stacks of library books -- including Roald Dahl's "The Witches," a dark fantasy that revolves around secret societies of child-hating witches -- that would be overdue if school was open. Yeung is desperate to return so he can complete the project he left unfinished in his favorite design and technology class, a 3-D-printer-made LED light. The most devastating news, however, is yet to come. Yeung was expecting to appear at the Robot Olympiad for the first time this summer, an event that right now appears unlikely. "I know it's going to be canceled," he said. "It's not easy to accept because we worked so hard for this." -- Bengali and Pierson reported from Singapore and Kim from Seoul. Times staff writers Nabih Bulos in Beirut and Melissa Etehad in Los Angeles, special correspondent Aoun Sahi in Islamabad, Pakistan, and a special correspondent in Tehran contributed to this report. Caption: PHOTO: IN HONG KONG, primary school teacher Billy Yeung records a video lesson. Public schools have been closed since the Lunar New Year vacation began Jan. 22. PHOTOGRAPHER:Isaac Lawrence AFP/Getty Images PHOTO:IN KARACHI, Pakistan's largest city, students head home in February after authorities closed schools. A U.N. agency has warned that online learning is not accessible for all children; at one Pakistani school, exams were sent to high school students' homes via courier. PHOTOGRAPHER:Asif Hassan AFP/Getty Images PHOTO:IN RIYADH, Saudi Arabia, a private school sits empty this week after public and private universities and schools were shut nationwide until further notice. PHOTOGRAPHER:Fayez Nureldine AFP/Getty Images 
Mar 14, 2020	President Trump declared a national emergency over the coronavirus outbreak Friday, which will allow more federal aid to flow to states and municipalities, as he sought for the second time in three days to reassure the country about his leadership. At a news conference in the White House Rose Garden, the president made a number of undefined promises about expanded testing and bolstering the economy while batting away questions about the government's slow-footed response to date. "To unleash the full power of the federal government, I'm officially declaring a national emergency. Two very big words," he said.  Trump also said he was "most likely" to get a coronavirus test himself, although he maintained he had no symptoms and didn't actually need one. In recent days, the president has been in close proximity to at least one person who has tested positive for the virus and several others who have potentially been exposed. And in a remark that is almost certain to figure in advertisements against him in this year's presidential campaign, Trump said, "I don't take any responsibility at all" for the failures in the government's response to the coronavirus crisis so far. His administration had inherited a flawed system, he said. Moments later, he claimed not to know anything about his administration's 2018 decision to shut down the office within the National Security Council that was set up to coordinate the government's response to pandemics. "When you say 'me,' I didn't do it," he said, telling the reporter who asked about the subject that her question was "nasty." "You say we did that; I don't know anything about it," he said. Trump had been under mounting pressure from Democrats to make an emergency declaration in order to free more than $40 billion in federal money for states. The move will allow states to request a 75% federal cost-share for expenses related to virus response and mitigation efforts -- including emergency workers, medical tests, medical supplies and vaccinations. The president had been reluctant to make such a declaration, largely out of concern that it would contradict his numerous public statements over the last month that attempted to downplay concerns over the coronavirus. At the news conference, he appeared with members of his coronavirus task force as well as CEOs of several major corporations who have worked with the government on a new, expedited testing system. He also shook hands with several of them, again exhibiting a behavior health officials warn can spread the virus. Trump began by listing the actions he had already taken in response to the epidemic, but then pivoted. "We're doing a tremendous job," he said. "Now we're in a different phase." Trump urged states to immediately set up emergency operations centers and vowed to "vastly increase and accelerate our capacity to test" for the virus, addressing an issue that has become a serious logistical and political liability in recent days. The new testing system will allow the U.S. to establish "drive-through" centers similar to those currently in use in South Korea. He did not address why his administration had not worked to set up such a system earlier, before the virus had spread through the country. And despite repeated questions, neither Trump, Vice President Mike Pence nor the other officials and executives present would commit to a specific date that the new tests would be available to the public. Trump, who last week erroneously said that tests were available to anyone who wanted one, reiterated several times that not everyone should take the test and sought again to calm public fears about the pandemic. "We don't want everybody taking this test," Trump said. "It's totally unnecessary, and this will pass." Dr. Deborah Birx, the White House's coronavirus response coordinator, also unveiled a new website developed in collaboration with Google to enable people with concerns about symptoms to determine whether they should seek a test. Dr. Anthony Fauci, director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, said that the additional testing and emergency declaration would help slow the spread of the virus. Officials acknowledge that testing now is less important because the virus no longer can be contained. The focus of public health officials has shifted to efforts to reduce social contact in order to slow the pace at which the virus spreads and avoid overstressing the nation's hospitals and other medical facilities. "When you have an outbreak like this, particularly if you're trying to interfere with it, it's really impossible to predict a time element of when it's going to peak and when it's naturally going to go down," Fauci said. With the country desperate for clarity and direction as panic spreads, the president offered several vague responses to questions from reporters. He refused to commit one way or another to additional government bailouts for the cruise ship industry and other sectors reeling from the pandemic. He claimed that the government has ordered additional ventilators to prepare for an influx of critical cases at the nation's hospitals, but could not say when they'd be in place. He said that he might add the United Kingdom to the temporary ban on foreign travelers coming from Europe but did not say when a decision might be made. Trump did outline two concrete measures he's taking -- waiving interest on federal student loans for an unspecified period and directing the Department of the Treasury to take advantage of low crude oil prices to replenish the strategic petroleum reserve. With prices for crude oil crashing, oil industry lobbyists have been urging the government to buy up oil and place it in the reserve in the hope that those purchases will keep the price from dropping further. The reserve was set up in 1975 to protect the U.S. against a cutoff of oil imports. Since the U.S. now is a net exporter of oil, the reserve no longer serves that purpose. Roughly 90 minutes before the news conference began, House Speaker Nancy Pelosi (D-San Francisco) partially preempted Trump by making a public statement from the Capitol, outlining the legislation she has negotiated largely with Treasury Secretary Steven T. Mnuchin that, she said, would ensure that testing is free for all Americans, including the uninsured. "We can only defeat this outbreak if we have an accurate determination of its scale and scope," Pelosi said. Like former Vice President Joe Biden a day earlier, she delivered remarks standing in front of a row of American flags -- a symbolic gesture by Democrats suggesting an eagerness to grasp the trappings of the presidency at a moment when Trump's leadership is under intense scrutiny. Trump also spoke Friday with French President Emmanuel Macron, who tweeted that the Group of 7 leaders had agreed to take part in a video conference Monday to better coordinate efforts to slow the global pandemic and mitigate its sweeping economic fallout. The planned news conference came less than 48 hours after Trump gave an Oval Office address Wednesday evening, in which he made several factual errors, despite reading from a teleprompter, a performance so poorly received as to trigger a massive stock market sell-off Thursday that saw the Dow Jones industrial average plunge 10% -- its steepest drop since the market's 1987 crash. The stock market, which had been suffering one of its worst weeks in history as the rapid spread of the coronavirus disrupted economic activity on a massive scale, rebounded sharply Friday after the president's announcement. The Dow Jones industrial average gained nearly 2,000 points, or 9.4%, to 23,185.62. Other major stock indexes also gained more than 9% on Friday. The Dow still lost more than 10% for the week, during which the market fell into so-called bear territory, or 20% or more below the record highs the market reached only last month. That ended the 11-year bull market in stocks, the longest ever, that began in 2009 during the financial crisis. Trump's overall nonchalance about the coronavirus pandemic so far has stood in increasingly stark contrast to state and municipal leaders, as well as private-sector executives who have in recent days taken action on their own to shut down school districts, close offices, museums and other businesses and cancel major events, including the NCAA basketball tournaments. -- Times staff writer James Peltz in Los Angeles contributed to this report. Caption: PHOTO: PRESIDENT TRUMP, shown at Friday's news conference in the White House Rose Garden, appears with members of the coronavirus task force and chief executives of several major corporations who have worked with the government on a new, expedited testing system. PHOTOGRAPHER:Drew Angerer Getty Images 
Mar 13, 2020	Homework delivered via WhatsApp. “Minecraft” and Netflix instead of lectures and gym classes. Refrigerators as blackboards, harried parents, bored children — and no end in sight to what one 7-year-old calls a “nightmare.” School closures are just beginning to ripple across the United States as authorities try to contain the spreading coronavirus, but across swaths of Asia, the Middle East and Europe, children have already been kept home from classes for several nerve-racking weeks. Thirty-nine countries, including China, South Korea and Japan, have imposed nationwide school closures affecting more than 421 million students from elementary school through the university level, according to UNESCO. “I was kind of happy to stay home, but now I really want to go to school,” said O Hyun-jin, an 11th-grader in Daegu, the epicenter of South Korea’s coronavirus outbreak, where the typical start of the school year March 2 has been pushed back at least three weeks. O hasn’t set foot on campus since winter break began in December. In an additional 22 countries that have announced localized closures — from India and France to the United States — millions more out-of-school children are studying online or missing lessons altogether, forgoing sports and other extracurricular pursuits, not seeing their friends and facing less time to prepare college applications. All of it is forcing working parents to make difficult compromises. “I’m not happy about missing school. I want this to end,” said 13-year-old Yeung Tak-shing of Hong Kong, where public and government-subsidized schools have been closed since the Lunar New Year vacation started Jan. 22. The schools are not due to reopen until April 20. Attending the prestigious Carmel Divine Grace Foundation Secondary School was a dream come true for Yeung. The seventh-grader is a member of the institution’s celebrated robotics team, which sent 20 students to the International Robot Olympiad in Thailand last year, winning a bevy of medals. Yeung has spent much of the last six weeks confined to his family’s sixth-floor, 500-square-foot public housing unit, which is cluttered with his medals and trophies from middle school science and robotics competitions. Before the outbreak, Yeung would wake up at 6:50 a.m., put on his tie and uniform and take a 35-minute subway ride to school. On days the robotics team met, he wouldn’t get home until 6:30 p.m. Now, Yeung rolls out of bed at 9 a.m. and plays “Minecraft” online or “Grand Theft Auto 5” on his PlayStation 4 before doing a few hours of schoolwork online — sometimes interrupted by his unreliable Wi-Fi connection. He rarely gets out of his pajamas, though he musters the motivation to do a few sit-ups on instructions from his PE teacher. Newsletter Get our free Coronavirus Today newsletter Sign up for the latest news, best stories and what they mean for you, plus answers to your questions. Sign Me Up You may occasionally receive promotional content from the Los Angeles Times. His mother, Paula, a 50-year-old waitress, has had to ask her mother and other relatives to occasionally take turns watching her son at home while she and her husband, a repairman, go to work. Business at her cafe has tanked in the last two months, giving her more time to worry. As working-class immigrants from China, she said, they felt it was important that her son seize the opportunity to go to university. She fears the current academic year could be wasted. “He’s really clever,” she said. “He’s always had good grades. I know he’s going to succeed in technology one day. I just hope we can all stay healthy.” Among teenagers steeped in South Korea’s hyper-competitive, education-focused culture, the school closures affecting more than 10 million students brought anxiety about whether the late start to the school year would jeopardize their college admission prospects. Even more than missing school, 16-year-old O said she feared not being able to go to hagwon , the private cram schools where she typically spends 40 hours a week preparing for next year’s college entrance exam. Many of the hagwons in her neighborhood were in an area with a high number of infections. Some of her friends were placing academics over health risks and still attending cram-school classes. Her parents wouldn’t let her. So she’s been parked at her desk at home for eight to 10 hours a day studying. Occasionally, she’ll take breaks to play “Battleground,” meeting up with her friends in the virtual world of video games. “I’m trying not to fall behind,” she said. Although children have so far appeared less susceptible to the disease known as COVID-19 — which has sickened at least 140,000 people worldwide and killed more than 5,300 — medical research suggests that closing schools has helped slow down outbreaks in the past. One of the reasons is that more parents stay home, reducing the levels of social contact that can transmit disease. But closures come with huge social and economic costs, particularly if they drag on. Even as affordable home and mobile internet access has expanded to much of the world, the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization warns that online learning is not accessible for all children and that extended closures can eat into families’ incomes and raise dropout rates. For several days this week, Fahmida Riaz set aside her work as a freelance journalist in Karachi, Pakistan’s largest city, to stay home and supervise her 17-year-old son Shiraz’s high school exams. With no online testing capability, the school couriered the test sheets to their house after authorities closed the schools Feb. 26. “She is very strict,” Shiraz said. “She doesn’t allow me extra time and sent the papers back to the school as soon as I finished them.” Both he and his fifth-grade brother, whose school also lacks e-learning facilities, busy themselves playing video games late into the night. Neither goes out much because of virus fears, said their father, 50-year-old Riaz Sohail. “My wife’s work is affected as she spends almost all day with the children,” he said. And with a new coronavirus case surfacing in Karachi this week, he added, he didn’t see schools reopening anytime soon. In Hanoi, Vietnam’s capital, Chi Cong and his wife Dung, who run an airline ticketing agency, have taken turns staying home with their three children since schools were closed Feb. 3. Their 15 employees have taken on added responsibility — though that has been offset somewhat by a 50% decline in business due to the virus, said the 38-year-old Chi. “I have to organize the company and the family to work together to solve this,” he said. The hardest thing, he said, was the disruption to the children’s schedules. They are sad at home, missing their friends, struggling to focus on online homework and their teachers’ video lessons. But he believed the closures were appropriate because the outbreak “is becoming more and more complex. At this time, closing [schools] will be better.” Facing one of the severest outbreaks, authorities in Iran have shut schools across more than a dozen provinces. In Khuzestan province, a photo of a teacher using the side of her refrigerator as a whiteboard went viral. In Tehran, 7-year-old Amir Mahdi uploads homework via WhatsApp, sings songs with friends over video chat and watches livestreams of classes each morning, but it’s still not enough to keep him from feeling restless. “He was crying at noon saying that he hates this house and this nightmare,” said Amir’s mother, Nura Hosseini. She bought him arts and crafts supplies, encourages him to cook and clean with her and makes him do spelling drills online. But after being cooped up for nearly three weeks inside their two-story house that they share with extended family, both are feeling claustrophobic and are struggling to fill the days. “I am worried about his health. I am trying to make him tired by physically doing house chores, but I’m so tired because I cannot entertain him,” she said. “I even repaired an old cellphone so that he can play with it.” In the United Arab Emirates, the typical places that children congregate when not at school — at play dates and mega-malls — are considered off-limits as families practice social distancing. Yasmine Khayal, a corporate lawyer in Dubai who has three children ages 6 to 11, said she was using the time to upload lesson plans, videos and other educational materials to ramp up virtual learning. “It all sounds good in theory, but we won’t have interactions with the teachers,” she said. “I’ll have to be more involved, and I’m not sure how that will affect me with work, and everyone is unsure how it’s going to be in practice.” What You Can Do About Coronavirus  Back in Hong Kong, 13-year-old Yeung has occasional flashes of panic about contracting the coronavirus. But it’s the solitude in his three-bedroom flat that tests him most days. He often stares out his window at a park that’s mostly empty. His connection to the outside world is a desktop computer surrounded by stacks of library books — including Roald Dahl’s “The Witches,” a dark fantasy that revolves around secret societies of child-hating witches — that would be overdue if school was open. Yeung is desperate to return so he can complete the project he left unfinished in his favorite design and technology class, a 3-D-printer-made LED light. The most devastating news, however, is yet to come. Yeung was expecting to appear at the Robot Olympiad for the first time this summer, an event that right now appears unlikely. “I know it’s going to be canceled,” he said. “It’s not easy to accept because we worked so hard for this.” Bengali and Pierson reported from Singapore, and Kim from Seoul. Times staff writers Nabih Bulos in Beirut and Melissa Etehad in Los Angeles, special correspondent Aoun Sahi in Islamabad, Pakistan, and a special correspondent in Tehran contributed to this report.
Mar 13, 2020	Interior Secretary David Bernhardt Friday tweeted a video of President Trump’s declaration of a national emergency and lauded his boss for taking “decisive — even unprecedented — actions to protect the American people” from the coronavirus. But just two days earlier, Bernhardt’s office had sent talking points to Interior officials that downplayed the virus threat. “While the situation could change rapidly, the threat to the American public today remains low ... Americans don’t need to change their day-to-day lives but should stay informed and practice good hygiene,” stated the two-page memo, which was obtained by The Times. One of the points emphasized that “in South Korea, no one under the age of 30 has died from Coronavirus.” After outlining steps the Trump administration had taken to deal with the coronavirus, the March 11 memo closed with paragraphs highlighting the strength of the nation’s economy and advice on holding “large scale events (rallies).” “If there is an event tomorrow in a place where there is no community spread, I think the judgment to have it might be a good judgment. This is a decision that should be made by local leaders in these communities.” The talking points were not signed, and the Interior Department did not respond to requests for comment Friday. The memo was dispatched even as leading health authorities were criticizing the Trump administration’s mixed messages on the coronavirus threat and its halting response, which has lagged behind efforts by state and local governments. The same day that senior Interior officials received the talking points, Gov. Gavin Newsom asked Californians to cancel all gatherings of more than 250 people, after Washington Gov. Jay Inslee issued a similar order in his state. Los Angeles Mayor Eric Garcetti pushed the number down to 50, setting off a wave of cancellations of entertainment and sporting events. Los Angeles school officials on Friday announced that the nation’s second-largest school system will shut down its 900 campuses starting Monday. While many private companies days ago nixed nonessential air travel and instructed most employees to work from home, federal agencies have taken a less aggressive posture. It wasn’t until Thursday night that the White House officially advised federal agencies to let workers telecommute if they were in higher-risk groups or live in areas where the virus had spread through community contact. Hundreds of Defense Department employees attended the annual National Military Fish and Wildlife Association meeting in Omaha this week. At the Interior Department, some employees are still flying for work. An agency spokesperson said the department is reviewing “non-essential travel on a case-by-case basis.” Friday the National Conservation Training Center in West Virginia announced it was postponing all courses and events through the end of March. A spokesperson for the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, which runs the center, said the move came in response to cancellations and customer concerns about the virus. Boxall reported from Los Angeles and Phillips from Washington, D.C.
Mar 13, 2020	The neighbors were free at last. After weeks of confinement to their apartments because one person in the building had tested positive for coronavirus, they were throwing a party to celebrate his recovery and their release. It was Feb. 24, and Mr. Wang, a resident of Xuzhou, in Jiangsu province, appeared to have emerged victorious from a monthlong battle with the illness. Sixty-five residents of his building gathered downstairs to greet Wang with bouquets of pink flowers, a cake with a flamingo on it, and a red banner that read: “With strong neighborly feelings, we welcome you home.” They pressed in close around him for a group photo that was captured in a local news video. Three days later, though, Wang tested positive for the coronavirus again. He was re-hospitalized and his neighbors were locked down once more. His current condition is unknown. Wang, whose full name has not been disclosed for privacy reasons, is one of more than 100 reported cases of Chinese patients who have been released from hospitals as survivors of the new coronavirus — only to test positive for it a second time in the bewildering math of this mysterious illness. The science surrounding these apparent reinfections is further complicated by China’s handling of the outbreak, which since January has been marred by faulty testing procedures and questionable case counting methods with shifting definitions. In addition, the overburdened healthcare system has put pressure on doctors to discharge people who may not have fully recovered to free up beds for newly infected patients. China has been praised in recent weeks by the World Health Organization for containing the virus. But the Communist Party’s early moves to suppress public knowledge on the extent of infections prompt concerns over the accuracy of information about recovered patients who retest positive but may have been misdiagnosed in the first place. Such cases account for less than 0.2% of China’s total infections — not enough to cause alarm. But they are raising questions in China about the reliability of diagnostic tests, the possibility of reinfection and whether patients are wrongly designated as “recovered” and released too early from hospitals. Although most patients who retest positive do not display clinical symptoms, some have developed fevers and other signs of the virus. One such patient, a 36-year-old man, died in Wuhan on March 2, five days after being declared recovered. His diagnosis, according to hospital reports published in local media before they were censored, was respiratory tract obstruction, respiratory failure and COVID-19, the official name for the illness caused by the coronavirus. China’s National Health Commission says 64,216 out of 80,991 confirmed COVID-19 patients have recovered, and 3,179 have died. There is no official record of how many recovered patients have retested positive and returned to hospitals, but such cases have been reported in the provinces of Hubei, Guangdong, Hainan, Sichuan and Jiangsu, and the cities of Tianjin and Chongqing. In Guangdong, officials responsible for the coronavirus response announced Feb. 25 that 14% of declared recoveries in the province had later retested positive. What You Can Do About Coronavirus  The dynamic is also playing out in other countries: Two such cases have emerged in Japan and South Korea, though the Korean patient has been released from hospital after retesting negative five times. Scientists in and outside China agree that reinfection is a highly unlikely explanation for the patients who retest positive. They say testing errors are more likely to blame — either false negatives that resulted in patients being discharged too early, or false positives when they retested and were taken back into hospital. Those errors could be attributed to contaminated test samples, human error while taking swabs, or an oversensitive nucleic acid test that detects strands of virus. When a person gets sick with any kind of viral infection, their immune system naturally develops antibodies that should protect them from contracting the illness again after they’ve recovered. Even in cases where that immunity wears off, it shouldn’t be as quick as within a few days or weeks, said Dr. Keiji Fukuda, director of Hong Kong University’s School of Public Health. “If you get an infection, your immune system is revved up against that virus,” he said. “To get reinfected again when you’re in that situation would be quite unusual unless your immune system was not functioning right.” What’s more likely is that people are being released from hospitals while still carrying dormant fragments of the disease that are not infectious but resemble the virus when put through a nucleic acid test, he said. “The test may be positive, but the infection is not there,” he said. Another possibility is that the level of virus fell below the threshold that tests could detect but then resurfaced, said Dr. Clifford Lane, deputy director for Clinical Research and Special Projects at the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases. “So it looks like they cleared the virus and then the virus came back,” Lane said. “But they never really cleared it and they had a more prolonged course of infection.” Lane was one of only two U.S. experts in a World Health Organization delegation that visited China in February. He said Chinese experts told the visitors that there were no examples of people who became “reinfected.” Newsletter Get our free Coronavirus Today newsletter Sign up for the latest news, best stories and what they mean for you, plus answers to your questions. Sign Me Up You may occasionally receive promotional content from the Los Angeles Times. The best way to prove reinfection, Lane said, would be to sequence the genomes of the initial and subsequent viruses that circulated in a patient. If there is a difference between the two, that would suggest that the virus had mutated enough to evade the patient’s antibodies and prompt a second infection. Developing a vaccine would be significantly more difficult if the virus is changing fast enough to cause true reinfections. It would undermine the immunity patients develop from natural infections. It’s too early to know the true cause of these apparent reinfections, Lane said, especially because cases are so rare. “These are exceptions,” he added. “These are not the rule.” Another potential explanation is that some patients may also have been discharged too early because of pressure on hospitals to free up beds for new patients. “If you don’t discharge them, who’s going to save the other patients? You need to make trade-offs,” one unnamed doctor said in a report by the Paper, a Shanghai-based news outlet. A doctor at a Wuhan hospital told the Paper that he’d seen discharged patients still using oxygen tanks, having trouble walking and displaying obvious clinical symptoms, including serious lung infections, in February. Some of the recovered patients had worse clinical symptoms than the new, mild cases entering the hospitals, he said. But the situation improved in late February, when fewer patients turned up at Wuhan’s hospitals, enabling them to keep patients longer. Chinese authorities claim that none of the patients who tested positive again have infected others. If true, it’s an encouraging sign that even if some discharged patients are still carrying low levels of the virus, they are not contagious. But one study by Chinese scientists published last month in the Journal of the American Medical Assn. raised questions about testing. The study examined four medical workers in Wuhan, all infected with coronavirus and then declared recovered according to national criteria. But five to 13 days after the four were released from quarantine, they all tested positive again. They were then each given three repeat tests over the next four to five days. All were positive. Dr. Dale Fisher, professor of medicine at the National University of Singapore and another participant in the WHO’s China delegation, said the apparent reappearance of coronavirus in recovered patients was probably because of “excessive” testing and follow-up on discharged cases in China. “The outbreak is being driven by people who are spreading it in those first five days while they’re symptomatic and before they’re isolated ... when people are going around coughing and undiagnosed, infecting people,” he said. “The things to worry about are at the other end of the illness.” Times staff writer Victoria Kim in Seoul and Nicole Liu of The Times’ Beijing bureau contributed to this report. 
Mar 13, 2020	To prevent the spread of COVID-19, the Seoul metropolitan government quickly enacted a “social distancing” campaign to encourage citizens to stay home in order to protect themselves and others. Along with its agreeable catchphrase, “Hold up! Let’s take a break from social life,” one of the tips from the campaign suggests: “Keep in touch with people by using social media measures instead of meeting them personally.” One of the ways Koreans are staying connected is by trying their hand at making dalgona iced coffee and posting about it online. Made with equal parts instant coffee, sugar and water that’s whipped to sit atop a glass of milk like a big, foamy hat, dalgona iced coffee is the latest trendy drink that might rival latte art for being photogenic Instagram-bait. Currently, there are nearly 50,000 posts hashtagged #달고나커피 (#dalgonacoffee) on Instagram, and the most popular YouTube videos of the recipe have surpassed millions of views. Also known as whipped coffee in places like India, Pakistan and Macao, the coffee was given its nickname in South Korea because of how much it tastes like the retro toffee-like candy dalgona. Convenience stores and arcades used to keep dalgona-making kits around for kids to make it on their own after school. Made with sugar and baking soda, dalgona is still sold on the street in tourist areas, where the lollipop-like sweets come with shapes imprinted on them, and if you succeed in eating around the shape without breaking it, you can get another one free. Dalgona Coffee Makes 1 drink The dalgona coffee recipe making the rounds online calls for a simple 1:1:1 ratio of instant coffee powder, sugar and hot water, which is whipped into a creamy, caramel-colored batter. The light, frothy mixture resembles dalgona batter just before it hardens into candy, and mixed with milk, the whole thing is a nutty, caramelly delight. (It’s possible to make a caffeine-free version, if you want to substitute hot chocolate mix for coffee powder; my afternoon dose of dalgona coffee, I have to admit, kept me up until 4 a.m.) The coffee was first introduced in January when it was featured on the popular TV show “Fun-straunt.” Actor Jung Il Woo tried the drink at a restaurant in Macao and deemed it similar to the nostalgic taste of dalgona. When the coronavirus hit, the drink began popping up all over Instagram and YouTube with the hashtags #MacauCoffee (using an alternative spelling of Macao) and #Jungilwoocoffee before taking off as #dalgonacoffee, as people began turning to DIY activities to fight boredom at home. It’s said that you have to beat the batter 400 times to get it to the right consistency, but countless videos of people struggling to hand-whip the mixture will show that it takes much, much more. Though you can always use a hand mixer, it does make for some great entertainment to watch people like YouTube star Korean Grandma furiously stir the mixture, nearly give up, then marvel at the fruits of her labor. Cafe chains like Gong Cha, quick to jump on trends, are already serving their own versions of the drink in South Korea. But in times like these, dalgona coffee is a drink that’s meant to be made at home and shared online. If you decide to make it by hand, just pretend you’re getting in some light exercise, not that you’re just doing it for the ’gram. Ingredients - 2 tbsp instant coffee (I used Folger’s) - 2 tbsp sugar - 2 tbsp hot water - 1 cup milk  Instructions - Combine instant coffee, sugar, and hot water in a small mixing bowl. - Using a hand mixer, beat the mixture for 3 to 5 minutes, or until the color changes to golden brown and the mixture takes on a thick consistency. - Pour the milk into a tall glass with a few ice cubes in it and top with the mixture, using a spatula to coax it out of the bowl. Take a picture, post with #달고나커피, stir and enjoy. Variations You can make this recipe with hot chocolate mix instead of instant coffee. You can also YouTube it instead of Instagramming it. 
Mar 13, 2020	President Trump declared a national emergency over the coronavirus outbreak Friday, which will allow more federal aid to flow to states and municipalities, as he sought for the second time in three days to reassure the country about his leadership. At a news conference in the White House Rose Garden, the president made a number of undefined promises about expanded testing and bolstering the economy while batting away questions about the government’s slow-footed response to date. “To unleash the full power of the federal government, I’m officially declaring a national emergency. Two very big words,” he said. Trump also said he was “most likely” to get a coronavirus test, himself, although he insisted he had no symptoms and didn’t actually need one. In recent days, the president has been in close proximity to at least one person who has tested positive for the virus and several others who have potentially been exposed. And in a remark that is almost certain to figure in advertisements against him in this year’s presidential campaign, Trump said, “I don’t take any responsibility at all” for the failures in the government’s response to the coronavirus crisis so far. His administration had inherited a flawed system, he said. Moments later, he claimed not to know anything about his administration’s 2018 decision to shut down the office within the national security council that was set up to coordinate the government’s response to pandemics. “When you say ‘me,’ I didn’t do it,” he said, telling the reporter who asked about the subject that her question was “nasty.” “You say we did that, I don’t know anything about it,” he said. Trump had been under mounting pressure from Democrats to make an emergency declaration in order to free more than $40 billion in federal money for states. The move will allow states to request a 75% federal cost-share for expenses related to virus response and mitigation efforts — things including emergency workers, medical tests, medical supplies and vaccinations. The president had been reluctant to make such a declaration, largely out of concern that it would contradict his numerous public statements over the last month that attempted to downplay concerns over the coronavirus. At the news conference, he appeared with members of his coronavirus taskforce as well as CEOs of several major corporations who have worked with the government on a new, expedited testing system. He also shook hands with several of them, again exhibiting a behavior health officials warn can spread the virus. Trump began by listing the actions he had already taken in response to the epidemic, but then pivoted. “We’re doing a tremendous job,” he said. “Now we’re in a different phase.” Trump urged states to immediately set up emergency operations centers and vowed to “vastly increase and accelerate our capacity to test” for the virus, addressing an issue that has become a serious logistical and political liability in recent days. The new testing system will allow the U.S. to establish “drive-through” centers similar to those currently in use in South Korea. He did not address why his administration had not worked to set up such a system earlier, before the virus had spread through the country. And despite repeated questions, neither Trump nor Vice President Mike Pence, nor the other officials and executives present would commit to a specific date that the new tests would be available to the public. Trump, who last week erroneously said that tests were available to anyone who wanted one, reiterated several times that not everyone should take the test and sought again to calm public fears about the pandemic. “We don’t want everybody taking this test,” Trump said. “It’s totally unnecessary, and this will pass.” Dr. Deborah Birx, the White House’s coronavirus response coordinator, also unveiled a new website developed in collaboration with Google that will enable people with concerns about symptoms to determine whether they should seek a test. Dr. Anthony Fauci, director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, said that the additional testing and emergency declaration would help slow the spread of the virus. Officials acknowledge that testing now is less important because the virus no longer can be contained. The focus of public health officials has shifted to efforts to reduce social contact in order to slow the pace at which the virus spreads and avoid overstressing the nation’s hospitals and other medical facilities. “When you have an outbreak like this, particularly if you’re trying to interfere with it, it’s really impossible to predict a time element of when it’s going to peak and when it’s naturally going to go down” Fauci said. With the country desperate for clarity and direction as panic spreads, the president offered several characteristically vague responses to questions from reporters. He refused to commit one way or another to additional government bailouts for the cruise ship industry and other sectors reeling from the pandemic. He claimed that the government has ordered additional ventilators to prepare for an influx of critical cases at the nation’s hopsitals, but could not say when they’d be in place. He said that he might add the United Kingdom to the temporary ban on foreign travelers coming from Europe but did not say when a decision might be made. Trump did outline two concrete measures he’s taking — waiving interest on federal student loans for an unspecified period and directing the Department of the Treasury to take advantage of low crude oil prices to replenish the Strategic Petroleum Reserve. With prices for crude oil crashing, oil industry lobbyists have been urging the government to buy up oil and place it in the reserve in the hope that those purchases will keep the price from dropping further. The reserve was set up in 1975 to protect the U.S. against a cut off of oil imports. Since the U.S. now is a net exporter of oil, the reserve no longer serves that purpose. Roughly 90 minutes before the news conference began, House Speaker Nancy Pelosi (D-San Francisco) partially preempted Trump by making a public statement from the Capitol, outlining the legislation she has negotiated largely with Treasury Secretary Steven T. Mnuchin that, she said, would ensure that testing is free for all Americans, including the uninsured. “We can only defeat this outbreak if we have an accurate determination of its scale and scope,” Pelosi said. Like former Vice President Joe Biden a day earlier, she delivered remarks standing in front of a row of American flags — a symbolic gesture by Democrats suggesting an eagerness to grasp the trappings of the presidency at a moment when Trump’s leadership is under intense scrutiny. Trump also spoke Friday with French President Emmanuel Macron, who tweeted that the Group of Seven leaders had agreed to take part in a video conference Monday to better coordinate efforts to slow the global pandemic and mitigate its sweeping economic fallout. The planned news conference came less than 48 hours after the president gave an Oval Office address Wednesday evening, in which he made several factual errors, despite reading from a teleprompter, and delivered so unsteady and halfhearted-seeming a performance as to trigger a massive stock market sell-off on Thursday that saw the Dow Jones industrial average plunge 10% — its steepest drop since the market’s 1987 crash. The stock market, which had been suffering one of its worst weeks in history as the rapid spread of the coronavirus disrupted economic activity on a massive scale, rebounded sharply after the president’s announcement. The Dow Jones industrial average gained nearly 2,000 points, or 9.4%, to 23,185.62. Other major stock indexes also gained more than 9% on Friday. The Dow still lost more than 10% for the week, during which the market fell into so-called bear territory, or 20% or more below the record highs the market reached only last month. That ended the 11-year bull market in stocks, the longest ever, that began during the financial crisis in 2009. Trump’s overall nonchalance about the coronavirus pandemic so far has stood in increasingly stark contrast to state and municipal leaders, as well as private-sector executives who have in recent days taken action on their own to shut down school districts, close offices, museums and other businesses and cancel major events, including the NCAA tournament. Staff writer James Peltz in Los Angeles contributed to this report. 
Mar 12, 2020	The world’s coronavirus crisis entered a new phase Wednesday when a cascade of restrictions, cancellations and revelations worked to further upend everyday life, with more economic ramifications expected Thursday. The NBA said Wednesday it is suspending its season until further notice after a player tested positive for the novel coronavirus. The announcement came less than an hour after President Trump imposed stringent new travel restrictions, barring most travelers from Europe from entering the country for a 30-day period beginning Friday. That was followed by Gov. Gavin Newsom’s directive that large gatherings should be canceled across California because of the risk of spreading infections. Similar orders had come from governors in Washington state and New York, states hard hit by relatively large numbers of COVID-19 cases. Trump’s new travel restrictions exclude the United Kingdom and a few other European nations and make other exceptions for healthy Americans. “The European Union failed to take the same precautions” as the United States in barring travel from China, he said, claiming that U.S. clusters of the disease caused by the virus were “seeded by travelers from Europe.” The NBA’s announcement stunned the sports world and will surely add to the economic fallout caused by the coronavirus outbreak, an issue Trump touched upon in his televised address. Trump said he is instructing the Small Business Administration to provide new low-interest loans for some businesses hurt by the outbreak and asked Congress to approve $50 billion in additional funding for that purpose. He also asked Congress again to approve payroll tax relief, a proposal that neither party on Capitol Hill has favored. “We are at a critical time in the fight against the virus,” he said, while still claiming the risk to most Americans remains low. The travel ban applies to foreign nationals traveling from 26 Europe countries and does not affect travel by U.S. citizens, permanent residents or immediate family members of U.S. citizens, according to a statement from the Department of Homeland Security. It applies to any foreign national who has been in those European countries during the 14 days prior to their scheduled arrival in the U.S. and does not not apply to trade. Trump did not declare a national emergency, as some had suggested he would, which could have clashed with his previous, repeated calls for calm. “The virus will not have a chance against us” if Americans take precautions, he said, downplaying dire warnings from his public health officials who say the spread of the virus is inevitable. Later in the evening, the U.S. State Department issued an advisory urging citizens to reconsider traveling abroad because of the virus and the potential that other countries may unexpectedly limit mobility. The dual travel announcements come as the coronavirus toll continued to mount in California, especially in the Bay Area, where nearly 100 cases have been confirmed. But Southern California is also seeing the virus spread, affecting churches, LA suburbs and celebrities. On Wednesday, the Los Angeles County Department of Public Health confirmed its first coronavirus-related death and nine new cases, bringing the county’s total to 29, including four cases in Long Beach and one new case in Pasadena. A pair of famous Southern California residents, actors Tom Hanks and his wife, Rita Wilson, announced they had tested positive for the virus in Australia and are in isolation at a hospital. L.A. County’s first coronavirus fatality was a woman older than 60 who had underlying health issues, said Dr. Barbara Ferrer, the county health department’s director. The patient was not an L.A. County resident but had been visiting after extensive travel over the last month, including a long layover in South Korea. More coverage on coronavirus in California  “Shortly after being hospitalized, she unfortunately passed,” Ferrer said. Ferrer said that one of the new cases included the county’s second instance of community spread. That individual is hospitalized. Three individuals are household contacts of an L.A. County resident previously confirmed to have the virus. One of those people is currently hospitalized. To date, the county’s public health lab has completed 72 tests for the coronavirus that causes COVID-19. That number does not include those performed by commercial labs. Elsewhere in Southern California, Pasadena confirmed its first case of the novel coronavirus in a resident, Ventura County its second, Orange County its sixth and Riverside County its seventh. In Beverly Hills, a church announced that its rector had fallen ill with the virus. As the outbreak continued its rapid spread across the globe, the World Health Organization for the first time referred to the outbreak as a pandemic. “This is the first pandemic caused by a coronavirus,” WHO chief Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus said. “We have rung the alarm bell loud and clear.” Coronaviruses typically cause the common cold, but deadly illnesses SARS and MERS were also caused by coronaviruses. Tedros emphasized that countries could still take aggressive steps to beat back the spread of the new coronavirus and said he believed united action could effectively combat the spreading illness. The pandemic classification does not change the WHO’s strategy for slowing the outbreak nor should it affect how countries are tackling cases, Tedros said. “There has been so much attention on one word, and let me give you some other words that matter much more, and are much more actionable,” Tedros said. “These are prevention, preparedness, public health, political leadership and, most of all, people…. We’re in this together to do the right things with calm and protect the citizens of the world.” Unlike a public health emergency — which is declared based on specific international-law criteria — there is no formal WHO process that governs whether the organization refers to a global outbreak as a pandemic. Instead, the heightened rhetoric simply reflects the worsening trends that officials have been observing for some time, officials said. On Wednesday, the state released guidelines on how to prepare and protect homeless Californians and service providers from the virus, which included ensuring they had enough health and personal protective equipment on hand, identifying areas to isolate individuals suffering mild symptoms and seeking out the people most vulnerable to the disease. In Northern California, an elderly patient died in an assisted living facility of the novel coronavirus, sparking fears of an outbreak among other residents there and renewing concerns about statewide availability of testing kits. The patient, in her 90s, was Sacramento County’s first fatality from COVID-19, officials announced Tuesday. The woman was among about 140 patients of the facility in Elk Grove, the same suburb where all public schools were closed this week after two members of a household with students at multiple campuses tested positive for the coronavirus. Tuesday, the district announced that an elementary-school-age student in that family had also tested positive. Dr. Peter Beilenson, Sacramento County’s director of health services, said Tuesday that all patients in the nursing home would be tested for the virus, but that effort was delayed by a lack of test kits. He said the county had access to only 20 tests per day and was having to ration those among possible cases in the community and medical professionals who might have been exposed. “It has been very frustrating because we have been stuck now for a couple of weeks with just 20 tests a day,” Beilenson said. Newsletter Get our Coronavirus Today newsletter Sign up for the latest news, best stories and what they mean for you, plus answers to your questions. Sign Me Up You may occasionally receive promotional content from the Los Angeles Times. The city of Alameda on Wednesday said a firefighter had tested positive for the virus, and Stanislaus County confirmed its first two positive cases. Seventeen others in Stanislaus County are awaiting results, officials said. Officials have continued to take precautionary measures in an attempt to contain the spread of the illness. A growing number of colleges and universities, most recently Cal State Long Beach, Cal State L.A. and Pepperdine, have suspended in-person classes in favor of online instruction. Stanford University announced Wednesday two more coronavirus cases have been confirmed on its campus, making that three overall for the school. San Francisco announced a ban on group events of 1,000 or more people. “We know that this order is disruptive, but it is an important step to support public health,” said Mayor London Breed, noting that city officials were following advice from state officials. In San Mateo County, officials issued a legal order barring unauthorized visitors and nonessential personnel from licensed skilled nursing facilities, which includes family members. The county has 15 of the Bay Area’s 105 COVID-19 patients. Officials in other states have also taken action. Washington state has banned gatherings of 250 or more people as cases continue to rise in Seattle’s suburbs, reaching a death toll of more than 30. In Texas, where more than 20 cases have been confirmed, local officials canceled the Houston Livestock Show and Rodeo because of concerns about the spread of the virus. It’s the first time the indoor rodeo — billed as the largest in the world — has been canceled since 1932. The National Collegiate Athletic Assn. also announced that its upcoming men’s and women’s basketball tournaments will be played before “only essential staff and limited family attendance.” As of Wednesday afternoon, California had 177 confirmed coronavirus cases. The United States has surpassed 1,300 coronavirus cases, with most in Washington state, New York and California. Gov. Gavin Newsom said more than 1,075 Californians had been tested for the coronavirus at 18 labs across the state. The state was monitoring an additional 10,300 individuals who had returned to California on international flights and might have been exposed, he said. Many others who have interacted with infected people are being advised to self-monitor and quarantine at home. The largest outbreak of the illness is in Santa Clara County, where more than 40 cases have been confirmed. Public health officials in Placer and Yolo counties, meanwhile, have announced a shift from trying to contain the virus to accepting that it is spreading too fast for widespread quarantining measures. Seven people in Placer County have tested positive, including a Rocklin man who died last week. Yolo County has one confirmed case. Under the new recommendations in Placer and Yolo counties, which are effective through March 31, individuals who have come in contact with a confirmed or suspected case of coronavirus will no longer be required to be quarantined for 14 days. Instead, people with cold-like symptoms, regardless of whether they have the coronavirus or flu, are asked to self-quarantine and manage their symptoms with over-the-counter drugs. The counties also said that although they had tests for COVID-19, they would be reserved for people with more serious symptoms, because mild symptoms are treated the same regardless of the diagnosis. The counties urged businesses to allow employees to telecommute where possible and for large events to be postponed or canceled. Aimee Sisson, Placer County’s public health director, said the county would continue to do some tracing of those who had come in contact with the virus but that it would screen only for high-risk situations, such as a person who visited a nursing home or came in contact with an immunocompromised individual. A change in strategy is needed, she and other health officials said. If counties keep quarantining healthcare workers for potential exposure, she said, “we wouldn’t have any healthcare workers left.” Times staff writers Emily Baumgaertner, Taryn Luna, Melody Gutierrez, Tony Barboza, Molly Hennessy-Fiske, Ruben Vives and Rong-Gong Lin II contributed to this report. 
Mar 12, 2020	Coronavirus cases continued to mount across California, as counties both big and small reported new tallies on Thursday and Disneyland took unprecedented action to close the theme park for the rest of the month. Los Angeles County confirmed three new cases, health officials said. Two of the three have an unidentified source of exposure, further evidence of community spread. The third new case was a person who was exposed by a close contact who tested positive after attending a conference in Washington, D.C. One of the patients is hospitalized. The additions bring the total number of cases in L.A County to 32, which includes four cases in Long Beach and one case in Pasadena. California has recorded 198 cases of the new coronavirus as of Thursday, up from 177 the day before, Gov. Gavin Newsom announced. California officials are calling for the cancellation of all gatherings with 250 or more people to slow the spread of the coronavirus, a decision that came hours after a new federal travel ban and the suspension of the NBA season. In response to the governor’s order, Disneyland announced it will close its Anaheim theme park and California Adventure, beginning Saturday through the end of the month. Disneyland Resort hotels will remain open until Monday and will refund hotel bookings during the closure. The recommendations have the potential to touch virtually all corners of social life across the state: community meetings, sports events and school theater performances. The move comes as President Trump suspended travel from Europe as the coronavirus continued its spread across the globe Wednesday, claiming its first life in L.A. County and causing the World Health Organization to refer to the outbreak for the first time as a pandemic. The WHO has officially declared the coronavirus a pandemic. This is the first pandemic caused by a coronavirus. Infectious disease physician Timothy Brewer of UCLA compares the novel coronavirus to other pandemics, like H1N1, MERS, SARS and influenza. The new policy from the California Department of Public Health, which will be in effect at least through March, marks the first time the state has issued a request for all residents across California to adopt so-called “social distancing” measures and represents a new sense of urgency in the administration’s approach to fighting the virus. “Changing our actions for a short period of time will save the life of one or more people you know,” Newsom said in a statement. “That’s the choice before us. Each of us has extraordinary power to slow the spread of this disease. Not holding that concert or community event can have cascading effects — saving dozens of lives and preserving critical healthcare resources that your family may need a month from now. The people in our lives who are most at risk — seniors and those with underlying health conditions — are depending on all of us to make the right choice.” As a result, the Los Angeles Police Department will postpone its graduation ceremony for new officers, which was scheduled for this week at the Los Angeles Police Academy, to avoid a large gathering, according to officials. Such a graduation typically draws 300 people to the training facility near Dodgers Stadium. People are also advised to avoid communal eating, meetings or gatherings with more than 50 attendees and all nonessential travel, both international and domestic, Dr. Barbara Ferrer, director of the L.A. County Department of Public Health, said Thursday at a news conference. Those who are immunocompromised, pregnant or elderly should consider avoiding gatherings of even 10 people, she said. Those who take public transit should wash their hands before getting on a bus or train and after arriving at their destination, and people should take care to wipe down gym equipment and wash their hands before and after working out, she said. Group fitness classes where people aren’t able to stay 6 feet apart should be avoided entirely, she said. “We’re not at the point of closing down all activities for everybody,” Ferrer said. “But we are at the point of saying you know who you are. You know how much you can help at this point. We’ve asked for everyone’s help and that means modifying pretty much everything you do outside of your house every day.” Faced with two outbreaks of coronavirus on its ships and increasing government pressure, Princess Cruises announced Thursday it would suspend all operations for its vacation voyages for 60 days. The news comes as federal and state authorities undertake a massive operation to disembark 3,500 passengers from the Grand Princess, a number of them infected by the virus, and move them to quarantine sites largely on U.S. military bases. And in an announcement that brought the spreading public health crisis to Hollywood, Tom Hanks and wife Rita Wilson said they had tested positive for the virus. “Hello, folks,” Hanks said in a statement. “Rita and I are down here in Australia. We felt a bit tired, like we had colds, and some body aches. Rita had some chills that came and went. Slight fevers too. To play things right, as is needed in the world right now, we were tested for the coronavirus and were found to be positive.” Los Angeles Mayor Eric Garcetti on Thursday announced sweeping measures to try to limit the spread of the virus. Garcetti said all city departments were being ordered to postpone or cancel public events and meetings expected to draw 50 or more people. He also called for a ban on all public events and conferences on city-owned properties expected to draw 50 or more people. He also said visitors were effectively banned from City Hall. “We are closing City Hall to all non-city employees.” Guests, however, are allowed to attend City Council meetings, he said. The directive prompted the Griffith Observatory to close, starting Friday. The tourist attraction typically sees 4,000 visitors a day, so limiting that number to 50 “just doesn’t make sense,” said Department of Recreation and Parks General Manager Mike Shull. “It’s just safer. We could create other issues with lines forming.” The Los Angeles Zoo also will close to the public beginning Friday. Employees will continue to report to work to care for the animals. The closure is expected to last through March 31. Pasadena city officials announced the city was canceling all “nonessential” city-sponsored events and activities until further notice. Nonessential events and activities would generally include recreational events and classes;, census events, Community Police Academy Kids Safety Academy, PALS center activity, educational and cultural events, and community excursions. Pasadena is not directing the cancellation of any events or activities sponsored by third parties, although the city is reaching out to the coordinators and providing current guidelines by the California Department of Public Health regarding mass gatherings. Three L.A. County sheriff’s deputies and five L.A. County Fire Department personnel are now under quarantine after answering a Monday call to Walnut to attend to a woman who later died of the coronavirus, Sheriff Alex Villanueva said Thursday. The woman was taken by ambulance to Pomona Valley Hospital Medical Center in full cardiac arrest, the hospital said in a news release. After arriving at the hospital, she was placed in isolation but died shortly afterward, officials said. “Our highly trained staff followed all appropriate infection control protocols and took every precaution in caring for this patient, who tragically succumbed to their complications,” Dr. Daniel Gluckstein, the hospital’s medical director of infectious disease, said in a statement. “We extend our deepest condolences to the patient and family.” The hospital has identified all staffers who came into contact with the patient and is following guidelines issued by the county department of public health regarding healthcare worker exposure, the news release said. The rapid-fire developments come as the virus continued to spread elsewhere in the state. Tulare County announced its first case late Wednesday. Karen Elliott, public health director for Tulare County, said at a news conference that the infected person was tested at Sierra View Medical Center in Porterville and was being kept in isolation at home. The person was in stable condition, “and we hope for a quick recovery,” Elliott said. “The individual does not fall within a vulnerable population,” she said. Health officials believed the person contracted the virus outside the county, she said. Riverside County also announced an additional locally acquired case of the virus, bringing the total number of confirmed cases there to eight. It was announced Thursday that a San Jose firefighter had tested positive and might have exposed other firefighters, city manager David Sykes said. By Thursday afternoon, four firefighters had tested positive, said Sean Kaldor, president of IAFF Local 230, which represents San Jose firefighters. They worked in different stations, on different shifts, performing different roles, he said. “As far as how they got exposed, the challenge with COVID-19 is that it’s starting to become prevalent in our community,” he said. “So any patient, any call, any time could be symptomatic with it.” Two other San Jose firefighters were awaiting results after being tested for the coronavirus, and a total of 77 were on leave to see if they developed symptoms, Kaldor said. Contra Costa County reported a total of 16 cases, up from 10 the day before. And San Francisco reported 18 cases, up from 14 on Wednesday. Sen. Dianne Feinstein said she was closing her California offices and considering closing her Washington office because of the coronavirus. “I don’t want people unnecessarily hurt,” she said in a brief interview. “It’s a big decision.” She said Senate Democrats were advised in a healthcare meeting to close their offices. Meanwhile, San Francisco and Seattle announced bans on large gatherings, and a growing number of universities moved to hold classes online. In a sign of how surreal the disruption of American life looks to become, NCAA tournament games for men’s and women’s basketball will be played in empty arenas. “This is the first pandemic caused by a coronavirus,” WHO chief Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus said. “We have rung the alarm bell loud and clear.” In a televised address to the nation Wednesday night, Trump imposed stringent new restrictions, barring foreign nationals traveling from Europe from entering the country for 30 days, beginning Friday. The ban does not include the United Kingdom and does not affect travel by U.S. citizens, permanent residents or immediate family members of U.S. citizens. It applies to any foreign national who has been in Europe during the 14 days prior to their scheduled arrival in the U.S. “The European Union failed to take the same precautions” as the United States did in barring travel from China, he said, claiming that U.S. clusters of the disease were “seeded by travelers from Europe.” Trump said he was instructing the Small Business Administration to provide new low-interest loans for some businesses hurt by the outbreak and asked Congress to approve $50 billion in additional funding for that purpose. And he asked Congress again to approve payroll tax relief, a proposal that neither party on Capitol Hill has favored. Newsletter Get our Coronavirus Today newsletter Sign up for the latest news, best stories and what they mean for you, plus answers to your questions. Sign Me Up You may occasionally receive promotional content from the Los Angeles Times. “This is the most aggressive and comprehensive effort to confront a foreign virus in modern history,” Trump said. “I am confident by continuing to take these tough measures we will significantly reduce the threat to our citizens, and we will ultimately and expeditiously defeat this virus.” The NBA’s announcement came after a player for the Utah Jazz tested positive for the coronavirus. In a bizarre scene, the game in Oklahoma City between the Thunder and the Jazz was delayed seconds before tip-off and canceled minutes later. “The NBA announced that a player on the Utah Jazz has preliminarily tested positive for COVID-19,” the league said in a statement. “The test result was reported shortly prior to the tip-off of tonight’s game between the Jazz and Oklahoma City Thunder at Chesapeake Energy Arena. At that time, tonight’s game was canceled. The affected player was not in the arena.” Meanwhile, L.A. County health officials continued to urge people — particularly older residents, pregnant women and those with underlying health problems — to be cautious in large crowds or avoid them altogether, but they said the number of cases did not yet warrant closing schools or stadiums. “We will get to a point, unfortunately, here in L.A. County, where we will be asking for events to close,” said Barbara Ferrer, director of the Los Angeles County Department of Public Health. “But we’re not there yet.” The person who died was a woman older than 60 who had underlying health conditions and was visiting Los Angeles County after extensive travel over the last month, including a long layover in South Korea. “Shortly after being hospitalized, she unfortunately passed,” Ferrer said. Nine new cases confirmed Wednesday brought the total to 29 in the county, officials reported — a reflection of the minimal amount of testing conducted so far. Ferrer added that one of the new cases came from community spread and that the contagion is not just in a few pockets but “scattered throughout the entire county.” “If you are a person who is older and you have underlying health conditions or you have a serious immunocompromised system, or you are a pregnant woman or you are just aging, this is the time to avoid all nonessential travel, this is the time to stop going to events where there are large groups of people gathering, this is the time to stop going to the theater or concerts or sporting events,” Ferrer said. Newsom said Tuesday that thousands of California residents may have been exposed to the virus. The United States has surpassed 1,300 coronavirus cases, with most in Washington state, New York and California, where the Department of Public Health reported a total of 198 positive cases. By Tuesday evening, 1,452 passengers had been transferred from the Grand Princess cruise ship to be quarantined at Air Force bases or flown to their home countries. On Wednesday, officials continued to allow passengers to leave the ship, on which at least 21 people had tested positive for the coronavirus. That same day, officials announced that 120 people showing signs of illness would be quarantined separately at an otherwise empty hotel in San Pablo. The mounting side effects of the virus could be seen across the country: empty subway cars, quiet streets, a longtime Houston rodeo canceled, tours of the Capitol stopped in Washington, and the Dow Jones industrial average entering bear territory after an 11-year bull market. In Washington state, Gov. Jay Inslee banned events involving any gathering of more than 250 people in the Seattle metro area — be it Sunday church, a wedding, a concert or a political fundraiser. The ban does not extend to airports, grocery stores or transportation systems such as buses and ferries. The big conundrum public officials are facing is whether to close school systems. Seattle announced plans to shut its public schools for two weeks starting Thursday. But Los Angeles, Santa Clara and San Francisco counties are holding off such closures, at least for now. “In children, the illness has been very mild,” said Dr. Grant Colfax, health officer for San Francisco, adding that they were either showing no signs of physical illness or experiencing mild flu-like symptoms. In a study of nearly 45,000 lab-confirmed coronavirus cases, no one under the age of 10 had died of the virus. Colfax and other health experts raise the possibility that closing schools could actually cause more deaths, as a number of those children stay home with elderly caretakers who are much more likely to succumb to the disease. Santa Clara County, which has the state’s largest outbreak with 48 confirmed cases, is keeping its schools open for now. But others are closing. In the Sacramento suburb of Elk Grove, public schools were closed after two family members of students at several campuses tested positive for the coronavirus. Sacramento County health officials announced Tuesday that a resident at an Elk Grove senior-living facility had become the county’s first fatality from COVID-19. The woman, 90, was among about 140 patients at the facility. Dr. Peter Beilenson, Sacramento County’s health director, said other residents of the Elk Grove facility were now subject to special protective measures, including having meals delivered to rooms and not being allowed to congregate in communal areas. He said the county was changing its goal from trying to keep the virus contained to simply slowing its spread. That is the approach of the World Health Organization as well. “Even those countries with community transmission or larger clusters can turn the tide on this virus,” said Tedros, the director-general of WHO. He said his agency’s calling the disease a pandemic — a word many experts have been using for weeks — doesn’t change the need for more aggressive government responses. “WHO has been assessing this outbreak around the clock, and we’re deeply concerned both by the alarming levels of spread and severity and by the alarming levels of inaction,” Tedros said. The coronavirus outbreak has now sickened at least 127,000 people on six continents and caused more than 4,700 deaths. The objective now is to spread out the inevitable infections so that the healthcare system isn’t overwhelmed with patients. Public health officials have a name for this: flattening the curve. Left alone, the virus would race through the population, and the number of cases would shoot skyward and then fall, resembling the shape of a mountain peak. But with containment measures, the curve can be squashed into a wide hill. The outbreak would take longer to run its course. But if the strategy works, the number of people who are sick at any given time will be greatly reduced. Ideally, it would fall below the threshold that would swamp hospitals, urgent care clinics and medical offices. That’s why public health officials will continue the labor-intensive work of recording and tracking new infections, ensuring that infected individuals stay home and guarding the borders against the arrival of new cases. At the same time, they’ll expand their mitigation efforts, such as canceling events and encouraging people to work from home. Many universities are moving their classes online; on Wednesday, Cal State Long Beach, Cal State L.A., Cal State Northridge, Pepperdine and Chapman universities announced such measures. In some ways, mitigation is just containment on a larger scale. Instead of focusing on a single infected individual, officials target clusters of infected people. Buildings, city blocks or whole neighborhoods might be identified as infected, then walled off. That’s why New York Gov. Andrew Cuomo dispatched the National Guard to suburban New Rochelle to enforce a “containment zone” around a community with more than 100 infected residents. Even when infections are unavoidable, pushing them into the future will increase the chances that a treatment will be available by the time a patient needs it. Some might even benefit from a coronavirus vaccine, though that is nearly a year away, at best. “What we have to do right now is to put a lid on this epidemic, to flatten the curve of infection and buy ourselves some time to get a vaccine,” said Georgetown University’s Lawrence Gostin, an expert in public health law. “We are going to have to think about bringing all the interventions we have up to scale.” Times staff writers Jennifer Haberkorn and Noah Bierman in Washington, Rong-Gong Lin II in San Francisco, Anita Chabria, Taryn Luna and John Myers in Sacramento, Melissa Healy in New York and Josh Rottenberg, Dan Woike and Soumya Karlamangla in Los Angeles contributed to this report. 
Mar 12, 2020	Pasadena on Wednesday reported its first case of confirmed coronavirus, and hours later, a Beverly Hills church announced that its rector had also been diagnosed with the virus. On its website, All Saints’ Episcopal Church said its rector, the Rev. Janet Broderick, fell ill shortly after returning from the annual conference of the Consortium of Endowed Episcopal Parishes in Louisville, Ky. She was in stable condition at Cedars-Sinai Medical Center in Beverly Hills, the church said, and was being treated “for a severe form of pneumonia.” Pasadena’s first confirmed coronavirus case involved an individual “known to have close contact with a confirmed case outside of Pasadena, and has been in quarantine since the exposure occurred,” the city said in a statement. Officials say they are working with others who came in close contact with the patient and who might be at risk of infection. “We have been preparing and are ready to manage COVID-19 cases in Pasadena, in close coordination with our healthcare partners,” said Dr. Ying-Ying Goh, director of the Pasadena Public Health Department. “We will continue to recommend our community implement individual and community mitigation measures to reduce the risk of spread of illness.” COVID-19 is the illness caused by the novel coronavirus. The World Health Organization declared the global outbreak a pandemic on Wednesday. The WHO hasn’t declared a pandemic since the H1N1 influenza or swine flu outbreak in 2009. In the case of Broderick, the All Saints’ rector and the sister of actor Matthew Broderick, she returned sick from the Louisville conference and was initially treated for what her doctors believed was a “viral syndrome,” according to the church. Their assessment was that her illness did not warrant further concern. Then, last Sunday, the rector of Christ Church Georgetown in Washington, D.C., who also attended the conference, was diagnosed with the virus. More than 500 Episcopalians from around the country had participated in the event. With that in mind, Broderick sought further medical attention at Cedars-Sinai on Monday morning, the church said in its post. “After an initial assessment, she was moved to the ICU and placed under isolation. At that point, her care team moved forward with a test for COVID-19.” Newsletter Get our Coronavirus Today newsletter Sign up for the latest news, best stories and what they mean for you, plus answers to your questions. Sign Me Up You may occasionally receive promotional content from the Los Angeles Times. The results, returned Wednesday, showed she had the virus. In a statement, Broderick told her fellow church members that she is “through the worst of this and very very much on the mend.” “I asked my kids to bring me a coloring book and a LEGO set if that is any indication,” she added. Church offices will remain closed while its leaders await instructions from the Los Angeles County Health Department. Clergy and staff will continue working from home and be reachable via email and voicemail. It was not clear whether Broderick’s diagnosis was included in the official count of confirmed virus infections in L.A. County, which was increased to 29 on Wednesday. Four of those cases were reported in Long Beach, and officials say many more across the state likely have the virus. L.A. County announced the first death in Southern California linked to the illness. The woman was in her 60s and had underlying health issues. The woman who died was not a county resident but had been visiting after extensive travel over the last month, including a long layover in South Korea, which has been a hotbed for the virus. One of the latest cases announced was the county’s second instance of community spread. That individual is hospitalized. As the virus moves through the region — Orange County as of Wednesday night had six cases, Riverside County seven, Ventura County two — Los Angeles County has developed a risk-assessment tool that considers how many community transmissions there have been and whether new cases are accelerating, said Dr. Barbara Ferrer, the county’s health department director. “We’re trying to use that to drive our judgments about when things need to close,” she said. “We will get to a point, unfortunately, here in L.A. County, where we will be asking for events to close. But we’re not there yet.” Ferrer stressed the public’s need to be cautious in large gatherings and suggested that people assess themselves whether they should venture into crowded areas. Those who are pregnant, elderly or have underlying health issues are especially vulnerable to developing serious effects from the virus. To date, the county’s public health lab has completed 72 tests for COVID-19. That number does not include those performed by commercial labs. More than 1,075 Californians have been tested for the virus across 18 labs in the state, Gov. Gavin Newsom said. The state is monitoring an additional 10,300 individuals who returned from California on international flights and might have been exposed. Times staff writers Joseph Serna and Colleen Shalby contributed to this report. 
Mar 12, 2020	Correction: Jon Murray: In the March 12 Calendar section, an article about "The Real World" co-creator Jon Murray said he had given David France $250,000 to help finish the documentary "Welcome to Chechnya." The amount was $100,000. It also named Harvey Reese as a producer on "Transhood," which he was not. "Transhood" will show at Toronto's Hot Docs this year. It started off like many film festival conversations. Sliding into his seat at the Main Squeeze on 9th Street in Columbia, Mo., Jon Murray extolled the power of "Sunless Shadows," Mehrdad Oskouei's documentary about a group of Iranian women imprisoned for murdering the fathers, husbands and brothers who abused them. "I just saw an amazing film." The conversation then took a bit of a twist.  "At one point, one of the women addresses the camera directly," Murray says, "and I thought, 'Ah, the confessional.' Which we introduced in 'The Real World,' Season 2. Of course," he adds, "we got it from Warren Beatty's 'Reds,' but you didn't see it in documentary before 'The Real World.' And now you do." And there you have it, the great blur -- between film and television, feature and documentary, nonfiction and journalism, popular culture high and low -- diagrammed in three sentences by a man who as a founder of American reality TV is one of the world's leading experts in genre fluidity. Not that Murray considers reality television low culture. He and Mary-Ellis Bunim created "The Real World" in part to offer audiences a chance to experience life outside their own particular bubble. "We believed," he said in an earlier conversation, "that if we bring different kinds of people together, after all the drama and the shouting, they will find they have more in common than not." Certainly, the casting of Pedro Zamora in the show's third season, "The Real World: San Francisco," had the kind of effect many documentary filmmakers dream of. As the first gay man with AIDS to be featured in mainstream media, Zamora helped change cultural attitudes. When he died in the same year the show ran, he was mourned by millions. "President Clinton said Pedro did more to educate Americans about AIDS than anything else." There were many notable aspects of this year's True/False Film Fest, a 17-year-old celebration of documentary and nonfiction that draws 16,000 filmmakers and film lovers from around the world to the unlikely spot of Columbia. Including that it happened at all. Even as South by Southwest in Austin, Texas, and other festivals and public events were being canceled over coronavirus concerns, True/False slid through four days of packed movie houses on a sea of antibacterial gel (prominently provided at every venue), liquid soap (religiously replenished in every public restroom) and the blessings of the Boone County Health Department. There are advantages to being smack dab in the middle of fly-over country, Columbia Mayor Brian Treece said in a press conference held on the festival's opening day, March 5, to assuage any local concerns. There were no films coming from the hardest-hit countries -- China, Iran, Italy and South Korea -- so festival organizers felt confident that following guidelines from the national Centers for Disease Control and Prevention would offset any risk. And with the exception of a few sponsor reps, who were no-shows after their companies issued "no unnecessary travel" policies, the only significant cancellation was by Musa Hadid, the mayor of Ramallah, West Bank, and the subject of David Osit's revelatory "Mayor." Hadid was on his way to the airport when the Palestinian government issued a similar policy, but he sent his greetings via Osit to standing ovation crowds. Elbow bumps occasionally replaced handshakes, but not all that often, and as crowds spread across the sidewalks under the unseasonably warm and sunny skies, there was nary a face mask in sight. But for me, the most notable aspect of this year's True/False was the ability to see it briefly through the eyes of Murray. Murray is, after all, a former journalist who cofounded Bunim/Murray Productions. He, along with his partner, Mary Ellis-Bunim, practically invented reality TV with "The Real World" (which, after 32 seasons on MTV, recently had a 33rd on Facebook Watch), "Road Rules," "Starting Over" and "The Simple Life" before executive-producing the pop culture revolution that is "Keeping Up With the Kardashians" and its various spin-offs. In recent years, BMP has moved into documentary film -- "Autism: the Musical" "Valentine Road" -- and series -- "Citizen Rose" and "Surviving R. Kelly." For Murray, who now serves as creative consultant at BMP, the recent explosion of documentary filmmaking, and the exploding of the traditional rules of what that is, makes perfect sense; there are as many ways to tell a nonfiction story as a fictional one. Maybe even more. True/False fest has always had a nonbinary, all-inclusive attitude toward the definition of "documentary." This year, Kitty Green's "The Assistant" was part of the early, unofficial opening, and several films, including Turner and Bill Ross' "Bloody Nose, Empty Pockets" used staged situations to "document" larger truths. Green, who is best known for documentaries including 2017's "Casting JonBenet," interviewed more than 100 people before writing the script for the fictional "The Assistant." For "Bloody Nose, Empty Pockets," the Rosses assembled a reality show-like cast and put it in a Vegas dive bar with a general prompt -- act as if this were the last night of your favorite bar -- and a series of announced cues. Which, if either, is nonfiction? "It's a big question," says Murray. "With 'The Real World,' we were very transparent. We chose seven people we thought were interesting to live together and then filmed what happened. With 'Bloody Nose,' the prompt was much more specific. I liked the film, but I'm not quite sure what it is." "Sometimes," he added, describing the fest, which he's gone to for the last seven years, "you don't know quite what you're seeing. But that's what makes it exciting." And sometimes, at least for Murray, expensive. This was the first year Murray was attached to a festival entrant. He is a co-executive producer of David France's "Welcome to Chechnya," which documents activists attempting to save LGBT+ people in that country from the horrific antigay purges being conducted by Chechen strongman Ramzan Kadyrov (and approved by Russian President Vladimir Putin). A traditional documentary that is by turns harrowing, horrifying, heartbreaking and inspiring, "Welcome to Chechnya" received the festival's True Life Fund award this year. Murray's involvement began at the end of last year's True/False, when, leaving Columbia, he shared an airport shuttle with France. "I loved his film 'How to Survive a Plague,' so I asked him what he was working on," he recalled. France told Murray that he had made "Welcome to Chechnya" but that he could not show it because he wanted to use digital facial transformation technology, the kind Martin Scorsese used in "The Irishman," to disguise his subjects without dehumanizing them. But that technology was very expensive. France screened the film for Murray and his partner, Harvey Reese, at their L.A. home. They gave France a check for $250,000 and later held a fundraiser at their home in Cape Cod. "The moral of the story is," Murray says, laughing "be careful who you get on an airport shuttle with." But that was actually not the most costly visit Murray has made to True/False. On his first trip, seven years ago, he realized that while Columbia is home to both the largest documentary film festival in the country and one of its best journalism schools (from which he had graduated), that school did not have a documentary program. This seemed to Murray like a pretty big disconnect, so he started talking with festival founders and several journalism professors about fixing it. A year and a $6.7-million endowment later, the Jonathan B. Murray Center for Documentary Journalism was born. "Docs are critical to exploring social issues in depth and holding people in power accountable," Murray says. "And with all the best documentary filmmakers coming to Columbia each year, we all loved putting equal emphasis on filmmaking and journalism." With Robert Green as the artist in residence, Murray says, the program (from which my son is about to graduate) has a journalism bedrock infused with True/False. "But that's how I feel about my reality career," he says. "It was always grounded in journalism." The Jonathan B. Murray Center is also a key sponsor of True/False, which means Murray's name flashes on-screen, albeit amid a crowd of other sponsors, before all the movies. This does not grant him any special dispensation, however. He had been hoping that "Transhood," a film about a group of Kansas City parents navigating their children's transition that he and Reese produced, would be at this year's True/False. But it didn't make the cut. "But HBO bought it," he says, "and it showed at Toronto. So that was some consolation." "It's something," he adds as we eat a lunch of organic vegetarian food -- yes, even in Missouri -- and discuss the multiplatform-amped world of documentary and his part in it. "The way things happen. For years, we pitched scripted series, even had a few pilots made. The only reason 'Real World' got made was because MTV couldn't afford a scripted series. And look what happened." He laughs, takes a bite of kale and looks at his watch -- his former college roommate is meeting him before the festival premiere of "Welcome to Chechnya." "I think about all the strange decisions that lead to where I am today, to creating a new genre that has changed so much." He laughs suddenly. "I'm actually writing a one-man show about it," he says. "About my life and my career. It's in the early stages, and I'm not sure what I'll do with it when it's done." Who knows? Maybe it'll show up some year at True/False. Caption: PHOTO: "THE REAL WORLD: San Francisco," with Pedro Zamora, second from right. PHOTOGRAPHER: MTV PHOTO:JON MURRAY practically co-invented reality TV with "Real World." PHOTOGRAPHER:MTV 
Mar 12, 2020	An analysis of the novel coronavirus' spread inside the United States suggests that thousands of Americans are already infected, dimming the prospects for stamping out the outbreak in its earliest stages. Researchers estimate that by March 1, the virus had already infected about 1,000 to 10,000 people who have not yet been accounted for. At the start of this month, about 80 U.S. cases had been confirmed and officials were still expressing confidence they could contain the new virus. Quarantines, contact tracing and other public health measures have probably tamped down the COVID-19 outbreak here, the researchers said. But from the start, a group of infected travelers just big enough to fill an elevator probably has been expanding the virus' reach, largely undetected.  Released into a country of about 330 million, each of these travelers was assumed to have passed the virus to 2 to 2.5 people, each of whom in turn infected another 2 to 2.5 people, and so on. Tote up the nodes on this rapidly branching network of contacts and the number of victims balloons quickly, the researchers wrote. Their study, released Monday on the medRxiv website to discuss work that has not yet been submitted to a peer-reviewed journal, came as U.S. officials reported a total of 704 COVID-19 cases and 29 deaths in the United States. That is probably just the tip of a much larger iceberg, the mathematical modeling suggests. Under their most optimistic assumptions, as few as 1,043 people in the United States have been infected with the novel coronavirus. Under a more realistic scenario, that number could easily be as high as 9,484. That only accounts for U.S. residents whose infections originated with people carrying the virus directly from Wuhan, the epicenter of the outbreak in China. In reality, many more people probably have brought the virus here from other hot spots, including Italy, South Korea and the rest of Asia. Each virus carrier who arrived from those places would set off his or her own cascade of infections. The model also stopped adding up infections as of March 1. But given its firm toehold in the United States by then, the virus could have racked up tens of thousands of new cases since that date. The mathematical simulation of the U.S. outbreak was run more than a thousand times by a team from Cedars-Sinai Medical Center in Los Angeles and Peking University in Beijing. The researchers began with a hypothetical group of undetected carriers -- probably eight to 16 people -- who arrived in the United States on direct flights from Wuhan after the virus now known as SARS-CoV-2 began infecting humans in late November but before those flights were halted on January. It's safe to assume that roughly half of these travelers were intercepted by U.S. health officials and saw their movements curtailed. The rest continued on their journeys with their undetected infections, each setting off an unrecognized chain of transmission. While it is impossible to see, the scope of that transmission can be estimated by adopting a range of assumptions about the movements of infected people and the behavior of the virus. Some of the team's assumptions are grounded in data collected by Chinese epidemiologists who have tracked the virus as it has roared through China. But other assumptions were a matter of judgment. Those included, for instance, the number of virus-exposed travelers leaving Wuhan in early January on U.S.-bound jumbo jets, and the impact of social isolation measures in limiting a person's opportunities to spread the virus. Where they had a range of assumptions to choose from, the researchers said they deliberately rejected the most alarming suspicions about, say, the virus' ability to jump from person to person. Instead, they consistently adopted measures of viral or human behavior that were more reassuring. As a result, their estimate probably sets a lower boundary on the virus' presence in the United States, the team wrote. The analysis began circulating Monday among epidemiologists but has not yet been subject to the rigorous academic scrutiny that typically precedes publication in a scientific journal. The authors said they planned to post the assumptions, equations and computer code that drove their analysis so that other disease modelers could comment and expand upon their findings. Experts in disease modeling said the preliminary model was a good start. While it worked around many of the outbreak's complexities, it has made reasonable assumptions and used plausible techniques that help describe the extent of the nation's public health challenge, said Gerardo Chowell, a mathematical epidemiologist at Georgia State University. "It's good to keep things simple," said Chowell, who studies the dynamics of epidemics. Some of the researchers' assumptions may overestimate the extent of undetected infection: In a country as large and diverse as the United States, many infected people may have gone home to low-density hometowns, where their chain of transmission fizzled, he said. But other assumptions, including the researchers' focus only on early travelers from Wuhan, have certainly underestimated the numbers of U.S. residents infected. Dr. Donald S. Burke, a disease modeler at the University of Pittsburgh, added that the team's assumptions about the coronavirus' ability to jump from person to person is especially conservative. The new analysis assumed that each infected person will pass the virus along to 2.1 to 2.5 others over the course of their infection, a number epidemiologists call the reproductive rate. But estimates of the coronavirus' reproductive rate in circumstances where it is spreading undetected has ranged between 5 and 6, so the researchers may have greatly underestimated the number of infections in the United States, Burke said. "The overall conclusion is, it's very likely there's a significant burden of disease we have yet to uncover," Chowell said. Some of that will probably show up as testing for the disease becomes more commonplace, he said. But much of the outbreak's unseen underside may never be counted. Caption: PHOTO: PASSENGERS from the Grand Princess cruise ship, which had 21 coronavirus cases and was stranded at sea, board flights after the ship docked in Oakland. PHOTOGRAPHER:Josh Edelson AFP/Getty Images 
Mar 12, 2020	President Trump suspended travel from Europe as the novel coronavirus continued its spread around the globe Wednesday, claiming its first life in Los Angeles County, prompting the NBA to suspend its season and causing the World Health Organization to refer to the outbreak for the first time as a pandemic. And in an announcement that brought the spreading public health crisis home to Hollywood, Tom Hanks said he and his wife, Rita Wilson, have tested positive for the coronavirus. "Hello, folks," Hanks said in a statement. "Rita and I are down here in Australia. We felt a bit tired, like we had colds, and some body aches. Rita had some chills that came and went. Slight fevers too. To play things right, as is needed in the world right now, we were tested for the Coronavirus, and were found to be positive."  Meanwhile, San Francisco and Seattle announced bans on large gatherings, and a growing number of universities moved to hold classes online. In a sign of how surreal the disruption of American life looks to become, NCAA tournament games for men's and women's basketball will be played in empty arenas. "This is the first pandemic caused by a coronavirus," WHO chief Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus said. "We have rung the alarm bell loud and clear." In a televised address to the nation Wednesday night, Trump imposed stringent new restrictions, barring foreign nationals traveling from Europe from entering the country for 30 days beginning Friday. The ban does not include the United Kingdom and does not affect travel by U.S. citizens, permanent residents or immediate family members of U.S. citizens. It applies to any foreign national who has been in Europe during the 14 days prior to their scheduled arrival in the U.S. "The European Union failed to take the same precautions" as the United States did in barring travel from China, he said, claiming that U.S. clusters of the disease were "seeded by travelers from Europe." Trump said he is instructing the Small Business Administration to provide new low-interest loans for some businesses hurt by the outbreak and asked Congress to approve $50 billion in additional funding for that purpose. And he asked Congress again to approve payroll tax relief, a proposal that neither party on Capitol Hill has favored. "This is the most aggressive and comprehensive effort to confront a foreign virus in modern history," Trump said. "I am confident by continuing to take these tough measures we will significantly reduce the threat to our citizens and we will ultimately and expeditiously defeat this virus." The NBA's announcement came after a player for the Utah Jazz tested positive for the coronavirus. In a bizarre scene, the game in Oklahoma City between the Thunder and the Jazz was delayed seconds before tipoff and canceled minutes later. "The NBA announced that a player on the Utah Jazz has preliminarily tested positive for COVID-19," the league said in a statement. "The test result was reported shortly prior to the tip-off of tonight's game between the Jazz and Oklahoma City Thunder at Chesapeake Energy Arena. At that time, tonight's game was canceled. The affected player was not in the arena." Meanwhile, L.A. County health officials continued to urge people -- particularly elderly residents, pregnant women and those with underlying health problems -- to be cautious in large crowds or avoid them altogether, but they said the number of cases did not yet warrant closing schools or stadiums. "We will get to a point, unfortunately, here in L.A. County, where we will be asking for events to close," said Barbara Ferrer, director of the Los Angeles County Department of Public Health. "But we're not there yet." The person who died was a woman older than 60 who had underlying health conditions and was visiting Los Angeles County after extensive travel over the last month, including a long layover in South Korea. "Shortly after being hospitalized, she unfortunately passed," Ferrer said. Nine new cases confirmed Wednesday brought the total to 29 in the county, officials reported -- a reflection of the minimal amount of testing conducted so far. Ferrer added that one of the new cases came from community spread and that the contagion is not just in a few pockets but "scattered throughout the entire county." "If you are a person who is older and you have underlying health conditions or you have a serious immunocompromised system, or you are a pregnant woman or you are just aging, this is the time to avoid all nonessential travel, this is the time to stop going to events where there are large groups of people gathering, this is the time to stop going to the theater or concerts or sporting events," Ferrer said. Gov. Gavin Newsom said Tuesday that thousands of California residents may have been exposed to the virus. The United States has surpassed 1,200 coronavirus cases, with most in Washington state, New York and California, where the Department of Public Health reported a total of 177 positive cases. On Wednesday, officials continued to allow passengers to leave the Grand Princess cruise ship, on which at least 21 people tested positive for the coronavirus. By Tuesday evening, 1,452 had been transferred to be quarantined at Air Force bases or flown to their home countries. On Wednesday, officials announced that 120 people showing signs of illness would be quarantined separately at an otherwise empty hotel in San Pablo. The mounting side effects of the virus could be seen across the country: empty subway cars, quiet streets, a rodeo canceled in Houston, tours of the Capitol stopped in Washington, and the Dow Jones industrial average having entered bear territory after an 11-year bull market. In Washington state, Gov. Jay Inslee banned events involving any gathering of more than 250 people in the Seattle metro area -- be it Sunday church, a wedding, a concert or a political fundraiser. It does not extend to airports, grocery stores or transportation systems such as buses and ferries. The big conundrum public officials are facing is whether to close school systems. Seattle announced plans to shut its public schools for two weeks starting Thursday. But Los Angeles, Santa Clara and San Francisco counties are holding off such closures, at least for now. "In children, the illness has been very mild," said Dr. Grant Colfax, health officer for San Francisco, adding that they are either showing no signs of physical illness or experiencing mild flu-like symptoms. In a study of nearly 45,000 lab-confirmed coronavirus cases, no one under the age of 10 has died of the virus. Colfax and other health experts raise the possibility that closing schools could actually cause more deaths, as a number of those children stay home with elderly caretakers who are much more likely to succumb to the disease. Santa Clara County, which has the state's largest outbreak with 48 confirmed cases, is keeping its schools open for now. But others are closing. In the Sacramento suburb of Elk Grove, public schools were closed after two family members of students at several campuses tested positive for the coronavirus. Sacramento County health officials announced Tuesday that a nursing home patient in Elk Grove became the county's first fatality from COVID-19. The woman, 90, was among about 140 patients at the facility. Dr. Peter Beilenson, Sacramento County's health director, said other residents of the Elk Grove facility are now subject to special protective measures, including having meals delivered to rooms and not being allowed to congregate in communal areas. He said the county was changing its goal from trying to keep the virus contained to simply slowing its spread. That is the approach of the World Health Organization as well. "Even those countries with community transmission or larger clusters can turn the tide on this virus," said Tedros, the director-general of WHO. He said his agency's calling the disease a pandemic -- a word many experts have been using for weeks -- doesn't change the need for more aggressive government responses. "WHO has been assessing this outbreak around the clock, and we're deeply concerned both by the alarming levels of spread and severity and by the alarming levels of inaction," Tedros said. The coronavirus outbreak has now sickened at least 125,000 people on six continents and caused more than 4,600 deaths. The objective now is to spread out the inevitable infections so that the healthcare system isn't overwhelmed with patients. Public health officials have a name for this: flattening the curve. Left alone, the virus would race through the population, and the number of cases would shoot skyward and then fall, resembling the shape of a mountain peak. But with containment measures, the curve can be squashed into a wide hill. The outbreak would take longer to run its course. But if the strategy works, the number of people who are sick at any given time will be greatly reduced. Ideally, it would fall below the threshold that would swamp hospitals, urgent care clinics and medical offices. That's why public health officials will continue the labor-intensive work of recording and tracking new infections, ensuring that infected individuals stay home and guarding the borders against the arrival of new cases. At the same time, they'll expand their mitigation efforts, such as canceling events and encouraging people to work from home. Many universities are moving their classes online; on Wednesday, Cal State Long Beach, Cal State L.A., Pepperdine and Chapman universities announced such measures. In some ways, mitigation is just containment on a larger scale. Instead of focusing on a single infected individual, officials target clusters of infected people. Buildings, city blocks or whole neighborhoods might be identified as infected, then walled off. That's why New York Gov. Andrew Cuomo dispatched the National Guard to suburban New Rochelle to enforce a "containment zone" around a community with more than 100 infected residents. Even when infections are unavoidable, pushing them into the future will increase the chances that a treatment will be available by the time a patient needs it. Some might even benefit from a coronavirus vaccine, though that is nearly a year away at best. "What we have to do right now is to put a lid on this epidemic, to flatten the curve of infection and buy ourselves some time to get a vaccine," said Georgetown University's Lawrence Gostin, an expert in public health law. "We are going to have to think about bringing all the interventions we have up to scale." -- Times staff writers Josh Rottenberg, Dan Woike and Soumya Karlamangla contributed to this report. Caption: PHOTO: UCLA STUDENT Kiera Laney, 20, uses her laptop for a virtual class as a growing number of universities moved sessions online. Meanwhile, L.A. County on Wednesday reported its first death from the coronavirus. PHOTOGRAPHER:Christina House Los Angeles Times PHOTO:PRESIDENT TRUMP speaks from the Oval Office in an address to the nation in which he announced a ban on foreign nationals traveling to the U.S. from Europe. PHOTOGRAPHER:Doug Mills Pool Photo 
Mar 12, 2020	With hopes of tapping into a market of up to 83 million passengers, the world's largest cruise company three years ago launched a new ship built specifically for Chinese vacationers. The Majestic Princess, operated by a subsidiary of Carnival Corp., features 1,780 cabins, 19 decks, an atrium and nearly 1,100 square meters of luxury boutiques, representing the largest shopping space at sea. But the ship is now docked in Singapore, with its next 13 cruise trips canceled.  With China representing ground zero for the outbreak of the deadly coronavirus and thousands of cruise ship passengers forced to undergo extra health screenings or a quarantine in Oakland, the cruise industry is reeling, facing its biggest crisis in decades. The dilemma grew worse over the weekend with the U.S. State Department recommending that Americans, particularly travelers with underlying health conditions, avoid cruise ships. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention said "a cruise-ship environment" could increase the risk of infection. "It's horrific," said Carl Winston, director of the L. Robert Payne School of Hospitality & Tourism at San Diego State University. "I can't imagine a single industry being called out like that." Gloria Guevara Manzo, president of the World Travel and Tourism Council, chimed in on the crisis, saying she disagrees with the State Department's recommendations against cruising, saying sailing on a cruise ship is just as safe as visiting a movie theater or a sports stadium. She said she would have preferred that the State Department had only warned people with underlying health conditions to stay home. The blow from the outbreak could be the most devastating in years, possibly surpassing the drop in passenger demand when the Costa Concordia sank off the coast of Italy in 2012 and the Carnival Triumph was left floating powerless in the Gulf of Mexico after an engine fire the following year, according to Winston and other experts. Shares of the world's largest cruise companies -- Carnival Corp., Royal Caribbean International and Norwegian Cruise Line -- dropped as much as 26% on Monday, after several weeks of declines as the virus' toll continued to grow. The effect will also include the added costs of the new enhanced cleaning procedures adopted on most cruise lines, including more frequent cleaning of hard surfaces, and the cost to defend against lawsuits filed by passengers who have been stuck on delayed or quarantined ships. Moody's Investors Service lowered its outlook for the lodging and cruise industry last week to "negative" from "stable," saying both industries face revenue losses in 2020 if the outbreak is not contained. "If COVID-19 confirmed cases continue to rise in North America, no lodging or cruise company could be immune to financial consequences," Moody's said in a report Friday. If travelers do abandon cruise trips, experts say it is not clear how long the cruise industry can withstand the revenue loss before turning to dramatic cost-cutting measures such as layoffs. "The key question is what is their staying power," Winston said. "How much cash do they have in the bank to stay afloat?" Carnival, the world's largest cruise company, reported net income of $3 billion last year, compared with $3.2 billion in 2018. Travel agencies say most of their clients who had previously booked cruise trips -- even river cruises in Europe -- are now postponing those trips for several months instead of canceling them altogether. "They are just moving them down the line," said Jay Johnson, owner of Coastline Travel Advisors in Garden Grove. The outbreak comes after five or six years of growing profits and bookings for the cruise industry. Before the outbreak, a trade group for the cruise industry predicted 32 million passengers would sail on cruise ships worldwide in 2020, up from 30 million in the previous year. To meet the increasing demand, the world's cruise companies were scheduled to launch 19 new ships in 2020, for a total of 278 cruise ships registered as members of the Cruise Lines International Assn. The industry supports nearly 1.2 million jobs, generating $50.2 billion in wages and salaries, according to the trade group. After the capsizing of the Costa Concordia off Italy's Tuscan coast and the fire on the Carnival Triumph, demand for cruise trips slowed to about 2% to 3% growth per year, down from the industry's typical 7% annual increases. Hoping to tap into a surging middle class in China, several cruise companies began in 2016 to add lines to serve Asian markets. Some cruise lines even revamped their ships to better serve Chinese customers. Royal Caribbean's Quantum of the Seas swapped out a Johnny Rockets retro burger joint for a noodle restaurant and replaced the duty-free shop with a luxury leather boutique. The 1,100-foot ship was relocated from New Jersey to Shanghai as part of the effort to attract new passengers. But in late January, when the scope of the coronavirus outbreak became clear, cruise lines started to cancel sailings to and from mainland China and began to restrict passengers who had previously visited China, South Korea, Italy and other regions hit hard by the outbreak. Despite the cancellations, industry experts say cruise prices have not dropped significantly. But Carnival recently offered as much as $200 in "credits" that passengers can spend on ships if they keep their reservations through May 31. Cruise lines are reluctant to lower trip prices because they can't raise them back too drastically after the crisis has passed, for fear of scaring off potential customers, according to industry experts. Stewart Chiron, who reviews cruises on his website cruiseguy.com, said the coronavirus outbreak may be the worst blow that the industry has seen. But he noted that unlike the hotel industry, cruise lines can speed up the recovery by redirecting ships to new destinations that are not as heavily hit as China or Italy. And he added that cruise passengers are typically very loyal customers and are likely to return to cruising after the shock of the outbreak wears off. "It's inevitable that the industry will rebound and persevere," he said. "It's a resilient industry." Johnson of Coastline Travel Advisors said many cruise companies are waiving penalties they usually charge for passengers who reschedule a booked trip. He expects that cruise lines will eventually offer discounts to entice travelers back to the water. "There will be a lot of inventory and the big discounts will come in the fall," he said. Caption: PHOTO: THE VIRUS' blow to the sector could be the most devastating in years. Above, the Grand Princess at the Port of Oakland on Tuesday. PHOTOGRAPHER:Justin Sullivan Getty Images PHOTO:PASSENGERS disembark from the Grand Princess in the Port of Oakland on Tuesday. The ship was held off the coast of California after several people on board tested positive for the new coronavirus. PHOTOGRAPHER:Justin Sullivan Getty Images PHOTO:CARNIVAL Corp.'s Majestic Princess was built for the China market. Above, the ship in Auckland, New Zealand, in 2018. PHOTOGRAPHER:James D. Morgan Getty Images for Princess Cruises 
Mar 12, 2020	The coronavirus outbreak is turning one luxury treat reserved for special occasions into a meal bargain hunters can afford. U.S. lobster prices have plummeted to the lowest in at least four years after the spread of the virus halted charter flights to Asia at a time when sales usually boom for Chinese New Year celebrations. The fallout has left thousands of pounds of unsold lobster flooding North American markets and squeezing U.S. businesses that were already hurting from lost sales due to China's tariffs from its trade war with Washington.  "This is like a fatal blow," said Stephanie Nadeau, owner of Arundel, Maine-based Lobster Co., which saw orders to Hong Kong shrivel from about 1,000 boxes a week to a total of 120 boxes -- each carrying 33 pounds -- since late January. "I'm about to lay off most of my employees." The U.S. used to be the main supplier of live lobster to China as exporters tapped into surging demand from the Asian nation's growing middle class. Buyers turned to relatively cheaper supply from Canada after Beijing placed retaliatory tariffs on American crustaceans in 2018. Canada typically sent about nine charter flights a week, with a total of 1.5 million pounds of the shellfish, from Nova Scotia to South Korea and mainland China for everything from restaurants and markets to business meetings and weddings. But as the coronavirus outbreak disrupted travel and transport in Asian nations including China, Canadian product began flooding the U.S. market, according to research company Urner Barry, which has been tracking food prices since 1858. That pushed prices lower, said Liz Cuozzo, seafood market reporter at Urner Barry. Prices for New England halves -- a whole lobster weighing 1 1/2 pounds -- have tumbled 17% since Jan. 20 and are currently at $8.10, the lowest for the period since at least 2016, she said. They typically rise this time of year as supplies are tighter before the main fishing season begins. Last year, they cost $10.70, with the 10-year average at $9.85. Demand for live Canadian lobster has dwindled to 5% of normal volumes in mainland China since the Lunar New Year when restaurants started canceling reservations and people stayed home, said Stewart Lamont, managing director of Tangier Lobster Co. in Nova Scotia. Lobsters have been sold aggressively over the last month to try to get ahead of the decline in export valuations, and companies are moving out some of their inventory, he said in an email. While fishers have been relatively insulated from the price decline, dealers and exporters in Canada and the U.S. have taken a substantial inventory loss and are charging importers and distributors in the Pacific Rim as much as 35% less than a month ago, he said. Lobsters that sold a month ago for $8.75 to $9 a pound plus freight charges are now selling for $6.52 to $7 plus freight, Lamont said. That kind of price drop at this time of year happening so quickly is almost unprecedented, he said. "It does not mean the lobsters are so cheap now in the market," Lamont said by email. "It means that all of December and January they were very expensive." It's not just the U.S. and Canada that are affected. Australia counts China as the main destination for its rock lobster exports, and its seafood industry will probably see significant short-term effects, the nation's agriculture ministry said in a report. New Zealand said it'll allow a limited release of rock lobster back into the wild after Chinese buyers canceled orders. There's a risk that other markets may shut down as the virus spreads, and uncertainty swirls over how many smaller merchants or mom-and-pop restaurants in China may be out of business and not return to buy after the outbreak, said Mark Barlow, owner of Island Seafood in Eliot, Maine. Lobster Co.'s Nadeau saw her inventory lose 40% of its value as shore prices dipped from $7.45 to $4.38 and she was forced to sell 50,000 pounds at a loss. She is laying off eight people from her staff of 14. "My customers got creamed and I got creamed," she said. Caption: PHOTO: LOBSTERMEN haul in a catch in Canada last year. As the coronavirus outbreak disrupted travel and transport in Asian nations, including China, Canadian lobster products began flooding the U.S. market. PHOTOGRAPHER:Bonnie Jo Mount Washington Post Credit: Skerritt writes for Bloomberg. 
Mar 11, 2020	It’s hard to believe we’ve devoted so little of our memory to something that killed 50 million people. Once in a while, the 1918 flu epidemic pops up — like a plot point in the period TV drama “Downton Abbey.” But in an age before instant communications, and in the midst of that vast man-made meat grinder of death called World War I, our exhausted species buried the epidemic along with its dead. Yet with the coronavirus now on the move around the world, it’s worth resurrecting the 1918 pandemic to study ourselves then, know how we reacted to it, how we learned and didn’t learn from it. Laura Spinney is a science journalist whose book “Pale Rider: The Spanish Flu of 1918 and How It Changed the World,” gives us what we have forgotten or never knew about this illness that killed almost three times the 18 million victims of World War I. Many millions caught the Spanish flu but survived: the king of Spain, paradoxically; Mohandas K. Gandhi; Franklin Delano Roosevelt; and Walt Disney. When you think of our alternative history had they not survived, you get a sense of how life-altering this death tsunami was for the world. ***** Are we seeing deja vu all over again for what was called the Spanish flu? The Spanish flu is one of the worst, if not the worst, pandemics that humanity has ever known. And I think we should hope that this one is not that bad. We’ve had many other pandemics, both of flu and of other diseases, that were not nearly as bad as the Spanish flu of 100 years ago. So, yes, there are parallels, but I think we need to keep it within perspective. What are some characteristics that we see in every one of these, about human behavior, human psychology, the disruptions to society and to economies? An epidemic of infectious disease is something that brings us right down to earth. It kind of makes a mockery of all the ways that human beings like to divide themselves up, by class, by wealth, by color, by religion, because everybody is vulnerable. For example, borders — borders don’t coincide with geographical frontiers, with oceans or mountains. They’re lines on a map. They’re ideas that some politician had. And viruses have no idea what that means, and they just walk across them. What about our individual psychology? There’s a lot of fear and some of that is reasonable. This is a disease that we don’t yet understand. It looks to be more lethal than seasonal flu, and perhaps more contagious. But I think that a big important issue here is information. And people will act sensibly and appropriately and proportionately if they’re properly informed. And we don’t seem to be able to manage that information dimension of pandemic very well. In 1918, for example, there was a big problem of wartime censorship, which blocked information getting out there. And today we have a very different problem, which sort of comes to the same thing in the end, which is fake news. I think it’s a big problem in trying to inform people about this current outbreak and how best to manage it and behave in it. As a lot of young people have pointed out to me, information tends to be locked behind paywalls these days, whereas fake news is free. And this is the attitude of people who’ve grown up with the internet: They don’t expect to pay for their information. And so they get deluged with a lot of bad information. And I think that a lot of the kind of disproportionate behavior stems from that fact. Information, we’ve learned, is absolutely crucial to managing an epidemic. You want people to comply with your public health measures voluntarily, because we know that mandatory health measures tend to be counterproductive. They’re only going to do that if, A, they trust you, and B, you give them correct information. We have a massive problem of fake news, and that is going to be a major obstacle this time around. Does people’s behavior alter, or are we at heart the same scared, selfish creatures we’ve been for thousands of years? I think we’re the same inconsistent creatures we’ve been for thousands of years. In Europe, 40,000 people will probably die from seasonal flu this winter. Nobody is panicking about that. And in a sense, that’s understandable, because we know a lot more about the flu. There’s a flu season every year. We sort of know what to expect. Whereas we don’t know what to expect from this coronavirus. But in another way, it suggests that we’ve got things out of perspective. And I think that in some ways we’re very irrational and we react to the news cycle. If we could just draw back a little bit and see that HIV has been killing legions of people for decades. TB is on the rise because there’s anti-microbial resistance, which means that the drugs aren’t working that well anymore. Childhood diseases are coming back largely because of vaccine hesitancy. I mean, this could go very big, this coronavirus. But at the same time, it’s not the only problem, and we mustn’t lose sight of the others. What would it have been like to be alive and in your 20s in 1918 or 1919, when you were doing your daily business, whether it was going to the market or maybe going to the movies or taking a train to see a relative? How different did the world look with the flu afoot? One thing that we can’t overlook is that the world was at war. And so people in their 20s — say, people between 20 to 40 — were of conscriptable age and in many countries were active in the military. The age group of 20 to 40 unfortunately was also very vulnerable to the Spanish flu for reasons that we only partly understand today. Daily life was rather traumatic at that time. Pregnant women were particularly vulnerable and had miscarriages in large numbers, and also died more commonly than people who weren’t pregnant and people in other age groups. Everything I say has to come with the caveat that it depends where you were in the world, because this is a global phenomenon. But say we’re talking about the industrialized parts of the world: Those were the parts that were beginning to be used to the concept of public health campaigns, to the idea that governments could intervene in your private lives and tell you how to behave for the collective good of society. Wear a mask. Don’t cough. Use a handkerchief. Also it was a very much more obedient society in some ways. Doctors were far more paternalistic, and people were far more willing to do what the doctor told them without questioning it than they are today. That was enhanced also by time of war. It was almost a patriotic duty to put your mask on and not shake hands and use a handkerchief and so on . People were more likely to respond with mystical explanations in religion in 1918, to find religious explanations for what was happening to them. Psychologically, I think it was much easier even for people in supposedly advanced countries to try and find mystical explanations for this maybe divine punishment for this dreadful war. You’re going to go to the church or the mosque, go to the synagogue and pray, which is probably not wise if it means that you’re going into a crowd of other people. And indeed, you see that as we’re seeing in South Korea today, that gatherings in religious sects and so on in places of worship are accelerating the spread of the disease. And they did so in 1918 as well. During the war, of course people would have had to sacrifice and pull together. Did that in any way prepare them to deal with this pandemic of flu? Because in your book, you write that your best chance of survival was to be selfish and guard your food and water and ignore all pleas for help, which seemed to work against the “let’s all pull together” war effort of the previous four years. What I was trying to say in the book was that logically, rationally, the best way to bring a pandemic or epidemic to an end quickly with the minimum number of casualties is that everybody isolate themselves because then the virus can’t spread and it dies out. But actually, and in some ways heartwarmingly though not very rationally, our instinct is to help each other. You see that very often people went to each other’s aid — and not just family and friends, but also strangers. Psychologists talk about something called collective resilience. They talk about the idea that when there’s an external threat — a disease of this kind, for example — people start redefining themselves. The self is no longer the individual self. It’s the collective self, because it’s everyone who’s threatened by this external thing, and so people pull together as a collective self and they consider themselves all in the same boat. And of course, it is antithetical to the idea of stopping the infection from spreading. But it’s a basic human instinct, for better or worse. Over centuries, when diseases have appeared, blame has been assigned. Sometimes the Jews were blamed. Syphilis was called the French pox, if you weren’t French. In this case, the Spanish flu was not Spanish. This is an uglier aspect of disease and human nature. It is the eternal human dilemma. Who is us and who is not us? Who is other and where is this threat coming from? And so the other side of human behavior that we tend to see in epidemics is this pointing of blame. And we’re seeing it today with the coronavirus. There have been massive reports, spiking reports, of xenophobia directed at people of East Asian descent. During the plague outbreaks of the Middle Ages, Jews were very often blamed for poisoning the water in the wells, and expelled, and all sorts of other awful things happened to them. This is a perennial and ugly side of human nature. After the flu epidemic there were world-shaking political consequences. When 50 million people die, or 2.5% of the human population, which is what we’re talking about, that is not negligible. That is going to have an impact. If you take the example of South Africa, there were already the stirrings of what would become apartheid. There had been talk of segregating towns along color lines, but nothing had been translated into law. And you see that translation into law happening from the 1920s. One of the arguments I made in my book, for which I think there’s pretty good evidence, is that the epidemic gave a big spur to that legislation because white people blamed very explicitly black people for bringing in the disease without any evidence whatsoever. In fact the black population suffered much worse than the white population in terms of percentages in South Africa. In India, when the pandemic struck, it became absolutely blatantly clear to everyone how dismally the British colonial authorities had provided for the healthcare of the indigenous population. People were dying in droves and in the absence of any British doctors — the British doctors there were, were very often at the front as well — the hole was even more glaring. The people who stepped into that [medical] breach tended to be the militants, the grassroots militant activists for independence who had already worked out how to cross caste barriers and work together for a different goal, i.e. independence. Once the pandemic passed, emotion against the British was even higher than it had been before. And secondly, those people were far more united than they had been. And now they came together behind Gandhi. He found that suddenly, he had the grassroots support that he had been lacking until then. What about social changes within the family or a society? Huge demographic changes. Often it was the pillars of the community, the breadwinners, who were being taken out. The few studies there are suggest that old people went in droves into workhouses because they no longer had any way of supporting themselves. There were also millions of orphans created. Even in the most advanced countries of that time, there was no real social welfare net, no organized system of adoption. And so these people kind of just vanish. Another interesting observation is that we’re talking about a time when the biggest killer of human beings was infectious disease. What it did as a result was to leave behind a smaller but in many ways healthier population, which now began to reproduce at a higher rate. So what you see in the 1920s is a baby boom. If you look at humanity at the population level, it’s recovering from this huge disaster very, very quickly in a way. When it comes to medicine and its ability to cope and its advances, we’d had four years of very heroic battlefield medicine, but those techniques were exactly the opposite or inadequate when it would come to dealing with a pandemic. What came out of this in terms of medicine and public health? Virus was a relatively new concept when the Spanish flu exploded, and once it had receded, I think doctors took a long, hard look at what they knew or more importantly, what they didn’t know. You see from the 1920s, the field of virology takes off, also the field of epidemiology, and epidemiology is the cornerstone of good public health. You see the discussion around socialized healthcare, the idea of a universal healthcare system that’s free at the point of delivery, start. They’d already been ongoing for a couple of decades, but now they really start coming together. And then the other really important thing is, is a global health agency. The League of Nations had a health branch — essentially the forerunner of the World Health Organization, which was created in 1946. Of course, it’s the World Health Organization that is managing the global response to this current outbreak. But what I think is interesting is that these days, the World Health Organization has less sway than it had in the past. It’s chronically underfunded by its member nations. And many of them have ignored its recommendations during this outbreak. We’ve forgotten a lot of the lessons that we learned after the Spanish flu and other pandemics, and we may be about to learn them again. When you watch the news, read the news, follow this, what are you watching for? One of the things that’s become clear about managing any epidemic is that they tend to grow very fast in the first weeks or months. You can think of it like a forest fire that initially, when it sparks is surrounded by dry wood and so it just takes off, and then it gradually burns up its fuel and it runs out of fuel and it slows down and gradually it burns itself out. An epidemic is a little bit the same, in the sense that it’s initially surrounded by everybody susceptible. As it burns through those hosts, either kills them or leaves them to some extent immune, it runs out of hosts and so gradually burns out. If you can slow down that initial pattern of growth, that initial period of growth, you can make a massive difference in terms of how many people will eventually suffer from this pandemic overall. How are we doing? In retrospect, I think the Chinese did an amazing job. We see now that the rate of new cases in China is slowed down dramatically. We shouldn’t be complacent, but that is encouraging. That means that, OK, it took a certain authoritarian regime to enact it. Did you have any episodes of this flu in your family history in 1918-19? The grandfather of my stepdaughter. When he died, they renovated his farmhouse in the north of Sweden. They found a pack of love letters bricked up inside the wall. And it turned out they were love letters that he’d written to his first wife, his beloved first wife, who died a few weeks after their marriage, in the summer of 1918, of the Spanish flu, and he ended up marrying her best friend, who was the grandmother of that whole branch of the family that survived. It illustrates how to us, looking back, everything seems to have happened as it should have been. But there was a huge game of musical chairs that set in after the Spanish flu, and people’s families were rearranged. You didn’t necessarily feel that you were married to the person you wanted to be or you were supposed to be. Life suddenly took a very different path and people had to adapt. 
Mar 11, 2020	It started off like many film festival conversations. Sliding into his seat at the Main Squeeze on 9th Street in Columbia, Jon Murray extolled the power of “Sunless Shadows,” Mehrdad Oskouei’s documentary about a group of Iranian women imprisoned for murdering the fathers, husbands and brothers who abused them. “I just saw an amazing film.” The then conversation took a bit of a twist. “At one point, one of the women addresses the camera directly,” Murray says, “and I thought, ‘Ah, the confessional.’ Which we introduced in ‘The Real World’ Season 2. Of course,” he adds, “we got it from Warren Beatty’s ‘Reds,’ but you didn’t see it in documentary before ‘The Real World.’ And now you do.” And there you have it, the great blur — between film and television, feature and documentary, nonfiction and journalism, popular culture high and low — diagrammed in three sentences by a man who as a founder of American reality television is one of the world’s leading experts in genre fluidity. Not that Murray considers reality television low culture. He and Mary-Ellis Bunim created “The Real World” in part to offer audiences a chance to experience life outside their own particular bubble. “We believed,” he said in an earlier conversation, “that if we bring different kinds of people together, after all the drama and the shouting, they will find they have more in common than not.” Certainly, the casting of Pedro Zamora in the show’s third season, “The Real World: San Francisco” had the kind of effect many documentary filmmakers dream of. As the first gay man with AIDS to be featured in mainstream media, Zamora helped changed cultural attitudes. When he died in the same year the show aired, he was mourned by millions. “President Clinton said Pedro did more to educate Americans about AIDS than anything else.” There were many notable aspects of this year’s True/False Film Fest, a 17-year-old celebration of documentary and nonfiction that draws 16,000 filmmakers and movie fans from around the world to the unlikely spot of Columbia. Including that it happened at all. Even as South by Southwest in Austin, Texas, and other festivals and public events were being canceled over coronavirus concerns, True/False slid through four days of packed movie houses on a sea of antibacterial gel (prominently provided at every venue), liquid soap (religiously replenished in every public restroom) and the blessings of the Boone County Health Department. There are advantages to being smack dab in the middle of fly-over country, Columbia Mayor Brian Treece said in a press conference held on the festival’s opening day, March 5, to assuage any local concerns. There were no films coming from the hardest-hit countries — China, Iran, Italy and South Korea — so festival organizers felt confident that following guidelines from the national Centers for Disease Control and Prevention would offset any risk. And with the exception of a few sponsor reps, who were no-shows after their companies issued “no unnecessary travel” policies, the only significant cancellation was by Musa Hadid, the mayor of Ramallah, West Bank, and the subject of David Osit’s revelatory “Mayor.” Hadid was on his way to the airport when the Palestinian government issued a similar policy, but he sent his greetings via Osit to standing ovation crowds. Elbow bumps occasionally replaced handshakes, but not all that often, and as crowds spread across the sidewalks under the unseasonably warm and sunny skies, there was nary a face mask in sight. But for me, the most notable aspect of this year’s True/False was the ability to see it briefly through the eyes of Murray. Murray is, after all, a former journalist who cofounded Bunim/Murray Productions. He, along with his partner, Bunim, practically invented reality television with “The Real World” (which, after 32 seasons on MTV, recently had a 33rd on Facebook Watch), “Road Rules,” “Starting Over” and “The Simple Life” before executive-producing the pop culture revolution that is “Keeping Up With the Kardashians” and all its various spin-offs. In recent years, BMP has moved into documentary film — “Autism: the Musical” “Valentine Road” — and series — “Citizen Rose” and “Surviving R. Kelly.” For Murray, who now serves as creative consultant at BMP, the recent explosion of documentary filmmaking, and the exploding of the traditional rules of what that is, makes perfect sense — there are as many ways to tell a nonfiction story as a fictional one. Maybe even more. True/False fest has always had a nonbinary, all-inclusive attitude toward the definition of “documentary.” This year, Kitty Green’s feature “The Assistant” was part of the early, unofficial opening and several films, including Turner and Bill Ross’ “Bloody Nose, Empty Pockets” used staged situations to “document” larger truths. Green, who is best known for documentaries including 2017’s “Casting JonBenet,” interviewed more than a hundred people before writing the script for the fictional “The Assistant.” For “Bloody Nose, Empty Pockets, the Ross brothers assembled a reality show-like cast put its members in a Vegas dive bar with a general prompt — act as if this were the last night of your favorite bar — and a series of announced cues. Which, if either, is nonfiction? “It’s a big question,” says Murray. “With ‘The Real World,’ we were very transparent. We chose seven people we thought were interesting to live together and then filmed what happened. With ‘Bloody Nose,’ the prompt was much more specific. I liked the film, but I’m not quite sure what it is.” “Sometimes,” he added, describing the festival, which he has attended for the last seven years, “you don’t know quite what you’re seeing. But that’s what makes it exciting.” And sometimes, at least for Murray, expensive. This was the first year Murray was attached to a festival entrant. He is a co-executive producer of David France’s “Welcome to Chechnya,” which documents a group of activists attempting to save LGBT+ people in that country from the horrific antigay purges being conducted by Chechen strongman Ramzan Kadyrov (and approved by Russian President Vladimir Putin). A traditional documentary that is by turns harrowing, horrifying, heartbreaking and inspiring, “Welcome to Chechnya” received the festival’s True Life Fund award this year. Murray’s involvement began at the end of last year’s True/False, when, leaving Columbia, he shared an airport shuttle with France. “I loved his film ‘How to Survive a Plague,’ so I asked him what he was working on,” he recalled. France told Murray that he had made “Welcome to Chechnya” but that he could not show it because he wanted to use digital facial transformation technology, the kind Martin Scorsese used in “The Irishman,” to disguise his subjects without dehumanizing them. But that technology was very expensive. France screened the film for Murray and his partner, Harvey Reese, at their L.A. home. They gave France a check for $250,000 and later held a fundraiser at their home in Cape Cod. “The moral of the story is,” Murray says, laughing “be careful who you get on an airport shuttle with.” But that was actually not the most costly visit Murray has made to True/False. On his first trip, seven years ago, he realized that while Columbia is home to both the largest documentary film festival in the country and one of its best journalism schools (from which he had graduated), that school did not have a documentary program. This seemed to Murray like a pretty big disconnect, so he started talking with festival founders and several journalism professors about fixing it. A year and a $6.7-million endowment later, the Jonathan B. Murray Center for Documentary Journalism was born. “Docs are critical to exploring social issues in depth and holding people in power accountable,” Murray says. “And with all the best documentary filmmakers coming to Columbia each year, we all loved putting equal emphasis on filmmaking and journalism.” With Robert Green as the artist in residence, Murray says, the program (from which my son is about to graduate) has a journalism bedrock infused with True/False. “But that’s how I feel about my reality career,” he says. “It was always grounded in journalism.” The Jonathan B. Murray Center is also a key sponsor of True/False, which means Murray’s name flashes on-screen, albeit amid a crowd of other sponsors, before all the films. This does not grant him any special dispensation, however. He had been hoping that “Transhood,” a film about a group of Kansas City parents navigating their children’s transition that he and Reese produced, would be at this year’s True/False. But it didn’t make the cut. “But HBO bought it,” he says, “and it showed at Toronto. So that was some consolation.” “It’s something,” he adds as we eat a lunch of organic vegetarian food — yes, even in Missouri — and discuss the multiplatform-amped world of documentary and his part in it. “The way things happen. For years, we pitched scripted series, even had a few pilots made. The only reason ‘Real World’ got made was because MTV couldn’t afford a scripted series. And look what happened.” He laughs, takes a bite of kale and looks at his watch — his former college roommate is meeting him before the festival premiere of “Welcome to Chechnya.” “I think about all the strange decisions that lead to where I am today, to creating a new genre that has changed so much.” He laughs suddenly. “I’m actually writing a one-man show about it,” he says. “About my life and my career. It’s in the early stages, and I’m not sure what I’ll do with it when it’s done.” Who knows? Maybe it’ll show up some year at True/False. 
Mar 11, 2020	As the novel coronavirus continues to spread, a new kind of cancel culture is taking hold in the entertainment industry. In recent weeks, movie releases, film festivals, concerts and other events involving public crowds and international travel have taken a hit from the spread of the COVID-19 respiratory illness. Even the venerable South by Southwest multimedia festival in Austin, Texas, has been canceled. And next month’s Coachella and Stagecoach festivals have been rescheduled until the fall. From “The Amazing Race” and “Sonic the Hedgehog” to the Louvre and Hong Kong Disneyland, here’s a rundown of what’s been affected by the coronavirus around the world. This list is being updated regularly as more events are canceled, so check back in. Events Following weeks of speculation, promoter Goldenvoice announced March 10 that two of its marquee annual festivals, the Coachella Valley Music and Arts Festival and Stagecoach , will shift from April to October. Both events take place at the Empire Polo Club in Indio. “At the direction of the County of Riverside and local health authorities,” Goldenvoice’s statement read, “we must sadly confirm the rescheduling of Coachella and Stagecoach due to COVID-19 concerns.” SXSW , which was set to take place March 16-22 in Austin, was canceled March 6. In an afternoon press conference, Austin Mayor Steve Adler said he had declared a local disaster and “together with that I have issued an order that effectively cancels South by Southwest this year.” Major participants including the Concord record label group, Facebook, Twitter, TikTok, Apple, Netflix and Amazon had already pulled out before the cancellation. E3 2020 , a.k.a. the Electronic Entertainment Expo, was canceled on March 11. The conference, which would have run June 9-11 at the L.A. Convention Center, is the top trade event for the video-game industry and has had tickets available to the public since 2017. Acting out of what it called “an abundance of caution,” Boston on March 9 shelved its famed St. Patrick’s Day Parade , which was set for March 15 and last year drew more than 1 million people. On March 11, Chicago called off its popular parade just days before its planned March 14 date, as did Pittsburgh before its March 15 event and Cleveland before its March 17 event. The New York City St. Patrick’s Day parade , which has been held every year since 1762, was finally canceled the afternoon of March 11. The parade features about 150,000 participants and draws about 2 million spectators. Those decisions follow similar announcements about the cancellation of all St. Patrick’s parades and festivals in Ireland and the Belfast St. Patrick’s parade in Northern Ireland. The Los Angeles Times Food Bowl , previously set for May, will be moved to the fall. Dates have yet to be announced. RuPaul’s DragCon L.A. 2020 , a celebration of drag, queer culture and self-expression that was set for May 1-3, has been canceled. The event will return in 2021, organizers said, and refunds will be issued. Chinese exhibitors will not attend CinemaCon 2020 , the movie industry’s annual trade show, in Las Vegas. The event is set to take place as planned March 30-April 2 at Caesars Palace, though organizers are enhancing “health and sanitation” measures for the convention and maintaining “daily communication” with the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, according to the CinemaCon website. San Francisco’s 2020 Game Developers Conference , a professional gathering for interactive industry members set for March 16-20, has been scrapped after multiple participants pulled out. Microsoft, Sony Interactive Entertainment, Electronic Arts, Facebook Gaming, Unity, Amazon and Activision Blizzard were among the top gaming companies that canceled. MIPTV 2020 , a March 30-April 2 global content conference in Cannes, France, has been canceled. Related events that were scheduled to take place March 28-29 also have been nixed. Organizers of the 2020 Thessaloniki Documentary Festival in Greece, which had been set for March 5-15, are considering rescheduling the event for the end of May or beginning of June, according to the festival’s website. Saudi Arabia’s inaugural Red Sea International Film Festival has been postponed indefinitely. The event was scheduled to run March 12-21. The 10th Beijing International Film Festival , originally scheduled for late April, has been postponed indefinitely. Organizers in Beijing said March 6 that new festival dates would be announced as soon as possible. The Prague International Film Festival , a.k.a. Febiofest, has been postponed indefinitely, organizers said March 10. It had been set for March 19-27. The government in the Czech Republic has banned gatherings of 100-plus people. Venice’s famed Carnival , which had been set to run Feb. 8-25, ended prematurely on Feb. 19. FILMART 2020 , the Hong Kong International Film & TV Market, now will be held Aug. 27-29 instead of the originally scheduled stretch in late March. It is the most significant film market in Asia. DC , the home of Wonder Woman, Batman, Superman and more, will not send staffers to comics conventions in March. The company says it will assess attendance at future conventions case by case. With COVID-19 hitting hard in Washington state, Emerald City Comic Con organizers decided March 6 to move the March 12-15 event to the summer. Refunds will be issued and details about the rescheduled Seattle event are forthcoming. The AFI Tribute to Julie Andrews , set for April 25, has been postponed until early summer, with a date to be announced later, the American Film Institute announced March 7. The air date on TNT will be rescheduled as well. Spain’s 23rd Malaga Festival , the biggest festival dedicated to Spanish and Latin American film and TV, has been postponed from its planned March 13-22 dates. No new dates have been floated yet. Berlin has closed all state-run theaters, operas and concert halls from March 11 through April 19. Movies Almost all movie theaters in mainland China — accounting for 70,000 screens — have been shuttered. Italy on March 4 closed “all theaters and cinema” where a one-meter distance requirement between patrons cannot be accommodated. Iran and the Czech Republic also have full cinema shutdowns. Movie theaters in Poland were closed on March 11. Lebanon and Kuwait have also closed theaters, among other measures. Individual states in India have been closing cinemas since March 10, while Korea, Japan, Hong Kong and northern France have partial closures. The forthcoming release of “No Time to Die , ” Daniel Craig’s final film in the James Bond franchise, has been postponed until November, according to MGM, Universal and Bond producers Michael G. Wilson and Barbara Broccoli. The movie, previously slated to debut in the U.S. on April 10, now will hit theaters Nov. 25. China releases for Paramount’s “Sonic the Hedgehog,” Universal’s “1917,” Searchlight’s “Jojo Rabbit” and Universal’s “Dolittle” have been postponed indefinitely. Should precautions related to the outbreak persist, forthcoming titles including Pixar’s “Onward” and Sony Pictures’ “Bloodshot” could also be at risk. Sony on March 10 postponed the release of “Peter Rabbit 2" until Aug. 7 in the U.S. and U.K. It had been set to premiere March 27 in the U.K. and Europe and April 3 in the U.S. Production on Paramount’s latest “Mission: Impossible” project has been delayed. The action flick, starring Tom Cruise, was set to film on location in Italy, which has seen one of the largest outbreaks of coronavirus outside Asia. The seventh film in the franchise is scheduled to hit theaters in July 2021. Major movie studios in China, including Qingdao Oriental Movie Metropolis and Hengdian World Studios , have shut down operations. The Chinese government has put an indefinite halt on all film production in the country. After learning that one of its London employees might have been exposed to the novel coronavirus, Sony Pictures Entertainment on March 4 closed its offices for a week in London, Paris and Gdynia, Poland. Employees were asked to work from home. Music BTS, Green Day , Khalid , New Order , Pentatonix, Stormzy , Mariah Carey, Avril Lavigne , Louis Tomlinson, a-ha, Santana, Madonna and Testament are among the many music acts who have called off or postponed tour dates and performances. Saying on Twitter on March 10 that they “have no reason to believe that it will be under control in the coming weeks ahead,” Pearl Jam indefinitely postponed the North American leg of their “Gigaton” tour, which had included two mid-April dates at the Forum in Inglewood. “Again, here in Seattle what we are witnessing we would not wish for anyone.” After the late pullout by Miley Cyrus on March 9, the World Tour Bushfire Relief benefit concert in Melbourne, Australia, was canceled. Lil Nas X, pop duo the Veronicas and DJ Seb Fontaine also were on the bill for the show, which was to have been March 13. The 2020 Piatigorsky International Cello Festival , an event that happens every four years and was set this time for March 13-22, was canceled Tuesday by host USC. Four LA Phil concerts at Walt Disney Concert Hall that were part of the 42-event festival are still on the calendar for March 20-22. The Philharmonic Society of Orange County canceled a Shanghai Chinese Orchestra concert in Costa Mesa last month, despite all of the musicians being in good health. A Chinese New Year celebration was scheduled to take place Feb. 5 at Segerstrom Center for the Arts. The 18th Korea Times Music Festival , set to take place at the Hollywood Bowl on April 25, has been postponed “due to current travel restrictions in Asia,” organizers said. Ticket refunds are available. The Ultra Music Festival , a massive Miami-based electronic music event, has been pushed back. The three-day concert, which draws 165,000 fans from across the globe, likely will be moved from this March to 2021. The Tomorrowland Winter 2020 electronic-music festival, set to run March 14-21 at a ski resort in the French Alps, has been canceled by organizers after the French government banned all indoor gatherings of more than 5,000 people. Tomorrowland Summer 2020 in Belgium was still on the schedule for July. Singer Ciara , who is pregnant, canceled a March 19 hometown concert set to open the Fort Hood USO in Killeen, Texas. The USO’s grand opening will now be held this summer. “My doctors have advised me to limit travel and large group gatherings,” she said in a statement. Bret Michaels , who has Type 1 diabetes, canceled March 13-14 gigs on the ’80s Cruise , citing his higher risk of contracting the disease as well as problems with having enough insulin and other supplies on hand if he were to be quarantined on the ship. The San Francisco Symphony canceled concerts through March 17 after San Francisco Mayor London N. Breed announced March 6 that the War Memorial Performing Arts Center venues would be closed for a two-week test period in an effort to slow spread of COVID-19. The symphony’s home, Davies Symphony Hall, is among the venues affected. TV Major late-night TV chat shows that tape in New York City — that includes “ The Tonight Show With Jimmy Fallon,” “The Late Show With Stephen Colbert,” “The Daily Show” and “Late Night With Seth Meyers” — will suspend taping with studio audiences starting March 16, the networks said March 11 in a coordinated announcement. TBS’ “Full Frontal With Samantha Bee” axed its studio audience starting March 11, and “Last Week Tonight” with John Oliver will follow suit March 15. ABC’s “The View,” “Live With Kelly and Ryan,” “Good Morning America,” “Strahan, Sara and Keke” and “Tamron Hall” also entered the audience-free zone on March 11. “Jeopardy!” and “Wheel of Fortune” announced plans March 10 to tape shows without a live studio audience. The move was made in part to protect host Alex Trebek, who has been battling Stage 4 pancreatic cancer. “The Dr. Phil Show” will tape without an audience for about two weeks, inviting audiences back March 23. Wendy Williams is also planning to tape her talk show sans live studio audience “until further notice.” The 33rd season of the Emmy-winning TV show “The Amazing Race” has ceased filming indefinitely, and “all contestants and production staff are returning home,” according to a statement from CBS. No new production date has been set for the popular reality travel competition. With a crew of more than 400 that flies in from 20 countries, “Survivor” has postponed the start of Season 41 production to May from March 24. That in turn is likely to affect Season 42 production, scheduled to start on May 24. At this point, air dates for both seasons are not expected to change. The 16th season of ABC’s “The Bachelorette,” starring 38-year-old Clare Crawley, will no longer shoot episodes in Italy, according to Variety. Filming internationally has not been ruled out entirely. Comcast’s FreeWheel and Fox News pulled out of their annual advertisers upfront presentations scheduled for March 12 and 24 in New York City. Fox Entertainment reportedly canceled program development presentations scheduled for New York, Chicago, Detroit and L.A. during the last week of March. A+E Networks on March 9 announced that its upfronts planned for late March will be replaced by a virtual event set to begin March 23. Plans for 2021 on A&E, History and Lifetime will be presented. AMC Networks said March 9 that it will have “individual conversations” with advertisers in lieu of the upfront that had been set for March 18. Disney has scrapped a two-day launch event for its new streaming platform, Disney+ . The roll-out was set to take place on the Thursday and Friday leading up to the service’s March 24 European debut; it will be replaced by an executive press briefing via webcast. Short-form streaming platform Quibi , which launches April 6, has canceled plans for an April 5 red-carpet launch event. Theme parks Universal Studios Japan has closed from Feb. 29 to March 15, with the reopening date subject to change depending on the coronavirus situation. Disney’s themed resorts in Shanghai, Hong Kong and Tokyo have been shuttered until at least March 15. In a recent earnings call, the Mouse House estimated the closures would result in a roughly $175-million hit to operating income in its second fiscal quarter, should the parks remain shut for two months. On March 9, some restaurants and shops reopened at Shanghai Disneyland. Books The Los Angeles Times Festival of Books , which had been set for April at USC, has been postponed until Oct. 3-4. Honorees and winners of the L.A. Times Book Prizes will still be announced April 17. The Times also has canceled its book club event with authors Steph Cha and Joe Ide scheduled for March 30. The London Book Fair 2020 , which was scheduled for March 10-12, has been nixed. Around 25,000 publishers, authors and agents were expected at one of the world’s biggest international literary events. The 2020 Livre Paris Book Fair , which attracts 160,000 annually and was scheduled for March 20-23, has been canceled in accordance with France’s new indoor-gatherings policy. The Bologna Children’s Book Fair , which had been set for March 30-April 2, has been moved to May 4-7. The event in Bologna, Italy, typically draws 1,400 exhibitors and 30,000 professional visitors. Amid more than 100 author cancellations and facing uncertainty about volunteer turnout, the Tucson Festival of Books announced March 9 that it is nixing the event scheduled for March 14-15 on the University of Arizona campus. The festival is expected to return in 2021. The National Book Critics Circle has canceled its finalists reading on March 11 and awards ceremony March 12. Winners will be notified via email, with announcements made via press release and on social media. The gala will be rescheduled for fall. Museums  The Louvre in Paris shut down for a few days after employees walked out, demanding further protections against the virus, but it reopened March 6. The National Museum of Korea and the National Museum of Modern and Contemporary Art in South Korea, Beijing’s Palace Museum in the Forbidden City and Japan’s Mori Art Museum , National Museum of Modern Art and Kyoto National Museum are among closures in Asia. Museums (and theaters) in the Los Angeles area are operating as usual unless they hear otherwise from public health authorities but are more aggressively cleaning and disinfecting facilities and coming up with plans in case the virus spreads further. Opera San Diego Opera has nixed March 13-14 performances of “Aging Magician” at the Balboa Theatre, citing possible travel restrictions for 25-plus youth choral performers coming from Brooklyn. “The Barber of Seville” and “The Falling and the Rising” are still on the calendar for April and May. Performances at La Scala in Milan have been suspended through April 3. New York’s Metropolitan Opera on Tuesday mandated a 14-day self-imposed pre-show quarantine for all performers and staff traveling to New York City from China, Iran, South Korea, Japan, Italy and Hong Kong. The Bavarian State Opera in Munich has canceled all performances from March 11 through April 19. This list will be updated as more closures, cancellations and postponements are announced. 
Mar 11, 2020	A second MLS game has been affected by the coronvavirus outbreak with the reigning league champion Seattle Sounders announcing Wednesday that their March 21 home game with FC Dallas has been postponed. The decision came shortly after Washington Gov. Jay Inslee declared the state would prohibit gatherings of more than 250 people in three Seattle-area counties. “We respect the difficult decision that has been made today and our club will continue following the guidelines set forth by our public health authorities and government agencies,” the team said in a statement. “We will maintain our consistent dialogue with elected leadership, public health officials and Major League Soccer.” In Southern California, the Los Angeles County Department of Public Health said it is not asking for events to be canceled, although that may become necessary. “We’re not there yet,” said Barbara Ferrer, the department’s director. “But we do need to get prepared.” Ferrer did advise pregnant women and other at-risk people to voluntarily avoid large public gatherings such as sporting events. The San Jose Earthquakes announced Tuesday that their March 21 game will not be played as scheduled after Santa Clara County’s public health department banned all gatherings of 1,000 or more people, beginning at midnight Wednesday. The team has not said whether the game with Sporting Kansas City will be postponed or played without fans. Also affected was Wednesday night’s USL Championship game between Landon Donovan’s San Diego Loyal and the Tacoma Defiance. That match, the first road game in Loyal history, will be played in an empty Cheney Stadium. “We fully support Gov. Inslee’s announcement and will comply with all recommendations from local health authorities as they develop,” said Warren Smith, the Loyal’s president. “We take our responsibility to San Diego very seriously and will continue to take all appropriate precautions for the safety of our players, staff and community.” The Loyal arrived in the Seattle area on Tuesday, before the ban on public gatherings was made. With the team already on the ground, local authorities, in concert with public health officials, decided it would be safe to play the game with only players, coaches and essential staff present. A Loyal spokeswoman said the team is in contract with San Diego officials regarding future games. “We are closely monitoring developments in our region on COVID-19, including updates from San Diego County officials and the Centers for Disease Control,” the team said in a statement. The coronavirus, officially designated a pandemic by the World Health Organization, has already forced the cancellation of soccer games in China, Japan and South Korea. FIFA and the Asian Football Confederation have postponed World Cup qualifiers in March and June, while in Italy, all sporting events, including Serie A matches, have been canceled until at least April 3. The next two rounds of matches in Spain’s La Liga will be played in empty stadiums while first- and second-division matches in France will be played behind closed doors through at least April 15. The German Bundesliga is playing select games in empty stadiums while others in little-affected areas will proceed as normal. In England, Wednesday’s Premier League game between Arsenal and Manchester City was postponed as a “precautionary measure” after several Arsenal players went into self-quarantine. The players’ action came after Evangelos Marinakis, owner of Greek club Olympiakos, tested positive for the virus. Marinakis met several Arsenal players two weeks ago when the teams met in a Europa League match in London. Marinakis also owns Nottingham Forest, a team in the second-tier English Championship. The impact of the coronavirus has so far been little felt in England in comparison to the rest of Europe, and the Premier League, the world’s most popular soccer league, said it has no plans to postpone any other matches. 
Mar 11, 2020	Pasadena on Wednesday reported its first case of confirmed coronavirus, officials said. “This individual was known to have close contact with a confirmed case outside of Pasadena, and has been in quarantine since the exposure occurred,” the city said in a statement. Officials said they are working with others who came in close contact with the patient and who might be at risk for infection. “We have been preparing and are ready to manage COVID-19 cases in Pasadena, in close coordination with our healthcare partners,” said Dr. Ying-Ying Goh, director of the Pasadena Public Health Department. “We will continue to recommend our community implement individual and community mitigation measures to reduce the risk of spread of illness.” It brings to 29 the number of confirmed cases in L.A. County. Four of those cases were reported in Long Beach, and officials are saying many more across the state likely have the virus. L.A. County announced the first death in Southern California linked to the illness. The woman was in her 60s and had underlying health issues. The woman who died was not a county resident but had been visiting after extensive travel over the last month, including a long layover in South Korea, which has been a hotbed for the virus. 
Mar 11, 2020	The NBA said Wednesday it is suspending its season until further notice after a player tested positive for the coronavirus. The announcement came less than an hour after President Trump imposed strict new travel restrictions, barring travelers from Europe from entering the country beginning Friday for a 30-day period. The new travel restrictions do not include the United Kingdom and makes other exceptions for healthy Americans. “The European union failed to take the same precautions” as the United States in barring travel from China, he said, claiming that American clusters of the disease were “seeded by travelers from Europe.” The NBA’s announcement stunned the sport’s world and will surely add to the economic fallout caused by the coronavirus outbreak, an issue Trump address in his televised address. Trump said he is instructing the Small Business Administration to provide new low-interest loans for some businesses hurt by the epidemic and asked Congress to approve $50 billion in additional funding for that purpose. He also asked Congress again to approve payroll tax relief, a proposal that neither party on Capitol Hill has favored. “We are at a critical time in the fight against the virus,” he said, while still claiming the risk to most Americans remains low. The travel ban applies to foreign nationals traveling from Europe and does not affect travel by U.S. citizens, permanent residents or immediate family members of U.S. citizens, according to a statement from the Department of Homeland Security. It applies to any foreign national who has been in Europe during the 14 days prior to their arrival in the U.S. and does not not apply to trade. Trump did not declare a national emergency, as some had suggested he would, which could have clashed with his previous, repeated calls for calm. “The virus will not have a chance against us,” if Americans take precautions, he said, downplaying dire warnings from his public health officials who say the spread of the virus is inevitable. Later in the evening, the U.S. State Department issued an advisory urging citizens to reconsider traveling abroad due to the virus and the potential that other countries may limit mobility unexpectedly. The dual travel announcements came come as the coronavirus toll continued to mount in California, where on Wednesday the Los Angeles County Department of Public Health confirmed its first coronavirus-related death and six new cases, bringing the county’s total to 29, including four cases in Long Beach and one new case in Pasadena. A pair of famous Southern California residents, actors Tom Hanks and his wife Rita Wilson, announced amid the President’s address that they two have been infected with the virus and are now isolated in Australia. The county’s first coronavirus fatality was a woman older than 60 who had underlying health issues, said Dr. Barbara Ferrer, the county health department’s director. The patient was not an L.A. County resident but had been visiting here after extensive travel over the past month, including a long layover in South Korea. “Shortly after being hospitalized, she unfortunately passed,” Ferrer said. Ferrer said that one of the new cases included the county’s second instance of community spread. That individual is hospitalized. Three individuals are household contacts of an L.A. County resident previously confirmed to have the virus. One of those people is currently hospitalized. One individual had traveled to France and returned home ill. Another traveled to a religious conference in a different state and was a close contact of someone at the conference who later tested positive for COVID-19, the disease caused by the coronavirus. The county has developed a risk-assessment tool that considers how many community transmissions there have been and whether new cases are accelerating, Ferrer said. “We’re trying to use that to drive our judgments about when things need to close,” she said. “We will get to a point, unfortunately, here in L.A. County, where we will be asking for events to close. But we’re not there yet,” Ferrer said. Ferrer stressed the public’s need to be cautious in large gatherings and suggested that people assess themselves whether they should venture into crowded areas. Those who are pregnant, elderly or have underlying health issues are especially vulnerable to developing serious effects from the virus. To date, the county’s public health lab has completed 72 tests for COVID-19. That number does not include those performed by commercial labs. Elsewhere in the county, Pasadena confirmed its first case of the novel coronavirus in a resident, officials announced Wednesday. The patient had been in contact with a confirmed case in Southern Californiaand has been in quarantine since that exposure occurred and is recovering, according to the Pasadena Public Health Department. Officials learned of the patient this week and they are cooperating with instructions from healthcare providers. Since then, officials have been reaching out to everyone who had close contact with the resident to discuss their next steps because they were possibly exposed. “We have been preparing and are ready to manage COVID-19 cases in Pasadena, in close coordination with our healthcare partners,” said Dr. Ying-Ying Goh, PPHD director in a statement. “We will continue to recommend our community implement individual and community mitigation measures to reduce the risk of spread of illness.” As the outbreak continued its rapid spread across the globe, the World Health Organization, for the first time, referred to the outbreak as a pandemic. “This is the first pandemic caused by a coronavirus,” WHO chief Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus said. “We have rung the alarm bell loud and clear.” Coronaviruses typically cause the common cold, but deadly viruses SARS and MERS were also coronaviruses. Tedros emphasized that countries could still take aggressive steps to beat back the spread of the new coronavirus and said he believed united action could effectively combat the spreading illness. The pandemic classification does not change the WHO’s strategy for slowing the outbreak nor should it affect how countries are tackling cases, Tedros said. “There has been so much attention on one word, and let me give you some other words that matter much more, and are much more actionable,” Tedros said. “These are prevention, preparedness, public health, political leadership and, most of all, people. ... We’re in this together to do the right things with calm and protect the citizens of the world.” Unlike a public health emergency — which is declared based on specific international-law criteria — there is no formal WHO process that governs whether the organization refers to a global outbreak as a “pandemic.” Instead, the heightened rhetoric simply reflects the worsening trends that officials have been observing for some time, they said. Across California, the number of cases has continued to grow, including the death Tuesday of a woman at a senior living facility, and officials are saying it’s increasingly unlikely they can contain the virus and instead are focusing on slowing its spread. “The community spread has already occurred,” said Peter Beilenson, Sacramento County’s health director. On Wednesday, the state released guidelines on how to prepare and protect homeless Californians and service providers from the virus, which included ensuring they had enough health and personal protective equipment on hand, identified areas to isolate individuals suffering mild symptoms and identifying the people most vulnerable to the disease. “We know that individuals experiencing homelessness are at greater risk of having an untreated and often serious health condition. This vulnerable population also has a higher risk of developing severe illness due to COVID-19,” said Dr. Mark Ghaly, Secretary of the California Health and Human Services Agency in a statement. “It is important that we act now to protect this population and the compassionate people who serve them.” In Northern California, an elderly patient died in an assisted living facility of the novel coronavirus, sparking fears of an outbreak among other residents there and renewing concerns about statewide availability of testing kits. Sacramento County health officials announced Tuesday that a patient in her 90s was the county’s first fatality from COVID-19. The woman was among about 140 patients of the facility in Elk Grove, the same suburb where all public schools were closed this week after two family members with students at multiple sites tested positive for the coronavirus. Tuesday, the district announced that an elementary-school-age student in that family had also tested positive. Beilenson said Tuesday that all patients in the nursing home would be tested for the virus, but that effort was delayed by a lack of test kits. He said the county had access to only 20 tests per day and was having to ration those between possible cases in the community and medical professionals who might have been exposed. “It has been very frustrating because we have been stuck now for a couple of weeks with just 20 tests a day,” Beilenson said. Newsletter Get our Coronavirus Today newsletter Sign up for the latest news, best stories and what they mean for you, plus answers to your questions. Sign Me Up You may occasionally receive promotional content from the Los Angeles Times. Beilenson said other residents of the Elk Grove facility were now subject to special protective measures, including having meals delivered to rooms and not being allowed to congregate in communal areas. The city of Alameda on Wednesday said a firefighter had tested positive for the virus, and Stanislaus County confirmed its first two positive cases. One of the individuals was a passenger on the Grand Princess cruise to Mexico. The other is likely a case of community transmission, as officials said the person had not traveled anywhere with a known outbreak or been in contact with someone who previously tested positive. Seventeen others in Stanislaus County are currently awaiting results, officials said. Officials have continued to take precautionary measures in an attempt to contain the spread of the illness. A growing number of colleges and universities, most recently Cal State Long Beach and Pepperdine, have suspended in-person classes in favor of online instruction. San Francisco announced a ban on group events of 1,000 or more people. “We know that this order is disruptive, but it is an important step to support public health,” said Mayor London Breed, noting that city officials were following advice from state officials. In San Mateo County, officials issued a legal order barring unauthorized visitors and non-essential personnel from licensed skilled nursing facilities, which includes family members. According to the order, “The virus that causes Coronavirus 2019 Disease (also known as COVID-19) places residents at long-term care facilities at high risk, especially given that visitors to such facilities may have the virus but may not have symptoms or may have mild symptoms. Such visitors can easily pass the virus on to vulnerable residents.” The county has 15 of the Bay Area’s 105 COVID-19 patients. Officials in other states have also taken action. Washington state has banned mass gatherings of 250 or more people, as cases continue to rise in Seattle’s suburbs, reaching a death toll of more than 30. In Texas, where more than 20 cases have been confirmed, local officials canceled the Houston Livestock Show and Rodeo because of concerns about the spread of the virus. It’s the first time the indoor rodeo — billed as the largest in the world — has been canceled since 1932. The National Collegiate Athletic Assn. also announced that its upcoming men’s and women’s basketball tournaments will be played before"only essential staff and limited family attendance.” As of Wednesday afternoon, California had 177 confirmed coronavirus cases. Gov. Gavin Newsom noted Tuesday that thousands of residents more might have come into contact with the disease. The United States has surpassed 1,000 coronavirus cases, with most in Washington state, New York and California. The governor said more than 1,075 Californians had been tested for the coronavirus at 18 labs across the state. The state was monitoring an additional 10,300 individuals who had returned to California on international flights and might have been exposed, he said. Many others who have interacted with infected people are being advised to self-monitor and quarantine at home. The largest outbreak of the illness is in Santa Clara County, where there have been more than 40 positive cases confirmed. Late Tuesday, officials announced that three Transportation Security Administration agents at Mineta San Jose International Airport tested positive. Two screeners at Los Angeles International Airport also have the coronavirus. In Los Angeles County, Ferrer said her agency was focused on slowing the spread of COVD-19 but was combining mitigation efforts with containment. But public health officials in Placer and Yolo counties, which neighbor Sacramento to the northeast and west, have announced a shift from trying to contain the virus to accepting that it is spreading too fast for widespread quarantining measures. Seven people in Placer County have tested positive, including a Rocklin man who died last week. Yolo County has one confirmed case. Under the new recommendations in Placer and Yolo counties, which are effective through March 31, individuals who have come in contact with a confirmed or suspected case of coronavirus will no longer be required to be quarantined for 14 days. Instead, people with cold-like symptoms, regardless of whether they have the coronavirus or flu, are asked to self-quarantine and manage their symptoms with over-the-counter drugs. The counties also said that although they had tests for COVID-19, they would be reserved for those with more serious symptoms, because mild symptoms are treated the same regardless of the diagnosis. The counties urged businesses to allow employees to telecommute where possible and for large events to be postponed or canceled. Aimee Sisson, Placer County’s public health director, said the county would continue to do some tracing of those who had come in contact with the virus but that it would screen only for high-risk situations, such as a person who visited a nursing home or came in contact with an immuno-compromised individual. Widespread quarantine measures can’t be sustained, Sisson said, especially for healthcare workers. California already is taxed with a shortage of medical providers, and forcing quarantines on front-line staff is a burden the system can’t bear as the virus spreads. If counties keep quarantining healthcare workers for potential exposure, “we wouldn’t have any healthcare workers left,” she said. Sisson said the county did not have the capacity to continue to trace every contact because it lacked the manpower, even with an offer from the state for additional help. “Even a handful of cases tested our capacity,” she said. Times staff writers Emily Baumgaertner, Taryn Luna, Melody Gutierrez, Tony Barboza, Molly Hennessy-Fiske, Ruben Vives, Noah Bierman and Rong-Gong Lin II contributed to this report. 
Mar 11, 2020	Los Angeles County reached a milestone Wednesday in its battle against the coronavirus, announcing the first death in Southern California linked to the illness. The death of the woman, who was in her 60s and had underlying health issues, came as the number of coronavirus cases reported by the L.A. County Department of Public Health jumped to 28. Four of those cases were reported in Long Beach, and officials are saying many more across the state likely have the virus. Here is what we know: L.A. County fatality Public health director Dr. Barbara Ferrer did not identify where in Los Angeles County the death occurred. The woman who died was not a county resident but had been visiting after extensive travel over the past month, including a long layover in South Korea, which has been a hotbed for the virus. “Shortly after being hospitalized, she unfortunately passed,” Ferrer said. Virus spreading Ferrer said additional cases, and deaths, are likely — and the spread may eventually require more stringent social-distancing measures. More than two dozen cases have been spread across the county, though no specific locations were provided. “At this point, these cases were scattered throughout the entire county. There is no supervisorial district that does not have a positive case,” she said, and that does not include cases that have yet to be diagnosed. “We at this point say to everybody you need to be aware, you need to expect that there’s going to be transmission if you’re here in L.A. County, and you need to take the steps you can to protect yourself and the people you love.” New cases There are now 28 confirmed cases in L.A. County. They include: • Three individuals who were household contacts of an L.A. County resident previously confirmed to have the virus. • One individual who had traveled to France and returned home ill. • One individual who traveled to a religious conference in a different state and was a close contact of someone at the conference who later tested positive. New restrictions? Los Angeles County has been less aggressive than San Francisco and Santa Clara County, which has prohibited large public events including professional sports. L.A. officials said they were now considering that. The county has developed a risk-assessment tool that considers how many community transmissions there have been and whether new cases are accelerating, Ferrer said. “We’re trying to use that to drive our judgments about when things need to close,” Ferrer said. “We will get to a point, unfortunately, here in L.A. County, where we will be asking for events to close. But we’re not there yet.” Ferrer stressed the public’s need to be cautious in large gatherings and suggested that people assess themselves whether they should venture into crowded areas. Those who are pregnant, elderly or have underlying health issues are especially vulnerable to developing serious effects from the virus. 
Mar 11, 2020	As fears of a coronavirus pandemic spread, Hollywood is feeling the effects at the international box office, especially in China and Italy, where theaters are closed. But in the U.S., it's unclear how much of a damper the virus will put on moviegoing. Last weekend's box-office returns suggest that Americans are still largely willing to go out to cinemas, despite increasing numbers of cases in states including California, New York and Washington. Movies in the U.S. and Canada generated $103.4 million from Friday through Sunday, up 4% from the previous weekend, according to data firm Comscore.  "When we look at the numbers in the U.S., we're not seeing an impact as of yet," said Paul Dergarabedian, a box-office analyst for Comscore. Of course, that is likely to change. Studio executives are still bracing for at least some drop-off domestically, depending on how long and how severe the outbreak gets. In a sign of broader rising concerns, the California Department of Public Health on Monday issued guidelines for how event organizers should handle mass gatherings amid the growing number of cases of the coronavirus infections. The highly anticipated annual South by Southwest festival in Austin, Texas, was canceled last week, and the Coachella Valley Music and Arts Festival has been rescheduled to October. However, a close look at box-office data creates a blurry picture of how consumers are reacting. In the hard-hit Seattle area, box office was down 4% last weekend from a week ago, indicating a potential slowdown there, according to distribution executives who did not want to be named commenting publicly on the situation. New York, which has also suffered from the outbreak, was down 13%. Additionally, Washington, D.C., saw a 9% drop compared with last week. On the other hand, the Los Angeles box office was up 5%, despite multiple coronovirus cases here. In San Francisco, where multiple tech companies pulled out of the Game Developers Conference over coronavirus fears, the box office rose 8%. Meanwhile, Austin experienced a 13% jump over a year ago. "I don't see any clear correlation at all," said the executive, who was not authorized to speak publicly on the matter. "It's really reflective of the pictures in the marketplace and how they're doing." Analysts were similarly hesitant to draw any conclusions from Pixar Animation Studios' new film, "Onward," which grossed a relatively soft $40 million in the U.S. and Canada this past weekend. Reviews for the film, while mostly positive, were less enthusiastic than they have been for Pixar's greatest hits. The computer-animated comedy adventure scored $28 million abroad from countries including Britain and France. The film has not yet been released in the heavily affected countries of South Korea, Italy, Japan and China. Disney on Sunday said "most regions with the exception of Asia-Pacific have not seen a material impact at this point." In another sign of resilience in moviegoing, returning releases have held up well at theaters. Universal Pictures' horror movie "The Invisible Man," starring Elisabeth Moss, declined only 46% in its second weekend, a strong hold for a genre that tends to see steeper drops. Attendance is clearly taking a hit in some other countries. In China, the world's second-largest box-office market behind the U.S. and Canada, theaters have been shuttered for weeks as that country's government tries to get the situation under control. Home to 70,000 screens, China is a key market for Hollywood movies. Studios have had to hit pause on their plans to release movies there, and there's no indication of when multiplex doors will reopen. Movies including Disney's "Mulan," for which China is an important market, have been delayed. ("Mulan," set for a March 27 U.S. debut, had not yet been given a release date in China.) Italy this week shut down cinemas to help prevent further spread. Other public places such as museums, pubs, discos and bingo halls have also been closed. In France, theaters that were closed recently in some places have since reopened, but with restrictions to keep every other row of seats empty. South Korean theaters have remained open for business, but attendance there has taken a big hit. Other countries, including Australia and Britain, have remained stable, said analyst Bruce Nash, who runs the box office data website The-Numbers.com. "For now, the effects seem to be localized," Nash said. MGM and Universal last week postponed the global release of the James Bond movie "No Time to Die" until November. Small indie distributor Magnolia Pictures on Monday pushed back the debut of its gerrymandering documentary "Slay the Dragon." On Tuesday, Sony Pictures moved the release of "Peter Rabbit 2: The Runaway" from April 3 to Aug. 7. So far, though, other studios are standing firm on their release plans. Disney has shown no signs of holding off on the releases of "Mulan" or Marvel Studios' "Black Widow," which hits theaters April 24. Universal Pictures is sticking with a May 22 release of the ninth "Fast and the Furious" movie, "F9." Last week, the National Assn. of Theatre Owners told CinemaCon attendees that the annual trade show in Las Vegas starting March 30 would continue as planned and that the event would take additional precautions, such as providing extra hand sanitizer and trash bins. "The safety and productivity of our attendees remains our highest priority," the theater group said in an email. "As of today, the CDC maintains the risk for the majority of the public remains low." The next box-office test comes this weekend with "Bloodshot," Sony Pictures' new comic book action film starring Vin Diesel. The $45-million movie is expected to open with about $10 million in its first weekend, which is lower than earlier industry projections for the film. Also debuting are Lionsgate's faith-based film "I Still Believe" and Universal's satirical thriller "The Hunt." In an interview with USA Today, Diesel, who stars in both "Bloodshot" and "F9," responded to a question about the coronavirus' potential effect on release plans for the new "Fast and the Furious" film by channeling the title character of his other movie. "Let me put it to you this way: 'Bloodshot' at the end of the day is a soldier, and a soldier doesn't decide or pick when or where he's deployed," he said. "We're going to go in." Caption: PHOTO: THE INVISIBLE MAN, starring Elisabeth Moss, declined only 46% in its second weekend. PHOTOGRAPHER:Mark Rogers Universal Pictures PHOTO:PIXAR'S "Onward" grossed just $40 million over the weekend, but analysts didn't blame virus fears. The U.S. and Canada box office was up 4% from a week earlier. PHOTOGRAPHER: Pixar 
Mar 11, 2020	Airbnb Inc. is making adjustments to its refund policy in an attempt to balance the needs of hosts and guests on its home-sharing site amid the global coronavirus outbreak that has severely reduced travel demand. Because Airbnb operates as an online platform -- connecting people who want to rent out all or part of their home with travelers seeking accommodations -- it's choosing to take a lighter touch with hosts. The San Francisco company said it will reward hosts who are more flexible or generous on offering refunds. It will offer promotions for those listings to drive new bookings and will waive the standard 3% host fee on new reservations for those listings through June 1.  "When a crisis like coronavirus hits, we know both hosts and guests are affected," Airbnb said in a statement Tuesday. "Hosts lose earnings that they rely on to make ends meet. Guests are losing hard-earned vacation savings." Airbnb's policy is that all reservations are able to be canceled within 48 hours of booking for a full refund. Beyond that, it's up to hosts to determine the refund policy, which are stated on the listings and range from flexible to strict. Since the coronavirus became more widespread, Airbnb has been granting full refunds to people traveling to China, South Korea and Italy. Airbnb also announced some changes Tuesday meant to encourage people to keep booking trips on its platform. The company will return the service fee guests pay to Airbnb as a coupon for future reservations if people cancel their trips on bookings made from now through June 1.  Credit: Carville and Newcomer write for Bloomberg. 
Mar 10, 2020	UC Santa Cruz and Whittier College on Tuesday joined a growing wave of colleges and universities across the country that are launching sweeping safety measures in response to the growing coronavirus outbreak, including the cancellation of in-person classes and several urging students to not return to campus after spring break. As colleges turn to online learning for the remainder of the school year, many have also canceled admission tours and put tight restrictions on campus gatherings and travel. UC Santa Cruz is the third University of California campus, joining Berkeley and San Diego, to suspend in-person classes and transition to online learning to reduce face-to-face interactions as much as possible. Whittier College officials said Tuesday that classes will be canceled on Friday at the 1,700-student campus and will resume online only after spring break on March 23. San Jose State, San Francisco State and the private Santa Clara University are the largest California universities as of Tuesday that have made similar moves. UC San Diego decided to conduct online classes for the entirety of the spring quarter, which begins March 25. Scores of universities in the United States, Mideast, Asia and Italy have announced moves to online learning. On the East Coast, Harvard and Princeton are urging students to stay home after their spring break, when classes will go online. In New York, Columbia University, Barnard and New York University are transitioning to online classes on Wednesday. A growing number of colleges, including Amherst College in Massachusetts, Ohio State University and Vanderbilt University in Tennessee, have taken similar actions. The sweeping measures cut across core campus operations — including instruction, lab work, admissions and financial aid — as they confront the fast-moving global coronavirus outbreak. Caltech officials, citing an “abundance of caution in light of the quickly evolving COVID-19 situation,” announced cancellations of all on-campus visit programs indefinitely. “The long-term results of the coronavirus will remain to be seen, but it’s clear that the short-term challenge is probably the greatest that higher education has faced in a generation,” said Ted Mitchell, president of the American Council on Education. “Every college and university is on a war footing about this and are trying to assemble as much information as possible.” Mitchell said higher education has experienced such tumult only a few times in the last century. After 9/11, he said, widespread travel restrictions were initiated and some students were targets of racial and religious profiling. During the Vietnam War, many campuses were inflamed by antiwar protests and lost some students and faculty members to the military draft. The Great Recession of 2008 financially sapped higher education, but the damage took place more gradually, with the University of California losing one-third of its state funding over three years, said Nathan Brostrom, who was UC chief financial officer at the time and now serves as interim chancellor at UC Merced. The difference with the coronavirus, Brostrom said, has been the speed of its onslaught and the dramatic effect it is having across campus. “Literally every time I look at my computer, something new is coming up,” Brostrom said. “The impact is felt on every part of campus operations. All we can do is continually prepare and be nimble in our responses.” UC Merced’s all-in mobilization involves twice-daily meetings on emergency services and teleconferences with all UC campuses to share information and best practices. They review health updates and policies on travel and large gatherings. They nail down plans to continue instruction and research should the campus have to move to online learning. Merced has no confirmed cases of the coronavirus or even reports of potential exposure, and its classes are not affected for now. In addition, the UC financial expert said he was starting to assess the costs of the coronavirus outbreak. Merced will pay for any extra costs to bring 21 students home early from study-abroad programs in Italy, South Korea and Japan. Already, the campus is paying for added expenses, such as mega-orders of hand sanitizer and extra campus cleanings. And potential future costs loom. Merced could lose needed revenue if the campus cancels summer sessions. It could need to provide financial aid to the largely low-income student body if classes move online and obviate the need for federal work-study jobs on campus. So far Berkeley, San Diego and Santa Cruz are the only campuses in the 10-campus University of California system to announce in-person class suspensions. At those campuses, classes that cannot be held remotely, such as laboratories and performing arts, will continue to meet. Varsha Sarveshwar, a UC Berkeley senior and UC Student Assn. president, said she fully backed the decision and called on all UC campuses to consider similar action. “It’s a really responsible decision on the part of the campus,” she said. She added that the transition should not be too disruptive because Berkeley already began stepping up online learning last year when Pacific Gas & Electric shut off power during the Northern California wildfires. At a UCLA student meeting Monday, officials said that they are paying close attention to public health reports but do not see a need at this time to suspend in-person classes or close dorms or dining halls. Across town at USC, officials are preparing for a three-day test on online learning beginning Wednesday. “We are preparing the university to make substantial changes in a very short period of time to ensure we have the capability to move online should stronger measures become necessary,” said Provost Charles F. Zukoski. “We are in uncharted territory, and we are being vigilant to protect our community.” Except for San Jose and San Francisco State, the California State University’s 21 other campuses were are still holding in-person classes as of Tuesday, a university spokesman said. At Cal State Long Beach 10 students were in self-isolation, and at Cal State Northridge 13 students were isolating themselves after possible exposure at in Washington, D.C., last week. At the California community colleges “all of our campuses are preparing for the possibility of a disruption and for moving students online,” Chancellor Eloy Ortiz Oakley said. Sierra College in Rocklin, outside Sacramento, declared a “campus state of emergency” Sunday after two employees were possibly exposed to COVID-19 on a cruise. The employees, who do not work in classrooms, were on the same cruise as an elderly Placer County man who later tested positive for COVID-19 and died. The college said faculty would begin providing instruction online Wednesday and must transition to remote instruction by March 18. Many lab classes will continue on site, and athletic competitions will proceed without spectators. All events and non-essential travel through the end of March were also canceled. In the Los Angeles Community College District, officials have worked to debunk false rumors about coronavirus cases at three campuses. Five Pierce College students have been instructed to “self-monitor” their health after returning from a conference last week at which three other attendees not affiliated with the campus tested positive for COVID-19, said LACCD spokesman William Boyer. He said no students have shown symptoms of the illness that met public health agency standards for testing for the virus. Times staff writer Sonali Kohli contributed to this report. 
Mar 10, 2020	An analysis of the novel coronavirus’ spread inside the United States suggests that thousands of Americans are already infected, dimming the prospects for stomping out the outbreak in its earliest stages. Researchers estimate that by March 1, the virus had already infected about 1,000 to 10,000 people who have not yet been accounted for. At the start of this month, about 80 U.S. cases had been confirmed and officials were still expressing confidence they could contain the new virus. Quarantines, contact tracing and other public health measures have likely tamped down the COVID-19 outbreak here, the researchers said. But from the start, a group of infected travelers just big enough to fill an elevator likely has been expanding the virus’ reach, largely undetected. Released into a country of about 330 million, each of these travelers was assumed to have passed the virus to 2 to 2.5 people, each of whom in turn infected another 2 to 2.5 people, and so on. Tote up the nodes on this rapidly branching network of contacts and the number of victims balloons quickly, the researchers wrote. Their study, released Monday on the medRxiv website to discuss work that has not yet been submitted to a peer-reviewed journal, came as U.S. officials reported a total of 704 COVID-19 cases and 29 deaths in the United States. That is likely just the tip of a much larger iceberg, the mathematical modeling suggests. Under their most optimistic assumptions, as few as 1,043 people in the United States have been infected with the novel coronavirus. Under a more realistic scenario, that number could easily be as high as 9,484. Newsletter Get our Coronavirus Today newsletter Sign up for the latest news, best stories and what they mean for you, plus answers to your questions. Sign Me Up You may occasionally receive promotional content from the Los Angeles Times. That only accounts for U.S. residents whose infections originated with people carrying the virus directly from Wuhan, the epicenter of the outbreak in China. In reality, many more people likely have brought the virus here from other hot spots, including Italy, South Korea and the rest of Asia. Each virus carrier who arrived from those places would set off his or her own cascade of infections. The model also stopped adding up infections as of March 1. But given its firm toehold in the United States by then, the virus could have racked up tens of thousands of new cases since that date. The mathematical simulation of the U.S. outbreak was run over a thousand times by a team from Cedars-Sinai Medical Center in Los Angeles and Peking University in Beijing. They began with a hypothetical group of undetected carriers — likely eight to 16 people — who arrived in the United States on direct flights from Wuhan after the virus now known as SARS-CoV-2 began infecting humans in late November but before those flights were halted on January. It’s safe to assume that roughly half of these travelers were intercepted by U.S. health officials and saw their movements curtailed. The rest continued on their journeys with their undetected infections, each setting off an unrecognized chain of transmission. While it is impossible to see, the scope of that transmission can be estimated by adopting a range of assumptions about the movements of infected people and the behavior of the virus. Some of the team’s assumptions are grounded in data collected by Chinese epidemiologists who have tracked the virus as it has roared through China. But other assumptions were a matter of judgment. Those included, for instance, the number of virus-exposed travelers leaving Wuhan in early January on U.S.-bound jumbo jets, and the impact of social isolation measures in limiting a person’s opportunities to spread the virus. Where they had a range of assumptions to choose from, the researchers said they deliberately rejected the most alarming suspicions about, say, the virus’ ability to jump from person to person. Instead, they consistently adopted measures of viral or human behavior that were more reassuring. As a result, their estimate likely sets a lower boundary on the virus’ presence in the United States, the team wrote. The analysis began circulating Monday among epidemiologists but has not yet been subject to the rigorous academic scrutiny that typically precedes publication in a scientific journal. The authors said they planned to post the assumptions, equations and computer code that drove their analysis so that other disease modelers could comment and expand upon their findings. Experts in disease modeling said the preliminary model was a good start. While it worked around many of the outbreak’s complexities, it has made reasonable assumptions and used plausible techniques that help describe the extent of the nation’s public health challenge, said Gerardo Chowell, a mathematical epidemiologist at Georgia State University. “It’s good to keep things simple,” said Chowell, who studies the dynamics of epidemics. Some of the researchers’ assumptions may overestimate the extent of undetected infection: in a country as large and diverse as the United States, many infected people may have gone home to low-density hometowns, where their chain of transmission fizzled, he said. But other assumptions, including the researchers’ focus only on early travelers from Wuhan, have certainly underestimated the numbers of U.S. residents infected. Dr. Donald S. Burke, a disease modeler at the University of Pittsburgh, added that the team’s assumptions about the coronavirus’ ability to jump from person to person is especially conservative. The new analysis assumed that each infected person will pass the virus along to 2.1 to 2.5 others over the course of their infection, a number epidemiologists call the reproductive rate. But estimates of the coronavirus’ reproductive rate in circumstances where it is spreading undetected has ranged between 5 and 6, so the researchers may have greatly underestimated the number of infections in the United States, Burke said. “The overall conclusion is, it’s very likely there’s a significant burden of disease we have yet to uncover,” Chowell said. Some of that will likely show up as testing for the disease becomes more commonplace, he said. But much of the outbreak’s unseen underside may never be counted. 
Mar 10, 2020	As fears of a coronavirus pandemic spread, Hollywood is feeling the effects at the international box office, especially in China and Italy, where theaters are closed. But in the U.S., it’s unclear how much of a damper the virus will put on moviegoing. Last weekend’s box office returns suggest that Americans are still largely willing to go out to cinemas, despite increasing numbers of cases in states including California, New York and Washington. Movies in the U.S. and Canada generated $103.4 million from Friday through Sunday, up 4% from the previous weekend, according to data firm Comscore. “When we look at the numbers in the U.S., we’re not seeing an impact as of yet,” said Paul Dergarabedian, a box office analyst for Comscore. Of course, that is likely to change. Studio executives are still bracing for at least some drop-off domestically, depending on how long and how severe the outbreak gets. In a sign of broader rising concerns, the California Department of Public Health on Monday issued guidelines for how event organizers should handle mass gatherings amid the growing number of cases of the coronavirus infections. The highly anticipated annual South by Southwest festival in Austin, Texas, was canceled last week, and the fate of the Coachella Valley Music and Arts Festival in April remains unclear. However, a close look at box office data creates a blurry picture of how consumers are reacting. In the hard-hit Seattle area, box office was down 4% last weekend from a week ago, indicating a potential slowdown there, according to distribution executives who did not want to be named commenting publicly on the situation. New York, which has also suffered from the outbreak, was down 13%. Additionally, Washington D.C., saw a 9% drop compared with last week. On the other hand, the Los Angeles box office was up 5%, despite multiple coronovirus cases here. In San Francisco, where multiple tech companies pulled out of the Game Developers Conference over coronavirus panic, the box office rose 8%. Meanwhile, Austin experienced a 13% jump over a year ago. “I don’t see any clear correlation at all,” said the executive, who was not authorized to speak publicly on the matter. “It’s really reflective of the pictures in the marketplace and how they’re doing.” Analysts were similarly hesitant to draw any conclusions from Pixar Animation Studios’ new film “Onward,” which grossed a relatively soft $40 million in the U.S. and Canada this past weekend. Reviews for the film, while mostly positive, were less enthusiastic than they have been for Pixar’s greatest hits. The computer-animated comedy adventure scored $28 million abroad from countries including Britain and France. The film has not yet been released in the heavily affected countries of South Korea, Italy, Japan and China. Disney on Sunday said “most regions with the exception of Asia-Pacific have not seen a material impact at this point.” In another sign of resilience in moviegoing, returning releases have held up well at theaters. Universal Pictures’ horror movie “The Invisible Man,” starring Elisabeth Moss, declined only 46% in its second weekend, a strong hold for a genre that tends to see steeper drops. Attendance is clearly taking a hit in some other countries. In China, the world’s second-largest box office market behind the U.S. and Canada, theaters have been shuttered for weeks as that country’s government tries to get the situation under control. Home to 70,000 screens, China is a key market for Hollywood movies. Studios have had to hit pause on their plans to release movies there, and there’s no indication of when multiplex doors will reopen. Movies including Disney’s “Mulan,” for which China is an important market, have been delayed. (“Mulan,” set for a March 27 U.S. debut, had not yet been given a release date in China.) Italy this week shut down cinemas to help prevent further spread. Other public places such as museums, pubs, discos and bingo halls have also been closed. In France, theaters that were closed recently in some places have since reopened, but with restrictions to keep every other row of seats empty. South Korean theaters have remained open for business, but attendance there has taken a big hit. Other countries, including Australia and Britain, have remained stable, according to analyst Bruce Nash, who runs the box office data website The-Numbers.com. “For now, the effects seem to be localized,” Nash said. MGM and Universal last week postponed the global release of the new James Bond movie “No Time to Die” until November. Small indie distributor Magnolia Pictures on Monday pushed back the debut of its gerrymandering documentary “Slay the Dragon.” On Tuesday, Sony Pictures moved the release of “Peter Rabbit 2: The Runaway” from April 3 to Aug. 7. So far, though, other studios are standing firm on their release plans. Disney has shown no signs of holding off on the releases of “Mulan” or Marvel Studios’ “Black Widow,” which hits theaters April 24. Universal Pictures is sticking with a May 22 release of the ninth “Fast and the Furious” movie, “F9.” Last week, the National Assn. of Theatre Owners told CinemaCon attendees that the annual trade show in Las Vegas starting March 30 would continue as planned and that the event would take additional precautions, such as providing extra hand sanitizers and trash bins. “The safety and productivity of our attendees remains our highest priority,” the theater group said in an email. “As of today, the CDC maintains the risk for the majority of the public remains low.” The next box office test comes this weekend with “Bloodshot,” Sony Pictures’ new comic book action film starring Vin Diesel. The $45-million movie is expected to open with about $10 million in its first weekend, which is lower than earlier industry projections for the film. Also debuting are Lionsgate’s faith-based film “I Still Believe” and Universal’s satirical thriller “The Hunt.” In an interview with USA Today, Diesel, who stars in both “Bloodshot” and “F9,” responded to a question about the coronavirus’ potential effect on release plans for the new “Fast and the Furious” film by channeling the title character of his other movie. “Let me put it to you this way: ‘Bloodshot’ at the end of the day is a soldier, and a soldier doesn’t decide or pick when or where he’s deployed,” he said. “We’re going to go in.” 
Mar 10, 2020	China’s Communist Party signaled confidence in its fight against the coronavirus on Tuesday when the party’s general secretary and Chinese leader Xi Jinping made a surprise visit to Wuhan, where the outbreak began. It was Xi’s first visit since the city of roughly 11 million was put on lockdown in late January, despite the leader saying he was personally directing China’s efforts against COVID-19. Since then, more than 115,000 people have been infected worldwide, including more than 80,000 Chinese citizens, of whom 3,140 have died. The visit came as infection numbers skyrocketed in other countries across the globe but dropped dramatically in China. After a near-total shutdown of most of the country’s economy and transportation for almost two months, with tight surveillance and movement control measures implemented at the neighborhood level across the country, several Chinese provinces have downgraded their emergency levels. China reported just 19 new cases Tuesday, the lowest number since nationwide reporting began. Most new infections have been “imported” cases — people reentering China from abroad — rather than cases spread from within China. Italy, Iran and South Korea all have more than 7,000 coronavirus cases, while the U.S. currently has 755 confirmed cases. Repeats of China’s initial problems -- a shortage of tests, overwhelmed hospitals, insufficient social distancing, overconfident political figures who end up infected themselves -- have played out in several countries. Xi said the coronavirus had been “basically curbed” in Wuhan and the surrounding Hubei province, announcing that China had succeeded in stabilizing the situation and “turning the tide.” The daily 7 p.m. state news broadcast showed Xi wearing an N95 mask in a large room flanked by military and party officials. He stood several feet away from a large digital screen, speaking to a coronavirus patient through video chat. “Now what you must do is fortify your faith. We will definitely win this battle. Wuhan must be victorious, Hubei must be victorious, and all of China must be victorious,” he said, pumping a clenched fist. He also spoke to medical workers through the screen and outside Huoshenshan hospital, one of several facilities built expressly for the coronavirus response. He visited a residential neighborhood and greeted community workers, praising them for frontline work in caring for quarantined residents locked in their homes. It was a moment of relief for many as Xi’s appearance bolstered citizens’ hopes that China may be able to return to normal in coming weeks, but tension for others as the party tightened its grip on China’s coronavirus narrative. Wuhan residents shared videos and photos on social media Tuesday morning of police entering apartments in the compound Xi visited and allegedly telling residents not to make trouble. Two police entered each home, the residents claimed, posting photos of officers in protective medical suits that said “Wuhan Public Security” on the back, sitting on their balconies under racks of drying laundry. Last week, Wuhan residents had screamed out of their apartment windows at Vice Premier Sun Chunlan while she was inspecting a compound. “Fake! It’s all fake!” they shouted, exposing that the disinfection and food delivery arrangements for the quarantined residents were a setup pulled together right before Sun arrived. “There’s no way to describe the kind of anger in our hearts,” said a Wuhan resident, a businessman living close to the compound Xi was inspecting, who asked not to publish his name for protection. He couldn’t verify what was happening in the neighboring compound, he said, because -- like most other Wuhan residents -- he’d been unable to leave his apartment for more than 40 days. “I have many relatives and friends around me who were infected. Many elderly people, my friends, aunts and uncles, have died. Entire families have gone extinct,” he said in a phone interview. “All this is because of the doctors who were silenced and punished after speaking up. That allowed this virus to transmit to the whole world. But we Wuhan people have suffered the most.” He said that food prices had multiplied in the last two months while many people were trapped at home, unable to work but forced to pay high prices despite supposed nationwide efforts to aid Wuhan with donations of fresh produce. Meanwhile, individuals who tried to organize grassroots relief efforts, report problems or seek help online were threatened by state security. He had received threats after trying to organize volunteer efforts from neighboring Hunan province, he said. “State security call me and tell me to stop speaking up. I tell them, you should first take care of the alone, the poor, the elderly.... They die at home and nobody knows,” he said. He dismissed Xi’s visit as a performance, surrounded by officials, special police and military. “He’s living in a world of total separation from the people.” 
Mar 10, 2020	There are about 110,000 confirmed cases of the new coronavirus worldwide, according to the World Health Organization. And more cases are reported in new places every day. As a result, travelers (especially those who have underlying health problems) may want to cancel or postpone upcoming vacation plans. Should I cancel my cruise? It depends on whether you’re OK with putting yourself at higher risk of getting the disease, but that’s not a risk federal health officials recommend taking. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention on Sunday came out with its strongest advice yet for all people, especially those with underlying health issues, to “defer all cruise ship travel worldwide.” “Cruise ships are unique because you are keeping people in repeated contact over a long period of time,” said Dr. Amy Stone, a virologist from Touro University Nevada in Henderson. That means if someone on the ship is infected, you face a higher risk of being exposed to them repeatedly — in dining areas, common restrooms, on the dance floor, etc. — and contracting the coronavirus. The cruise industry shot back Sunday by promising to tighten health and safety protocols. The Cruise Lines International Assn. said ships will, “as soon as they are capable,” take the temperature of every passenger when they board to check for fever. It also promised more screenings and medical support for people showing symptoms of COVID-19. No details were given on what those enhanced screenings would entail. Two high-profile coronavirus outbreaks occurred on cruise ships, first the Diamond Princess, which was quarantined off Yokohama, Japan, in February; and then the Grand Princess, which finally was allowed to dock Monday in Oakland after completing a cruise to Mexico in which 21 passengers and crew members tested positive for the disease. A man in Northern California died from coronavirus after taking the cruise. Will I lose money if I cancel my cruise? You likely won’t get a refund, but you shouldn’t lose money either, depending on when you are scheduled to sail. Cruise lines are allowing passengers to cancel their voyages, some with as little as 48 hours’ notice, and receive a full credit for a future sailing later this year or next year. The offer also is good for future reservations. However, the sailing dates to qualify for the full cruise credit vary. Check out revised cancellation rules at these cruise lines and the departure dates that qualify. Check with your travel agent or cruise line for information about your options. Should I cancel my flight? The CDC isn’t advising travelers not to fly, so again, it depends on your risk tolerance for getting sick. The CDC did, however, advise older adults and those with health problems to avoid crowded places and long plane trips (in addition to avoiding cruise ships). And here’s a twist: As a result of canceled and postponed events, airlines are left with empty seats, which has brought cheaper fares. Will I lose money if I cancel my flight? It depends. You may be eligible for a refund if your flight was canceled, which means you wouldn’t lose a dime. Or the airline may give you receive credit for a future flight to be used within a certain period, usually within a year. Or you may be allowed to postpone your flight without paying a change fee. However, if you change the date of your flight, you still might have to pay more if the new date affects the cost of the ticket. Still want to go? Note that some travel destinations are pretty much off the table. The CDC’s Level 3 risk assessment advises travelers to avoid any “nonessential travel” to China, Iran, South Korea and Italy. It also tells travelers with chronic medical conditions to postpone travel to Japan (Level 2) and practice health precautions in Hong Kong (Level 1). Scott’s Cheap Flights posted a handy round-up of each airline’s fee waiver policies for changes and cancellations. The rules vary by airline, so check with your travel agent or your airline to find out more. What if I bought travel insurance? Am I covered? “Unfortunately, there is limited cancellation coverage [for coronavirus] under most standard travel insurance policies,” Kasara Barto of Squaremouth.com, a travel insurance comparison site, told The Times in an email. “Virus outbreaks do not fall under the standard cancellation reasons on most travel insurance.” Travel editor Catharine Hamm took a deep dive in this Q&A about what coverage does and doesn’t mean. Insurers may have set a deadline by which you would have had to have purchased a policy that covers coronavirus. And even cancel-for-any-reason insurance doesn’t mean you’ll be fully reimbursed for nonrefundable travel costs; many such policies cover about 75% of what you paid. Will I lose money if I cancel my Amtrak ticket? No. Amtrak is allowing customers with existing or new reservations made before April 30 to change the date of their travel without paying change fees. Online users may log into their Amtrak.com account and select “modify trip” or call (800) 872-7245 to make the change. A fare difference may apply to your new itinerary. Note too Amtrak is suspending three high-speed Acela routes between Washington, D.C., and New York City due to a fall-off in ridership blamed on coronavirus fears, according to media reports. Where can I find health and travel updates regarding the coronavirus? The Los Angeles Times’ Health: Coronavirus web page provides news about the outbreak in California and elsewhere, and tips about what you can do to avoid getting infected. Also, the CDC’s Traveler’s Health website and the World Health Organization’s coronavirus disease information page provide solid information about what’s happening worldwide with the coronavirus oubreak. 
Mar 10, 2020	North America’s major sports leagues have crossed the next fearful frontier in fighting the incursion of the coronavirus. A ban on gatherings of more than 1,000 people was issued by the Santa Clara County Public Health Department late Monday, leaving the NHL’s San Jose Sharks with the possibility of playing their next three home games in an empty SAP Center, playing at a neutral site or postponing those games until public health officials deem it safe for large crowds to assemble again. The ban will take effect Wednesday and last three weeks, affecting the Sharks’ games March 19 against Montreal, March 21 against Boston and March 29 against Arizona. Arena officials said in a statement they will review each event scheduled at SAP Center and provide an update “in the coming days.” Some college basketball and college hockey games have been or will be played in arenas without fans in an effort to keep players safe, but this is the first time a major professional sports team has been affected by extraordinary actions intended to minimize the spread of COVID-19. Sadly, it won’t be the last of measures that were considered unthinkable not so long ago. Earlier on Monday, the NHL, NBA, Major League Baseball and Major League Soccer announced they will temporarily ban media from locker rooms before and after games and will limit locker-room access to essential personnel. Although the media corps is small compared with the number of fans in an arena or stadium, reporters and videographers often are within arm’s distance of players. Frequently, at the end of that arm is a germ-bearing cellphone that’s recording players’ comments from the distance of a foot or two. The reasoning behind the ban is simple: These leagues can imagine the ugly magnitude of what could happen if merely one player were to test positive for COVID-19, and the intrusion of the media is one risk that’s easily diminished. The disruption of a positive test in any league would be immense, resulting in quarantines of players — as well as those who are in close contact with them — and interruption of the season. If the player’s home arena is shared by NHL and NBA teams, as many are, the other league would feel the impact as well. It’s a nightmare no one wants to experience. Every league must plan ahead and anticipate the worst, while hoping for the best. That’s the way we all have to think. As of Monday afternoon, there were 133 confirmed coronavirus cases in California. On Saturday, signs were posted at the entrance to Chase Center in San Francisco to warn people to not enter the building if in the previous two weeks they had experienced fever, dry cough, aches and pains, nasal congestion, runny nose, sore throat or diarrhea or had traveled to any location subject to Level 1, 2, or 3 travel notices by the Centers from Disease Control, such as Iran, China, Italy, South Korea, Japan or Hong Kong. When Stephen Curry was held out of Saturday’s game the Warriors, knowing speculation about his health would spiral out of control, posted a tweet that quoted team physician Robert Nied as saying Curry had been diagnosed with influenza A, or seasonal flu, by positive viral testing. The tweet added, “He has no specific risk factors for COVID-19.” Until Monday’s announcement that locker rooms will close, the NHL and NBA had simply advised players to avoid close contact with fans such as high-fiving them or accepting pens to autograph items. A few NHL teams closed their locker rooms to the media after games and practices last week, but others had opted to leave their rooms open. The choice isn’t theirs to make anymore. “After consultation with infectious disease and public health experts, and given the issues that can be associated with close contact in pre- and post-game settings, all team locker rooms and clubhouses will be open only to players and essential employees of teams and team facilities until further notice,” the leagues’ joint statement said. “Media access will be maintained in designated locations outside of the locker room and clubhouse setting. These temporary changes will be effective beginning with [Tuesday’s] games and practices. “We will continue to closely monitor this situation and take any further steps necessary to maintain a safe and welcoming environment.” The leagues’ announcement came a day after organizers of the prestigious BNP Paribas Open at Indian Wells announced the tournament would not be held as scheduled because the Riverside County Public Health Department had declared a public health emergency for the Coachella Valley following a confirmed case of coronavirus. Many players had arrived on site and were surprised by the news. On Monday, some practiced on sunny courts with no fans watching, an eerie sight at a place where the closeness of fans to the practice courts was an attraction. Playing in front of empty stands, while drastic, still wouldn’t remove all the risks to baseball, basketball, hockey or soccer players because equipment managers, medical staff, security staff, stat crews and camera operators would have work in the building. The step after that is postponing or canceling games, which would be an annoying inconvenience for fans but potentially devastating for arena and stadium employees and those who work in restaurants and bars near arenas and stadiums. Any venture out in public carries some risks, whether the destination is a grocery store or a game. We take risks without thinking, and we can minimize some of those risks. Drive sober. Don’t text and drive. Now, add wash your hands frequently and stay home if you’re sick. Staples Center has installed hand sanitizing stations. Use them. And hope the people sitting next to you used them too. This is a strange new world we’re entering with no path to guide us. Tread carefully. 
Mar 10, 2020	With hopes of tapping into a market of up to 83 million passengers, the world’s largest cruise company three years ago launched a new ship built specifically for Chinese vacationers. The Majestic Princess, operated by a subsidiary of Carnival Corp., featured 1,780 cabins, 19 decks, an atrium and nearly 1,100 square meters of luxury boutiques, representing the largest shopping space at sea. But the ship is now docked in Singapore, with its next 13 cruise trips canceled. With China representing ground zero for the outbreak of the deadly coronavirus and thousands of cruise ship passengers forced to undergo extra health screening or a quarantine in Oakland, the cruise industry is reeling, facing its biggest crisis in decades. The dilemma grew worse over the weekend with the U.S. State Department recommending that Americans, particularly travelers with underlying health conditions, avoid cruise ships. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention said “a cruise-ship environment” could increase the risk of infection. “It’s horrific,” said Carl Winston, director of the L. Robert Payne School of Hospitality & Tourism at San Diego State University. “I can’t imagine a single industry being called out like that.” Gloria Guevara Manzo, president and chief executive of the World Travel and Tourism Council, a branch of the United Nations, chimed in on the crisis, saying she disagrees with the State Department’s recommendations against cruising, saying sailing on a cruise ship is just as safe as visiting a movie theater or a sports stadium. She said she would have preferred that the State Department had only warned people with underlying health conditions to stay home. The blow from the outbreak could be the most devastating in years, possibly surpassing the drop in passenger demand when the Costa Concordia sank off the coast of Italy in 2012 and the Carnival Triumph was left floating powerless in the Gulf of Mexico after an engine fire the following year, according to Winston and other experts. Shares of the world’s largest cruise companies — Carnival Corp., Royal Caribbean International and Norwegian Cruise Lines — dropped as much as 26% Monday, after several weeks of declines as the virus’ toll continued to grow. The effect will also include the added costs of the new enhanced cleaning procedures adopted on most cruise lines, including more frequent cleaning of hard surfaces, and the cost to defend against lawsuits filed by passengers who have been stuck on delayed or quarantined ships. Moody’s Investors Service lowered its outlook for the lodging and cruise industry last week to “negative” from “stable,” saying both industries face revenue losses in 2020 if the outbreak is not contained. “If COVID-19 confirmed cases continue to rise in North America, no lodging or cruise company could be immune to financial consequences,” Moody’s said in a report Friday. If travelers do abandon cruise trips, experts say it is not clear how long the cruise industry can withstand the revenue loss before turning to dramatic cost-cutting measures such as layoffs. “The key question is what is their staying power,” Winston said. “How much cash do they have in the bank to stay afloat?” Carnival, the world’s largest cruise company, reported net income of $3 billion last year, compared with $3.2 billion in 2018. Travel agencies say most of their clients who had previously booked cruise trips — even river cruises in Europe — are now postponing those trips for several months instead of canceling them altogether. “They are just moving them down the line,” said Jay Johnson, owner of Coastline Travel Advisors in Garden Grove. The outbreak comes after five or six years of growing profits and bookings for the cruise industry. Before the outbreak, a trade group for the cruise industry predicted 32 million passengers would sail on cruise ships worldwide in 2020, up from 30 million in the previous year. To meet the increasing demand, the world’s cruise companies were scheduled to launch 19 new ships in 2020, for a total of 278 cruise ships registered as members of the Cruise Lines International Assn. The industry supports nearly 1.2 million jobs, generating $50.2 billion in wages and salaries, according to the trade group. After the capsizing of the Costa Concordia off Italy’s Tuscan coast and the fire on the Carnival Triumph, demand for cruise trips slowed to about 2% to 3% growth per year, down from the industry’s typical 7% annual increases. Hoping to tap into a surging middle class in China, several cruise companies began in 2016 to add lines to serve Asian markets. Some cruise lines even revamped their ships to better serve Chinese customers. Royal Caribbean’s Quantum of the Seas swapped out a Johnny Rockets retro burger joint for a noodle restaurant and replaced the duty-free shop with a luxury leather boutique. The 1,100-foot ship was relocated from New Jersey to Shanghai as part of the effort to attract new passengers. But in late January, when the scope of the coronavirus outbreak became clear, cruise lines started to cancel sailings to and from mainland China and began to restrict passengers who had previously visited China, South Korea, Italy and other regions hit hard by the outbreak. Despite the cancellations, industry experts say that cruise prices have not dropped significantly. But Carnival Cruises recently offered up to $200 in “credits” that passengers can spend on ships if they keep their reservations through May 31. Cruise lines are reluctant to lower trip prices because they can’t raise them back too drastically after the crisis has passed, for fear of scaring off potential customers, according to industry experts. Stewart Chiron, who reviews cruises on his website cruiseguy.com, said the coronavirus outbreak may be the worst blow that the industry has seen. But he noted that unlike the hotel industry, cruise lines can speed up the recovery by redirecting ships to new destinations that are not as heavily hit as China or Italy. And he added that cruise passengers are typically very loyal customers and are likely to return to cruising after the shock of the outbreak wears off. “It’s inevitable that the industry will rebound and persevere,” he said. “It’s a resilient industry.” Johnson of Coastline Travel Advisors said many cruise companies are waiving penalties they usually charge for passengers who reschedule a booked trip. He expects that cruise lines will eventually offer discounts to entice travelers back to the water. “There will be a lot of inventory and the big discounts will come in the fall,” he said. 
Mar 10, 2020	As the novel coronavirus continues to spread, a new kind of cancel culture is taking hold in the entertainment industry. In recent weeks, movie releases, film festivals, concerts and other events involving public crowds and international travel have taken a hit from the spread of the COVID-19 respiratory illness. Even the venerable South by Southwest multimedia festival in Austin, Texas, has been canceled. And next month’s Coachella and Stagecoach festivals have been rescheduled until the fall. From “The Amazing Race” and “Sonic the Hedgehog” to the Louvre and Hong Kong Disneyland, here’s a rundown of what’s been affected by the coronavirus around the world. Events Following weeks of speculation, promoter Goldenvoice announced March 10 that two of its marquee annual festivals, Coachella and Stagecoach , will shift from April to October. Both events take place at the Empire Polo Club in Indio. “At the direction of the County of Riverside and local health authorities,” Goldenvoice’s statement read, “we must sadly confirm the rescheduling of Coachella and Stagecoach due to COVID-19 concerns.” SXSW , which was set to take place March 16-22 in Austin, was canceled March 6. In an afternoon press conference, Austin Mayor Steve Adler said he had declared a local disaster and “together with that I have issued an order that effectively cancels South by Southwest this year.” Major participants including the Concord record label group, Facebook, Twitter, TikTok, Apple, Netflix and Amazon had already pulled out before the cancellation. Acting out of what it called “an abundance of caution,” Boston on March 9 shelved its famed St. Patrick’s Day Parade , which was set for March 15 and last year drew more than 1 million people. That decision follows similar announcements about the cancellation of all St. Patrick’s parades and festivals in Ireland and the Belfast St. Patrick’s parade in Northern Ireland. The Los Angeles Times Food Bowl , previously set for May, will be moved to the fall. Dates have yet to be announced. RuPaul’s DragCon L.A. 2020 , a celebration of drag, queer culture and self-expression that was set for May 1-3, has been canceled. The event will return in 2021, organizers said, and refunds will be issued. Chinese exhibitors will not attend CinemaCon 2020 , the movie industry’s annual trade show, in Las Vegas. The event is set to take place as planned March 30-April 2 at Caesars Palace, though organizers are enhancing “health and sanitation” measures for the convention and maintaining “daily communication” with the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, according to the CinemaCon website. San Francisco’s 2020 Game Developers Conference , a professional gathering for interactive industry members set for March 16-20, has been scrapped after multiple participants pulled out. Microsoft, Sony Interactive Entertainment, Electronic Arts, Facebook Gaming, Unity, Amazon and Activision Blizzard were among the top gaming companies that canceled. MIPTV 2020 , a March 30-April 2 global content conference in Cannes, France, has been canceled. Related events that were scheduled to take place March 28-29 also have been nixed. Organizers of the 2020 Thessaloniki Documentary Festival in Greece, which had been set for March 5-15, are considering rescheduling the event for the end of May or beginning of June, according to the festival’s website. Saudi Arabia’s inaugural Red Sea International Film Festival has been postponed indefinitely. The event was scheduled to run March 12-21. The 10th Beijing International Film Festival , originally scheduled for late April, has been postponed indefinitely. Organizers in Beijing said March 6 that new festival dates would be announced as soon as possible. The Prague International Film Festival , a.k.a. Febiofest, has been postponed indefinitely, organizers said March 10. It had been set for March 19-27. The government in the Czech Republic has banned gatherings of 100-plus people. Venice’s famed Carnival , which had been set to run Feb. 8-25, ended prematurely on Feb. 19. FILMART 2020 , the Hong Kong International Film & TV Market, now will be held Aug. 27-29 instead of the originally scheduled stretch in late March. It is the most significant film market in Asia. DC , the home of Wonder Woman, Batman, Superman and more, will not send staffers to comics conventions in March. The company says it will assess attendance at future conventions case by case. With COVID-19 hitting hard in Washington state, Emerald City Comic Con organizers decided March 6 to move the March 12-15 event to the summer. Refunds will be issued and details about the rescheduled Seattle event are forthcoming. The AFI Tribute to Julie Andrews , set for April 25, has been postponed until early summer, with a date to be announced later, the American Film Institute announced March 7. The air date on TNT will be rescheduled as well. Spain’s 23rd Malaga Festival , the biggest festival dedicated to Spanish and Latin American film and TV, has been postponed from its planned March 13-22 dates. No new dates have been floated yet. Berlin has closed all state-run theaters, operas and concert halls from March 11 through April 19. Movies Almost all movie theaters in mainland China — accounting for 70,000 screens — have been shuttered. Theaters in Milan, Italy, including the iconic La Scala , have also been closed. Italy on March 4 closed “all theaters and cinema” where a one-meter distance requirement between patrons cannot be accommodated. The forthcoming release of “No Time to Die , ” Daniel Craig’s final film in the James Bond franchise, has been postponed until November, according to MGM, Universal and Bond producers Michael G. Wilson and Barbara Broccoli. The movie, previously slated to debut in the U.S. on April 10, now will hit theaters Nov. 25. China releases for Paramount’s “Sonic the Hedgehog,” Universal’s “1917,” Searchlight’s “Jojo Rabbit” and Universal’s “Dolittle” have been postponed indefinitely. Should precautions related to the outbreak persist, forthcoming titles including Pixar’s “Onward” and Sony Pictures’ “Bloodshot” could also be at risk. Sony on March 10 postponed the release of “Peter Rabbit 2" until Aug. 7 in the U.S. and U.K. It had been set to premiere March 27 in the U.K. and Europe and April 3 in the U.S. Production on Paramount’s latest “Mission: Impossible” project has been delayed. The action flick, starring Tom Cruise, was set to film on location in Italy, which has seen one of the largest outbreaks of coronavirus outside Asia. The seventh film in the franchise is scheduled to hit theaters in July 2021. Major movie studios in China, including Qingdao Oriental Movie Metropolis and Hengdian World Studios , have shut down operations. The Chinese government has put an indefinite halt on all film production in the country. After learning that one of its London employees might have been exposed to the novel coronavirus, Sony Pictures Entertainment on March 4 closed its offices for a week in London, Paris and Gdynia, Poland. Employees were asked to work from home. Music BTS, Green Day , Khalid , New Order , Pentatonix, Stormzy , Mariah Carey, Avril Lavigne , Louis Tomlinson, a-ha, Santana, Madonna and Testament are among the many music acts who have called off or postponed tour dates and performances. Saying on Twitter on March 10 that they “have no reason to believe that it will be under control in the coming weeks ahead,” Pearl Jam indefinitely postponed the North American leg of their “Gigaton” tour, which had included two mid-April dates at the Forum in Inglewood. “Again, here in Seattle what we are witnessing we would not wish for anyone.” After the late pullout by Miley Cyrus on March 9, the World Tour Bushfire Relief benefit concert in Melbourne, Australia, was canceled. Lil Nas X, pop duo the Veronicas and DJ Seb Fontaine also were on the bill for the show, which was to have been March 13. The Philharmonic Society of Orange County canceled a Shanghai Chinese Orchestra concert in Costa Mesa last month, despite all of the musicians being in good health. A Chinese New Year celebration was scheduled to take place Feb. 5 at Segerstrom Center for the Arts. The 18th Korea Times Music Festival , set to take place at the Hollywood Bowl on April 25, has been postponed “due to current travel restrictions in Asia,” organizers said. Ticket refunds are available. The Ultra Music Festival , a massive Miami-based electronic music event, has been pushed back. The three-day concert, which draws 165,000 fans from across the globe, likely will be moved from this March to 2021. The Tomorrowland Winter 2020 electronic-music festival, set to run March 14-21 at a ski resort in the French Alps, has been canceled by organizers after the French government banned all indoor gatherings of more than 5,000 people. Tomorrowland Summer 2020 in Belgium was still on the schedule for July. Singer Ciara , who is pregnant, canceled a March 19 hometown concert set to open the Fort Hood USO in Killeen, Texas. The USO’s grand opening will now be held this summer. “My doctors have advised me to limit travel and large group gatherings,” she said in a statement. Bret Michaels , who has Type 1 diabetes, canceled March 13-14 gigs on the ’80s Cruise , citing his higher risk of contracting the disease as well as problems with having enough insulin and other supplies on hand if he were to be quarantined on the ship. The San Francisco Symphony canceled concerts through March 17 after San Francisco Mayor London N. Breed announced March 6 that the War Memorial Performing Arts Center venues would be closed for a two-week test period in an effort to slow spread of COVID-19. The symphony’s home, Davies Symphony Hall, is among the venues affected. TV The 33rd season of the Emmy-winning TV show “The Amazing Race” has ceased filming indefinitely, and “all contestants and production staff are returning home,” according to a statement from CBS. No new production date has been set for the popular reality travel competition. The 16th season of ABC’s “The Bachelorette,” starring 38-year-old Clare Crawley, will no longer shoot episodes in Italy, according to Variety. Filming internationally has not been ruled out entirely. Comcast’s FreeWheel and Fox News pulled out of their annual advertisers upfront presentations scheduled for March 12 and 24 in New York City. Fox Entertainment reportedly canceled program development presentations scheduled for New York, Chicago, Detroit and L.A. during the last week of March. A+E Networks on March 9 announced that its upfronts planned for late March will be replaced by a virtual event set to begin March 23. Plans for 2021 on A&E, History and Lifetime will be presented. AMC Networks said March 9 that it will have “individual conversations” with advertisers in lieu of the upfront that had been set for March 18. Disney has scrapped a two-day launch event for its new streaming platform, Disney+ . The roll-out was set to take place on the Thursday and Friday leading up to the service’s March 24 European debut; it will be replaced by an executive press briefing via webcast. Short-form streaming platform Quibi , which launches April 6, has canceled plans for an April 5 red-carpet launch event. “Jeopardy!” and “Wheel of Fortune” announced plans Tuesday to tape shows without a live studio audience. The move was made in part to protect host Alex Trebek, who has been battling Stage 4 pancreatic cancer. “The Dr. Phil Show” will tape without an audience for about two weeks, inviting audiences back March 23. Theme parks Universal Studios Japan has closed from Feb. 29 to March 15, with the reopening date subject to change depending on the coronavirus situation. Disney’s themed resorts in Shanghai, Hong Kong and Tokyo have been shuttered until at least March 15. In a recent earnings call, the Mouse House estimated the closures would result in a roughly $175-million hit to operating income in its second fiscal quarter, should the parks remain shut for two months. On March 9, some restaurants and shops reopened at Shanghai Disneyland. Books The Los Angeles Times Festival of Books , which had been set for April at USC, has been postponed until Oct. 3-4. Honorees and winners of the L.A. Times Book Prizes will still be announced April 17. The Times also has canceled its book club event with authors Steph Cha and Joe Ide scheduled for March 30. The London Book Fair 2020 , which was scheduled for March 10-12, has been nixed. Around 25,000 publishers, authors and agents were expected at one of the world’s biggest international literary events. The 2020 Livre Paris Book Fair , which attracts 160,000 annually and was scheduled for March 20-23, has been canceled in accordance with France’s new indoor-gatherings policy. The Bologna Children’s Book Fair , which had been set for March 30-April 2, has been moved to May 4-7. The event in Bologna, Italy, typically draws 1,400 exhibitors and 30,000 professional visitors. Amid more than 100 author cancellations and facing uncertainty about volunteer turnout, the Tucson Festival of Books announced March 9 that it is nixing the event scheduled for March 14-15 on the University of Arizona campus. The festival is expected to return in 2021. The National Book Critics Circle has canceled its finalists reading on March 11 and awards ceremony March 12. Winners will be notified via email, with announcements made via press release and on social media. The gala will be rescheduled for fall. Museums  The Louvre in Paris shut down for a few days after employees walked out, demanding further protections against the virus, but it reopened March 6. The National Museum of Korea and the National Museum of Modern and Contemporary Art in South Korea, Beijing’s Palace Museum in the Forbidden City and Japan’s Mori Art Museum , National Museum of Modern Art and Kyoto National Museum are among closures in Asia. Museums (and theaters) in the Los Angeles area are operating as usual unless they hear otherwise from public health authorities but are more aggressively cleaning and disinfecting facilities and coming up with plans in case the virus spreads further. Opera San Diego Opera has nixed March 13-14 performances of “Aging Magician” at the Balboa Theatre, citing possible travel restrictions for 25-plus youth choral performers coming from Brooklyn. “The Barber of Seville” and “The Falling and the Rising” are still on the calendar for April and May. Performances at La Scala in Milan have been suspended through April 3. New York’s Metropolitan Opera on Tuesday mandated a 14-day self-imposed pre-show quarantine for all performers and staff traveling to New York City from China, Iran, South Korea, Japan, Italy and Hong Kong. The Bavarian State Opera in Munich has canceled all performances from March 11 through April 19. This list will be updated as more closures, cancellations and postponements are announced. 
Mar 10, 2020	Colleges and universities across the country are launching sweeping measures across core campus operations -- including instruction, lab work, admissions and financial aid -- as they confront the fast-moving global coronavirus outbreak. UC Berkeley, San Jose State, San Francisco State, Santa Clara, Princeton, Ohio State and Vanderbilt universities became the latest institutions to announce on Monday that they would suspend all or most in-person classes immediately or in coming weeks. UC San Diego announced Monday night that all lectures and discussion courses would be conducted online for the spring quarter, which begins March 25. Overall, more than 23 universities in the United States, Mideast, Asia and Italy have announced moves to online learning. Other campuses are stepping up restrictions on travel, large gatherings, study-abroad programs and campus events and tours. Caltech officials, citing an "abundance of caution in light of the quickly evolving COVID-19 situation," announced cancellations of all on-campus visit programs indefinitely.  "The long-term results of the coronavirus will remain to be seen, but it's clear that the short-term challenge is probably the greatest that higher education has faced in a generation," said Ted Mitchell, president of the American Council on Education. "Every college and university is on a war footing about this and are trying to assemble as much information as possible." Mitchell said higher education has experienced such tumult only a few times in the last century. After the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks, he said, widespread travel restrictions were initiated and some students were targets of racial and religious profiling. During the Vietnam War, many campuses were inflamed by antiwar protests and lost some students and faculty members to the military draft. The Great Recession of 2008 financially sapped higher education, but the damage took place more gradually, with the University of California losing one-third of its state funding over three years, said Nathan Brostrom, who was UC chief financial officer at the time and now serves as interim chancellor at UC Merced. The difference with the coronavirus, Brostrom said, has been the speed of its onslaught and the dramatic effect it is having across campus. "Literally every time I look at my computer, something new is coming up," Brostrom said. "The impact is felt on every part of campus operations. All we can do is continually prepare and be nimble in our responses." UC Merced's all-in mobilization involves twice-daily meetings on emergency services and teleconferences with all UC campuses to share information and best practices. They review health updates and policies on travel and large gatherings. They nail down plans to continue instruction and research should the campus have to move to online learning. Merced has no confirmed cases of the virus or even reports of potential exposure, and its classes are not affected for now. In addition, the UC financial expert said he was starting to assess the costs of the coronavirus outbreak. Merced will pay for any extra costs to bring 21 students home early from study-abroad programs in Italy, South Korea and Japan. Already, the campus is paying for added expenses, such as mega-orders of hand sanitizer and extra campus cleanings. And potential future costs loom. Merced could lose needed revenue if the campus cancels summer sessions. It could need to provide financial aid to the largely low-income student body if classes move online and obviate the need for federal work-study jobs on campus. So far, UC Berkeley and UC San Diego are the only schools in the 10-campus University of California system to announce in-person class suspensions. At both campuses, classes that cannot be held remotely, such as laboratories and performing arts, will continue to meet. Berkeley has not received notice of campus members who tested positive for the virus or were exposed to it. Varsha Sarveshwar, a UC Berkeley senior and UC Student Assn. president, said she fully backed the decision and called on all UC campuses to consider similar action. "It's a really responsible decision on the part of the campus," she said. She added that the transition should not be too disruptive because Berkeley already began stepping up online learning last year when Pacific Gas & Electric shut off power during the Northern California wildfires. At a UCLA student meeting Monday, officials said that they are paying close attentions to public health reports but do not see a need at this time to suspend in-person classes or close dorms or dining halls. Across town at USC, officials are preparing for a three-day test on online learning. "We are preparing the university to make substantial changes in a very short period of time to ensure we have the capability to move online should stronger measures become necessary," said Provost Charles F. Zukoski. "We are in uncharted territory and we are being vigilant to protect our community." At other campuses throughout the country, coronavirus developments have caused some confusion. Sophia Cai, a Princeton University student and co-president of the school's University Press Club, spent much of Sunday debunking unsubstantiated rumors of two cases of the coronavirus on campus. Cai lives in a dorm and her family lives in Princeton, but she's unsure whether she'll go home or stay on campus. She has not done "virtual learning" in college classes before. "This is new to me. It's new for all of us," she said. Princeton University President Chris Eisgruber said officials are encouraging students to consider staying home after the weeklong spring break, which begins March 14. Except for San Jose State and San Francisco State, the California State University's 21 other campuses are still holding in-person classes, a university spokesman said. But 10 Cal State Long Beach students were in self-isolation after possible exposure at a conference in Washington, D.C., last week. At the California community colleges "all of our campuses are preparing for the possibility of a disruption and for moving students online," Chancellor Eloy Ortiz Oakley said. Sierra College in Rocklin, outside Sacramento, declared a "campus state of emergency" Sunday after two employees were possibly exposed to COVID-19 on a cruise. The employees, who do not work in classrooms, were on the same cruise as an elderly Placer County man who later tested positive for COVID-19 and died. The college said faculty would begin providing instruction online Wednesday and must transition to remote instruction by March 18. Many lab classes will continue on site and athletic competitions will proceed without spectators. All events and non-essential travel through the end of March were also canceled. In the Los Angeles Community College District, officials have worked to debunk false rumors about coronavirus cases at three campuses. Five Pierce College students have been instructed to "self-monitor" their health after returning from a conference last week at which three other attendees not affiliated with the campus tested positive for COVID-19, said LACCD spokesman William Boyer. He said no students have shown symptoms of the illness that met public health agency standards for testing for the virus. -- Times staff writer Sonali Kohli contribute to this report. Caption: PHOTO: AT USC, officials are preparing for a three-day test on online learning. "We are being vigilant to protect our community," Provost Charles F. Zukoski says. PHOTOGRAPHER:Al Seib Los Angeles Times PHOTO:USC, A PROVOST says, is "in uncharted territory" regarding the coronavirus. Across town at UCLA, officials said they do not see a need at this time to suspend in-person classes or close dormitories or dining halls. PHOTOGRAPHER:Al Seib Los Angeles Times 
Mar 10, 2020	North America's major sports leagues have crossed the next fearful frontier in fighting the incursion of the coronavirus. A ban on gatherings of more than 1,000 people was issued by the Santa Clara County Public Health Department late Monday, leaving the NHL's San Jose Sharks with the possibility of playing their next three home games in an empty SAP Center, playing at a neutral site or postponing those games until public health officials deem it safe for large crowds to assemble again. The ban will take effect Wednesday and last three weeks, affecting the Sharks' games March 19 against Montreal, March 21 against Boston and March 29 against Arizona. Arena officials said in a statement they will review each event scheduled at SAP Center and provide an update "in the coming days."  Some college basketball and college hockey games have been or will be played in arenas without fans in an effort to keep players safe, but this is the first time a major professional sports team has been affected by extraordinary actions intended to minimize the spread of COVID-19. Sadly, it won't be the last of measures that were considered unthinkable not so long ago. Earlier on Monday, the NHL, NBA, Major League Baseball and Major League Soccer announced they will temporarily ban media from locker rooms before and after games and will limit locker room access to essential personnel. Although the media corps is small compared with the number of fans in an arena or stadium, reporters and videographers often are within arm's distance of players. Frequently, at the end of that arm is a germ-bearing cellphone that's recording players' comments from the distance of a foot or two. The reasoning behind the ban is simple: These leagues can imagine the ugly magnitude of what could happen if merely one player were to test positive for COVID-19, and the intrusion of the media is one risk that's easily diminished. The disruption of a positive test in any league would be immense, resulting in quarantines of players -- as well as those who are in close contact with them -- and interruption of the season. If the player's home arena is shared by NHL and NBA teams, as many are, the other league would feel the impact as well. It's a nightmare no one wants to experience. Every league must plan ahead and anticipate the worst, while hoping for the best. That's the way we all have to think. As of Monday afternoon, there were 133 confirmed coronavirus cases in California. On Saturday, signs were posted at the entrance to Chase Center in San Francisco to warn people to not enter the building if in the previous two weeks they had experienced fever, dry cough, aches and pains, nasal congestion, runny nose, sore throat or diarrhea or had traveled to any location subject to Level 1, 2, or 3 travel notices by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, such as Iran, China, Italy, South Korea, Japan or Hong Kong. When Stephen Curry was held out of Saturday's game, the Warriors, knowing speculation about his health would spiral out of control, posted a tweet that quoted team physician Robert Nied as saying Curry had been diagnosed with influenza A, or seasonal flu, by positive viral testing. The tweet added, "He has no specific risk factors for COVID-19." Until Monday's announcement that locker rooms will close, the NHL and NBA had simply advised players to avoid close contact with fans such as high-fiving them or accepting pens to autograph items. A few NHL teams closed their locker rooms to the media after games and practices last week, but others had opted to leave their rooms open. The choice isn't theirs to make anymore. "After consultation with infectious disease and public health experts, and given the issues that can be associated with close contact in pre- and post-game settings, all team locker rooms and clubhouses will be open only to players and essential employees of teams and team facilities until further notice," the leagues' joint statement said. "Media access will be maintained in designated locations outside of the locker room and clubhouse setting. These temporary changes will be effective beginning with [Tuesday's] games and practices. "We will continue to closely monitor this situation and take any further steps necessary to maintain a safe and welcoming environment." The leagues' announcement came a day after organizers of the prestigious BNP Paribas Open at Indian Wells announced the tournament would not be held as scheduled because the Riverside County Public Health Department had declared a public health emergency for the Coachella Valley following a confirmed case of coronavirus. Many players had arrived on site and were surprised by the news. On Monday, some practiced on sunny courts with no fans watching, an eerie sight at a place where the closeness of fans to the practice courts was an attraction. Playing in front of empty stands, while drastic, still wouldn't remove all the risks to baseball, basketball, hockey or soccer players because equipment managers, medical staff, security staff, stat crews and camera operators would have work in the building. The step after that is postponing or canceling games, which would be an annoying inconvenience for fans but potentially devastating for arena and stadium employees and those who work in restaurants and bars near arenas and stadiums. Any venture out in public carries some risks, whether the destination is a grocery store or a game. We take risks without thinking, and we can minimize some of those risks. Drive sober. Don't text and drive. Now, add wash your hands frequently and stay home if you're sick. Staples Center has installed hand sanitizing stations. Use them. And hope the people sitting next to you used them too. This is a strange new world we're entering with no path to guide us. Tread carefully. Caption: PHOTO: THE ORIOLES' Ubaldo Jimenez pitches to the Chicago White Sox's Adam Eaton with no crowd at Camden Yards on April 29, 2015, following civil unrest in Baltimore. Such a sight could become common in big-time sports as the fallout from the coronavirus grows. PHOTOGRAPHER:Patrick Semansky Associated Press 
Mar 9, 2020	Amid the spread of the coronavirus across the United States, Major League Baseball decided Monday not to call off remaining spring training games or postpone the start of the regular season. The determination came on the same day the Japanese league said it would postpone the opening of its season, which had been set to start next week, and on the day after the annual BNP Paribas tennis tournament in Indian Wells was called off. “While MLB recognizes the fluidity of this rapidly evolving situation,” a league statement said, “our current intention is to play spring training and regular season games as scheduled.” MLB did decide to join the NBA, NHL and Major League Soccer in closing clubhouses to reporters and limiting access to “players and essential employees of teams and team facilities,” effective Tuesday. Players would be expected to make themselves available for interviews outside clubhouses and in news conferences. In a joint statement, the leagues said the decision was made “after consultation with infectious disease and public health experts” and cited “issues that can be associated with close contact in pre- and post-game settings.” The statement called the decision “temporary.” MLB did not bar fans from attendance, despite the fact that a crowd is by definition full of people in “close contact.” The difference, according to a league official, is that players are showering and dressing “in an area of personal hygiene.” The MLB regular season is scheduled to start March 26, with the Dodgers playing at home and the Angels playing in Houston. The league’s decision to proceed could be overtaken by unforeseen developments between now and then. The league’s response to the coronavirus threat has evolved as the number of domestic cases has jumped. Two weeks ago, the first memo from the commissioner’s office provided players, staff and team executives with basic advice from the Centers for Disease Control: wash your hands; avoid touching your eyes, nose and mouth; stay home if you get sick, etc. In a second memo sent last week to team executives, the league urged each team to form an internal task force and consult with local public health officials and infectious disease specialists. MLB also suggested the installation of additional hand sanitizer stations and a reduction in hand-to-hand interactions with fans, perhaps by distributing cards and other items autographed in advance. The league did not disclose how it might deal with any games scheduled in an area where a particularly severe outbreak has been detected, or where a public health emergency might have been declared. On several occasions, MLB has moved games scheduled for a hurricane-impacted area to an alternate site. After the terrorist attacks of Sept. 11, 2001, the league halted play until Sept. 17 and made up the postponed games after the scheduled end of the regular season. In Asia, where the virus first surfaced and where more cases have been reported, professional sports leagues and other organizations have been quicker to cancel public events. In Taiwan, an Olympic baseball qualifying tournament was postponed from April 1-5 to June 17-21. In South Korea, the baseball league called off exhibition games and announced late Monday it is postponing Opening Day indefinitely, with hope to start sometime in April. It was originally scheduled for March 28. In Japan, the baseball league played its exhibition games but banned fans from attending. On Monday, the league said it would delay the start of its regular season, which had been set for March 20. The league now hopes to open its season “by at least the end of April,” commissioner Atsushi Saito said during a news conference. Saito called the possibility of playing regular-season games without fans “the final option” for the league and said it would be “highly unlikely to happen.” The Japanese soccer league interrupted its season Feb. 25 and has yet to resume play. In France, the government ordered Ligue 1 -- the country’s top soccer league -- to limit crowds to 1,000 or ban fans entirely for games through April 15. In Italy, the government Monday imposed a national lockdown that will preclude Serie A and B league games from being played through April 3. 
Mar 9, 2020	As fears of a novel coronavirus pandemic spread, Hollywood is feeling the effects at the international box office, especially in China and Italy, where theaters are closed. But in the U.S., it’s unclear how much of a damper the disease will put on moviegoing. Last weekend’s box office returns suggest that Americans are still largely willing to go out to cinemas, despite increasing numbers of cases in states including California, New York and Washington. Movies in the U.S. and Canada generated $103.4 million from Friday through Sunday, up 4% from the previous weekend, according to data firm Comscore. “When we look at the numbers in the U.S., we’re not seeing an impact as of yet,” said Paul Dergarabedian, a box office analyst for Comscore. Of course, that is likely to change. Studio executives are still bracing for at least some drop-off domestically, depending on how long and how severe the outbreak gets. In a sign of broader rising concerns, the California Department of Public Health on Monday issued guidelines for how event organizers should handle mass gatherings amid the growing number of cases of the coronavirus. The highly anticipated South by Southwest festival in Austin, Texas, was canceled last week, and the fate of the Coachella Valley Music and Arts Festival remains unclear. However, a close look at box office data creates a blurry picture of how consumers are reacting. In the hard-hit Seattle area, box office was down 4% last weekend from a week ago, indicating a potential slowdown there, according to distribution executives who did not want to comment publicly on the situation. New York, which has also suffered from the outbreak, was down 13%. Additionally, Washington D.C., saw a 9% drop compared to last week. On the other hand, the Los Angeles box office was up 5%, despite multiple coronovirus cases here. In San Francisco, where multiple tech companies pulled out of the Game Developers Conference over coronavirus panic, the box office rose 8%. Meanwhile, Austin experienced a 13% jump over a year ago. “I don’t see any clear correlation at all,” said the executive, who was not authorized to speak publicly on the matter. “It’s really reflective of the pictures in the marketplace and how they’re doing.” Analysts were similarly hesitant to draw any conclusions from Pixar Animation Studios’ new film “Onward,” which grossed a relatively soft $40 million in the U.S. and Canada this past weekend. Reviews for the film, while mostly positive, were less enthusiastic than they have been for Pixar’s greatest hits. The computer-animated comedy adventure scored $28 million abroad from countries including Britain and France. The film has not yet been released in the heavily affected countries of South Korea, Italy, Japan and China. Disney on Sunday said “most regions with the exception of Asia-Pacific have not seen a material impact at this point.” In another sign of resilience in moviegoing, returning releases have held up well at theaters. Universal Pictures’ horror movie “The Invisible Man,” starring Elisabeth Moss, declined only 46% in its second weekend, a strong hold for a genre that tends to see steeper drops. Attendance is clearly taking a hit in some other countries. In China, the world’s second-largest box office market behind the U.S. and Canada, theaters have been shuttered for weeks as that country’s government tries to get the situation under control. Home to 70,000 screens, China is a key market for Hollywood movies. Studios have had to hit pause on their plans to release movies there, and there’s no indication of when multiplex doors will reopen. Movies including Disney’s “Mulan,” for which China is an important market, have been delayed. (“Mulan,” set for a March 27 U.S. debut, had not yet been given a release date in China.) Italy this week shut down cinemas to help prevent further spread. Other public places such as museums, pubs, discos and bingo halls have also been closed. In France, theaters that were closed recently in some places have since reopened, but with restrictions to keep every other row of seats empty. South Korean theaters have remained open for business, but attendance there has taken a big hit. Other countries, including Australia and Britain, have remained stable, according to analyst Bruce Nash, who runs the box office data website The-Numbers.com. “For now, the effects seem to be localized,” Nash said. MGM and Universal last week postponed the global release of the new James Bond movie “No Time to Die” until November. Small indie distributor Magnolia Pictures on Monday pushed the debut of its gerrymandering documentary “Slay the Dragon.” So far, though, other studios are standing firm on their release plans. Disney has shown no signs of holding off on the releases of “Mulan” or Marvel Studios’ “Black Widow,” which hits theaters April 24. Universal Pictures is sticking with a May 22 release of the ninth “Fast and the Furious” movie, “F9.” Last week, the National Assn. of Theatre Owners told CinemaCon attendees that the annual trade show in Last Vegas starting March 30 would continue as planned and that the event would take additional precautions, such as providing extra hand sanitizers and trash bins. “The safety and productivity of our attendees remains our highest priority,” the theater group said in an email. “As of today, the CDC maintains the risk for the majority of the public remains low.” The next box office test comes this weekend with “Bloodshot,” Sony Pictures’ new comic book action film starring Vin Diesel. The movie is expected to open with roughly $12 million to $17 million in ticket sales, according to industry estimates. Also debuting are Lionsgate’s faith-based film “I Still Believe” and Universal’s satirical thriller “The Hunt.” In an interview with USA Today, Diesel, who stars in both “Bloodshot” and “F9,” responded to a question about the coronavirus’ potential effect on release plans for the new “Fast and the Furious” film by channeling the title character of his other movie. “Let me put it to you this way: ‘Bloodshot’ at the end of the day is a soldier and a soldier doesn’t decide or pick when or where he’s deployed,” he said. “We’re going to go in.” 
Mar 9, 2020	But for the notoriety of the killer that claimed his life, the 63-year-old man's death at a rural hospital may have gone completely unnoticed. After two decades confined to a psych ward, he had no known family, friends or other ties to the outside world -- no one to be notified, no one to mourn or claim his ashes. At just over 90 pounds at the time of his passing, the man, whose name has not been disclosed, barely took up any space in this world. His lonely death in the early hours of Feb. 19 became a matter of urgent public interest when he was posthumously confirmed to have the novel coronavirus, becoming the first killed by the illness in South Korea. Six others who'd been housed alongside him at the psych ward at the private Cheongdo Daenam Hospital in the country's southeast, all in their 50s and 60s, also died within days. Of 102 patients in the psych ward, 100 had contracted the deadly virus.  Authorities haven't determined how the virus made its way into the locked ward, but once it got there, it found easy prey in patients with weakened immune systems living in close, poorly ventilated quarters. As South Korea has scrambled to contain a surge of infections that has topped 7,300 and killed 50 in recent weeks, the virus has in particular seeped into the spaces where society's most frail are gathered or institutionalized -- the elderly, the mentally ill, the disabled. The virus overtook a group home for the disabled in the small southeastern town of Chilgok, infecting a third of its 69 residents and staff, then another in the nearby city of Daegu, the country's fourth-largest city. Pockets of infections were discovered at convalescent hospitals and at nursing homes for the elderly in Gyeongsan, Bonghwa and Cheongdo. Senior centers across the country abruptly shut their doors after three of those who frequent a center in downtown Seoul tested positive for the virus. They had eaten at the cafeteria and interacted at the center, a public facility where many senior citizens take regular classes and spend their days. The elderly and those with underlying conditions are particularly vulnerable to the virus, which has killed more than 3,800 worldwide and spread to more than 109,000 people in more than 100 countries. In China, where the vast majority of the deaths have occurred, doctors reported fatality rates of nearly 15% for those 80 years of age or older, compared with 2.3% overall. Those with existing heart disease, diabetes or respiratory problems have also been several times more likely to die. Facilities and institutions where the already weakened are living in close quarters are ideal breeding grounds for pathogens in the best of times. But calamities -- epidemics, natural disasters and wars -- have a way of further exposing society's fault lines. The current outbreak raging across South Korea, some activists and advocates say, is an overdue wake-up call casting light on the country's reliance on institutionalization as a way of caring for its most vulnerable and forcing a reckoning on the conditions in which they are housed. "It's not the virus that's cruel to the weak," a South Korean newspaper posited recently. "It's our society, civic groups say, that's shoved them into isolated environments ideal for the virus to thrive." The psych ward in the hospital where seven have died and nearly all patients have been infected has in particular raised alarm, as photos and details emerged about how patients have lived for decades with little prospect of healing or leaving. A task force of physicians at South Korea's National Medical Center overseeing the response to the coronavirus outbreak said the ward had no beds, with patients spending most of their days on thin futons on the floor -- not a typical standard of care for South Korea. Many of the patients were found to be malnourished, had issues with hygiene and atrophied muscles from rarely, if ever, having left the hospital for a decade or two, the task force reported last month. Making matters worse, ventilation was dismal because of windows being sealed to prevent suicides. "It was characteristically a condition for the virus to rapidly spread once it got in," Lee So-hee, head of psychiatry at the National Medical Center, told reporters. "Conditions at Cheongdo Daenam Hospital were particularly bad." As the extent of the outbreak became apparent, an alliance of advocates for the disabled lodged a petition with the National Human Rights Commission of Korea decrying conditions, saying other locked facilities housing the sick, disabled and mentally ill were themselves ticking time bombs. There were more than 1,500 group homes for the disabled in South Korea as of 2018. "We need to examine society's abuse of having branded the mentally disabled as dangerous and locked them up en masse," the group Solidarity Against Disability Discrimination said in a statement. "We pray for the deceased who were only freed of the locked ward in death." Advocates say these vulnerabilities had surfaced in 2015, amid a local outbreak of the Middle East respiratory syndrome, which killed 38 in South Korea. A coalition of groups working with the disabled sued the government alleging discrimination, saying two disabled patients were forced into quarantine after possibly having come into contact with the infected at a hospital without consideration for their severe disabilities. "The government is responsible for this reality in which the disabled are disproportionately affected in a time of disaster," said Park Kyung-seok, a longtime advocate who heads the group. Those who work with South Korea's rapidly increasing elderly population -- the fastest growing in the world -- were also on high alert as infections in the country soared. Of the fatalities, more than 80% were at least 60 years old. Authorities last week discovered a cluster of more than 50 patients and staffers infected with the novel coronavirus at a convalescent hospital in Bonghwa County, a mountainous area in the east of South Korea. The average age of the infected, many of whom are seriously ill although none have died, is 88. Chun Yong-man, president of the Korea Assn. of Senior Welfare Centers, said many of South Korea's elderly are housed in convalescent hospitals focused on medical treatment rather than nursing homes centered on quality of life. Those hospitals are less regulated and understaffed, making them especially vulnerable to a situation such as the coronavirus epidemic, he said. "Of course, the care is inadequate and they're vulnerable to the dangers of a virus like this," he said. "We're all on edge." Kim Dong-bae, professor emeritus of social work at Yonsei University, said many of South Korea's elderly were probably also suffering from an information gap, being less able to navigate the internet and social media for accurate information about how to keep safe. "People are telling me, they haven't felt this frightened or endangered since the Korean War," said Kim, who is 70. At Seoul's Jongmyo Park, the usual crowds of seniors milling about for company, free meals and games of Go had thinned out but not disappeared. Signs taped to a wall and a pathway said Go games were banned indefinitely as a coronavirus prevention measure; regardless, half a dozen games were in full swing nearby. Kim Young-bae, 84, wearing a flat cap and face mask and enjoying the afternoon sun on a bench in the park, was unfazed. He remembered a time after the war when an illness would hit a village and dozens would die at a time, so much so there wasn't enough cloth to wrap the bodies. His wife is refusing to leave their home, terrified of the virus, he said. She's stopped going to the daytime discotheque that's a popular pastime for seniors. "Does it matter, whether you die locked up in your home, or walking around?" he asked. "Whenever it is, we all go some time." Caption: PHOTO: CROWDS wait to buy masks in Seoul. Outbreaks at a psychiatric ward and a group home for disabled people in South Korea have underscored the threat the coronavirus poses to the country's most vulnerable populations. PHOTOGRAPHER:Ahn Young-joon Associated Press PHOTO:A WORKER sprays disinfectant at South Korea's Cheongdo Daenam Hospital. Seven psychiatric ward patients at the hospital have died of the coronavirus. PHOTOGRAPHER:Lim Hwa-young Associated Press 
Mar 9, 2020	Amid mounting coronavirus fears, which led to last week's unprecedented cancellation of the South by Southwest festival, enough filmgoers saw "Onward" to make the Disney-Pixar film tops at the box office. Still, it opened with $40 million, on the low end of analyst projections of $40 million to $45 million, according to estimates from measurement firm Comscore. Despite worries that the virus might affect moviegoing, the overall domestic gross was up 4% over last weekend, with most other films meeting or slightly exceeding expectations. The year-to-date box office, however, fell 1.9% behind 2019, because of the wild success last year of "Captain Marvel," which earned $153.4 million over the same period. "Onward" features the voices of Chris Pratt and Tom Holland, who play a pair of teen elf brothers determined to resurrect their late father. It was positively received with an A- CinemaScore and a 86% "fresh" rating on review aggregation site Rotten Tomatoes.  The film's performance is comparable to that of fellow Pixar title "The Good Dinosaur," which opened in 2015 with $39 million on its way to $332 million in global box office grosses, the lowest of the studio's 21 titles. "Onward" is also the first Pixar movie to debut in early spring; other Pixar titles have opened in either the summer or November. The film's international rollout excluded Italy, South Korea and China, where the coronavirus outbreak has hit the hardest. It was also banned in several Middle Eastern countries because of a reference to a lesbian relationship. Among the 47 international territories where it was released, it earned $28 million in tickets for a $68-million global debut, modest by Disney standards. In second place, Universal's "The Invisible Man" added $15.2 million in its second weekend. Globally, the film has earned $98.3 million. Coming in third, Warner Bros.' sports drama "The Way Back" opened with $8.5 million. The film stars Ben Affleck as an alcoholic construction worker turned high school basketball coach and was positively received with a B+ CinemaScore and an 88% "fresh" rating on Rotten Tomatoes. In fourth place, Paramount's "Sonic the Hedgehog" added $8 million in its fourth weekend. The film currently stands at $295.6 million in worldwide receipts. Rounding out the top five, 20th Century Studios' "The Call of the Wild" added $7 million in its third weekend. Globally, the film has earned $99.6 million. At No. 6, Focus Features' "Emma" expanded into wide release in its third weekend, adding $5 million for a cumulative $6.9 million. It received a B CinemaScore and an 85% "fresh" rating on Rotten Tomatoes. Globally, the film has earned $20.9 million. In seventh place, Sony's "Bad Boys for Life" added $3.1 million in its eighth weekend and surpassed $200 million with a cumulative of $202 million. This week, Sony opens "Bloodshot," Universal has "The Hunt" and Lionsgate debuts "I Still Believe." 
Mar 8, 2020	The State Department on Sunday urged U.S. citizens to not travel on cruise ships, warning that passengers on the hulking vessels are more likely to contract the coronavirus infection and could be subject to quarantines and other international travel restrictions. “U.S. citizens, particularly travelers with underlying health conditions, should not travel by cruise ship,” the State Department wrote in a statement on its website. Up until Sunday, the White House has resisted such declarations because President Trump has not wanted to do or say anything that might further hurt the stock market and the travel industry. Over the last month, the stock price for Carnival Corp., owner of Princess Cruises, has declined nearly 35%. The State Department alert came the day before the Grand Princess cruise ship was expected to dock at the Port of Oakland, where 3,000 people — about 1,000 of whom are from California — will disembark. All of those passengers will be quarantined for two weeks at military bases. At least 21 people on board the ship have confirmed cases of COVID-19, which is caused by the coronavirus that originated late last year in China. The virus also spread on another cruise ship, the Diamond Princess. Eight people died after contracting the illness on that ship, and more than 700 were infected. Newsletter Get our Coronavirus Today newsletter Sign up for the latest news, best stories and what they mean for you, plus answers to your questions. Sign Me Up You may occasionally receive promotional content from the Los Angeles Times. Gov. Gavin Newsom on Sunday criticized the cruise industry, saying that its leaders needed to implement stricter safety protocols to prevent further spread of the virus. He noted that California sees heavy cruise ship traffic and cannot continue to handle large-scale quarantines of ship passengers. “We simply as a state cannot experience this kind of operation at the scale that is likely” if cruise ships don’t take more precautions, Newsom said at a news conference. The world’s largest association of cruise lines on Sunday announced it would adopt enhanced screening measures for passengers. Cruise Lines International Assn. said it would not allow anyone who has visited South Korea, Iran, China or affected areas of Italy to board its ships. All passengers will also be subject to temperature screenings, and those with readings above 100.4 degrees Fahrenheit may be asked to disembark. “We remain in close contact with local governments around the world, and while we regret that these changes will result in the denial of boarding for some of our guests, travelers should know that their health and safety is the absolute priority for the industry,” said Kelly Craighead, president and CEO of the association. The crowded and confined environment of cruise ships makes them especially prone to disease outbreaks, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Outbreaks on ships can persist throughout multiple voyages if crew members are infected, and medical facilities on-board are limited when compared with the care mainland hospitals can provide. The most frequently reported cruise ship outbreaks have involved respiratory or gastrointestinal infections and vaccine-preventable diseases like the flu. Anywhere from eight to 16 outbreaks of norovirus — a highly contagious stomach bug — occurred each year among the international cruise ships that ported in the U.S. between 2010 and 2015, CDC data show. The coronavirus death toll in the U.S. rose to 21 on Sunday, and at least 537 cases of infection have been confirmed nationwide, including 114 in California. Worldwide, more than 109,000 people have been infected and more than 3,800 have died. The decline in cruise ship visits could dramatically impact the economies of countries like Mexico, which relies heavily on tourism. The resort city of Cabo San Lucas, which hosted 204 cruise ships in 2019, has already taken a big financial blow because of coronavirus concerns. State authorities have reported a 20% to 30% drop in cruise ship reservations. Questions have been raised about whether passengers on the Grand Princess could have either picked up or spread the coronavirus when it visited Cabo and three other Mexican Pacific ports during a trip from San Francisco in February. Mexico has confirmed a total of six cases of the coronavirus, but none so far in the state of Baja California Sur, where Cabo is located. Staff writers Anita Chabria, Susanne Rust and Patrick J. McDonnell contributed to this report. 
Mar 8, 2020	Shopping carts snaked in a line so long it stretched into the Costco parking lot. It was early Saturday at the Atwater Village location and hundreds of customers, in varying states of concern, were counting down the seconds until the doors opened. “Good morning, folks,” an employee shouted, “we have a limit on paper towels, water and bath tissue!” As the crowd crushed toward the back of the store, piling their carts high with toilet paper and paper towels, employees stood in the aisles directing carts as if they were traffic controllers. When he saw the long lines, Matthew Nasser wondered, at first, if there was a celebrity in the store. But then he asked someone what was going on. The commotion, he learned, was about the very thing that had nagged in the back of his mind: coronavirus. It wasn’t why he’d come shopping, but still, he decided to buy water and toilet paper. “While it’s here,” he said, “I’d better get it.” After weeks of watching its spread — in Italy and Iran, Seattle and South Korea — the anxiety of a global threat started to settle in across Southern California, creating a strange amalgam of emotions. Some people carried on with their Saturday routines, entirely unfazed, and others — gym rats, mall shoppers, park lovers — became disturbingly aware of just how often they came into close contact with others. At a Target in Mid-City, the shelves of bleach were completely emptied. And at a Sephora in Glendale, Mojo Tuheen perused the aisles of the cosmetic store, taking advantage of the smaller-than-usual crowds. She wasn’t going to put any makeup samples on her face — but that’s not something she usually does anyway. “I’m an extremely germophobic person,” Tuheen said. “I wash my hands 20 times a day, so I haven’t really done anything differently.” In MacArthur Park, the sidewalks buzzed with the usual energy of vendors hawking smartphone cases and neon sneakers. At the edge of the park, Gina Frankel, who is homeless, sat near her cart of belongings and stared out at the people all around her. “If somebody is coughing or sneezing around me, I hold my breath and get out of the area,” said Frankel, 64. “There are places here to wash your hands — but it’s hard to do because of this,” she said, displaying her hands, which were cracked from her psoriasis. Around the block, a man feeding pigeons waved off questions about the virus. “It’s not that bad in this area,” he said, “so I don’t really worry about it.” But the virus, which has killed more than 3,500 worldwide, was becoming increasingly hard to contain in California, where officials had started to switch gears, focusing less on containment and more on slowing its spread. In the Bay Area, health officials issued aggressive recommendations to the public: Stop shaking hands, stockpile medicine, work from home, and if you can’t, stay an arm’s length away from your co-workers. Without decisive action, San Francisco’s director of health warned the public, the death toll would spike. “We must reduce the times and places where people come together,” Dr. Grant Colfax said Friday. “Human viruses need people to carry them.” On Saturday in San Francisco, where officials had recently canceled the St. Patrick’s Day Parade, the Grand Princess cruise ship was waiting just offshore. The night before, a U.S. Coast Guard helicopter had swooped down, dropping off gloves and face masks for the 3,000 people aboard, including 21 who had already tested positive for the virus. When a cutter zipped through the water, ferrying off a passenger who was critically ill from something other than COVID-19, many others on board began to wonder how long it would be until they got off the ship. A 75-year-old Rocklin resident, who had taken an earlier voyage on the Grand Princess, died from complications of COVID-19 — California’s only confirmed fatality from the virus, which has sickened more than 80 across the state. In Los Angeles, the city’s marathon was still scheduled for Sunday morning, but officials urged spectators to stay at least six feet away from strangers, because that’s the maximum distance airborne droplets from a cough or sneeze can travel. Back at the jam-packed Costco Saturday morning, Larchmont resident Jon Oh said that although he had already stocked up on household essentials last week, he was back for a few more things — chicken soup, maybe another carton of water. “We always try to be prepared,” Oh said. “If something hits, it’s going to happen fast. The situation could go from, ‘Don’t worry about it,’ to the opposite.” If nothing else, Oh said, he could add the stuff to his earthquake stockpile. An hour south, at a gym in Tustin called OC FIT Las2winz, people had ditched their method of circuit-training class encouragement — high-fives — opting instead for elbow bumps. And near the entrance, gym co-owner Natalia Guzman, 30, greeted clients with a smile and a reminder. “Wash your hands,” she said, looking over at the extra gallon of Purell she’d set on the counter. “Use hand sanitizer.” Normally, Guzman said, her 63-year-old father would be here. He’s always the first person in line for workout class, she said, but because of his kidney transplant he takes a medication that suppresses his immune system. She and her twin sister, another co-owner, didn’t want to take any risks, Guzman said, so they banned him from their gym. So far, he’s the only regular who isn’t showing up. Jay Olegario, a nurse who attended a 7:15 a.m. class at the gym, said he uses the same safety precautions here as he does at the hospital. He washes his hands constantly and, like his scrubs, he said he washes his gym clothes as soon as he gets home. “Nothing will keep me from this place,” he said. “It’s a gamble just being out in general.” For Michi Kono, who attended the 8:15 a.m. class, the benefits of coming to the gym — lower blood pressure, lower cholesterol and weight loss — still outweigh his fears of catching the virus. Still, the 54-year-old orthopedic surgeon said he had been following news of the virus closely and was taking precautions. While he still plans to attend church on Sunday, Kono said, he has decided not to take Communion or shake anybody’s hand. He’s healthy and knows he would probably survive the virus, but feels compelled to protect others with weakened immune systems. “If I did become a carrier and I’m not symptomatic and let’s say my wife gets it and then she visits her 80-year-old parents?” he said. “It becomes an ethical and medical quandary.” Kono said he believes that the virus will continue to spread in Southern California and that eventually officials here will take steps to limit human contact. If that happens, he said, he’ll heed all warnings — even if that means staying away from the gym. A few miles away at a Souplantation restaurant, a maroon sign welcomed guests: “Please use hand sanitizer before going down the salad bar. Thank you.” Most patrons complied, pumping a few squirts into their palms, but the restaurant was two-thirds full and customers didn’t seem too worried. “It’s going to have to get a lot worse for me to panic,” said Dixie Shedwill, 79, who was recently diagnosed with breast cancer. Once she starts chemotherapy, she might have to reconsider, Shedwill said, before turning to her 83-year-old boyfriend, Bruce Nameth, and asking what he thought about the coronavirus. Nameth took a long sip of coffee. “If you sit around and worry about everything,” he said, “you’ll never do anything.” 
Mar 8, 2020	But for the notoriety of the killer that claimed his life, the 63-year-old man’s death at a rural hospital may have gone completely unnoticed. After two decades confined to a psych ward, he had no known family, friends or other ties to the outside world — no one to be notified, no one to mourn or claim his ashes. At just over 90 pounds at the time of his passing, the man, whose name has not been disclosed, barely took up any space in this world. His lonely death in the early hours of Feb. 19 became a matter of urgent public interest when he was posthumously confirmed to have the novel coronavirus, becoming the first killed by the illness in South Korea. Six others who’d been housed alongside him at the psych ward at the private Cheongdo Daenam Hospital in the country’s southeast, all in their 50s and 60s, also died within days. Of 102 patients in the psych ward, 100 had contracted the deadly virus. Authorities haven’t determined how the virus made its way into the locked ward, but once it got there, it found easy prey in patients with weakened immune systems living in close, poorly ventilated quarters. As South Korea has scrambled to contain a surge of infections that has topped 7,300 and killed 50 in recent weeks, the virus has in particular seeped into the spaces where society’s most frail are gathered or institutionalized — the elderly, the mentally ill, the disabled. The virus overtook a group home for the disabled in the small southeastern town of Chilgok, infecting a third of its 69 residents and staff, then another in the nearby city of Daegu, the country’s fourth largest city. Pockets of infections were discovered at convalescent hospitals and at nursing homes for the elderly in Gyeongsan, Bonghwa and Cheongdo. Senior centers across the country abruptly shut their doors after three of those who frequent a center in downtown Seoul tested positive for the virus. They had eaten at the cafeteria and interacted at the center, a public facility where many senior citizens take regular classes and spend their days. It’s a similar threat to that dawning on the U.S., as an unfolding outbreak at a nursing home in a Seattle suburb has killed more than 10 and infected dozens of others. Nursing homes across the U.S. and the millions who live in them, as well as their relatives, are on edge. The elderly and those with underlying conditions are particularly vulnerable to the virus, which has killed more than 3,800 worldwide and spread to more than 109,000 people in more than 100 countries. In China, where the vast majority of the deaths have occurred, doctors reported fatality rates of nearly 15% for those 80 years of age or older, compared with 2.3% overall. Those with existing heart disease, diabetes or respiratory problems have also been several times more likely to die. Facilities and institutions where the already weakened are living in close quarters are ideal breeding grounds for pathogens in the best of times. But calamities — epidemics, natural disasters and wars — have a way of further exposing society’s fault lines. The current outbreak raging across South Korea, some activists and advocates say, is an overdue wake-up call casting light on the country’s reliance on institutionalization as a way of caring for its most vulnerable and forcing a reckoning on the conditions in which they are housed. “It’s not the virus that’s cruel to the weak,” a South Korean newspaper posited recently. “It’s our society, civic groups say, that’s shoved them into isolated environments ideal for the virus to thrive.” The psych ward in the hospital where seven have died and nearly all patients have been infected has in particular raised alarm, as photos and details emerged about how patients have lived for decades with little prospect of healing or leaving. A task force of physicians at South Korea’s National Medical Center overseeing the response to the coronavirus outbreak said the ward had no beds, with patients spending most of their days on thin futons on the floor — not a typical standard of care for South Korea. Many of the patients were found to be malnourished, had issues with hygiene and atrophied muscles from rarely, if ever, having left the hospital for a decade or two, the task force reported last month. Making matters worse, ventilation was dismal because of windows being sealed to prevent suicides. “It was characteristically a condition for the virus to rapidly spread once it got in,” Lee So-hee, head of psychiatry at the National Medical Center, told reporters. “Conditions at Cheongdo Daenam Hospital were particularly bad.” As the extent of the outbreak became apparent, an alliance of advocates for the disabled lodged a petition with the National Human Rights Commission of Korea decrying conditions, saying other locked facilities housing the sick, disabled and mentally ill were themselves ticking time bombs. There were more than 1,500 group homes for the disabled in South Korea as of 2018. “We need to examine society’s abuse of having branded the mentally disabled as dangerous and locked them up en masse,” the group Solidarity Against Disability Discrimination said in a statement. “We pray for the deceased who were only freed of the locked ward in death.” Advocates say these vulnerabilities had surfaced in 2015, amid a local outbreak of the Middle East respiratory syndrome, which killed 38 in South Korea. A coalition of groups working with the disabled sued the government alleging discrimination, saying two disabled patients were forced into quarantine after possibly having come into contact with the infected at a hospital without consideration for their severe disabilities. “The government is responsible for this reality in which the disabled are disproportionately affected in a time of disaster,” said Park Kyung-seok, a longtime advocate who heads the group. Those who work with South Korea’s rapidly increasing elderly population — the fastest growing in the world — were also on high alert as infections in the country soared. Of the fatalities, more than 80% were at least 60 years old. Authorities last week discovered a cluster of more than 50 patients and staffers infected with the novel coronavirus at a convalescent hospital in Bonghwa County, a mountainous area in the east of South Korea. The average age of the infected, many of whom are seriously ill although none have died, is 88. Chun Yong-man, president of the Korea Assn. of Senior Welfare Centers, said many of South Korea’s elderly are housed in convalescent hospitals focused on medical treatment rather than nursing homes centered on quality of life. Those hospitals are less regulated and understaffed, making them especially vulnerable to a situation such as the coronavirus epidemic, he said. “Of course, the care is inadequate and they’re vulnerable to the dangers of a virus like this,” he said. “We’re all on edge.” Kim Dong-bae, professor emeritus of social work at Yonsei University, said many of South Korea’s elderly were probably also suffering from an information gap, being less able to navigate the internet and social media for accurate information about how to keep safe. “People are telling me, they haven’t felt this frightened or endangered since the Korean War,” said Kim, who is 70. At Seoul’s Jongmyo Park, the usual crowds of seniors milling about for company, free meals and games of Go had thinned out but not disappeared. Signs taped to a wall and a pathway said Go games were banned indefinitely as a coronavirus prevention measure; regardless, half a dozen games were in full swing nearby. Kim Young-bae, 84, wearing a flat cap and face mask and enjoying the afternoon sun on a bench in the park, was unfazed. He remembered a time after the war when an illness would hit a village and dozens would die at a time, so much so there wasn’t enough cloth to wrap the bodies. His wife is refusing to leave their home, terrified of the virus, he said. She’s stopped going to the daytime discotheque that’s a popular pastime for seniors. “Does it matter, whether you die locked up in your home, or walking around?” he asked. “Whenever it is, we all go some time.” 
Mar 8, 2020	Amid mounting coronavirus fears, which led to the unprecedented cancellation of the South by Southwest festival on Friday, enough moviegoers turned out to see “Onward” to make the Disney-Pixar film tops at the box office. Still, the film opened with $40 million, which was on the low end of analyst projections of $40 million to $45 million, according to estimates from measurement firm Comscore. Despite worries that the virus might affect moviegoing, the overall domestic gross was up 4% over last weekend, with most other films meeting or slightly exceeding expectations. The year-to-date box office, however, fell 1.9% behind 2019, due to the blockbuster success last year of “Captain Marvel,” which earned $153.4 million over the same weekend. “Onward” features the voices of Chris Pratt and Tom Holland, who play a pair of teenage elf brothers determined to resurrect their late father. It was positively received with an A- CinemaScore and a 86% “fresh” rating on review aggregation site Rotten Tomatoes. The film’s performance is comparable to that of fellow Pixar title “The Good Dinosaur,” which opened in 2015 with $39 million on its way to $332 million in global box office grosses, the lowest of the studio’s 21 titles. “Onward” is also the first Pixar movie to debut in early spring; other Pixar titles have opened in either the summer or November. The film’s international rollout excluded Italy, South Korea and China, where the coronavirus outbreak has hit the hardest. It was also banned in several Middle Eastern countries because of a reference to a lesbian relationship. Among the 47 international territories where it was released, it earned $28 million in ticket sales for a global debut of $68 million, modest by Disney’s standards. In second place, Universal’s “The Invisible Man” added $15.2 million in its second weekend (a 46% drop) for a cumulative $52.7 million. Globally, the film has earned $98.3 million. Coming in third, Warner Bros.’ sports drama “The Way Back” opened with $8.5 million. The film stars Ben Affleck as an alcoholic construction worker turned high school basketball coach and was positively received with a B+ CinemaScore and an 88% “fresh” rating on Rotten Tomatoes. In fourth place, Paramount’s “Sonic the Hedgehog” added $8 million in its fourth weekend for a cumulative $140.8 million. The film currently stands at $295.6 million in worldwide receipts. Rounding out the top five, 20th Century Studios’ “The Call of the Wild” added $7 million in its third weekend for a cumulative $57.5 million. Globally, the film has earned $99.6 million. At No. 6, Focus Features’ “Emma” expanded into wide release in its third weekend, adding $5 million for a cumulative $6.9 million. It received a B CinemaScore and an 85% “fresh” rating on Rotten Tomatoes. Globally, the film has earned $20.9 million. In seventh place, Sony’s “Bad Boys for Life” added $3 million in its eighth weekend and crossed the $200-million mark with a cumulative of $202 million. At No. 8, Warner Bros.’ “Birds of Prey” added $2.2 million in its fifth weekend for a cumulative $82.6 million. In ninth place, TruTV’s “Impractical Jokers: The Movie” added $1.8 million in its third weekend for a cumulative $8.5 million. Rounding out the top 10, Sony and Funimation’s “My Hero Academia: Heroes Rising” added $1.5 million in its second weekend (a 75% drop) for a cumulative $12.7 million. In limited release, A24 opened “First Cow” on four screens to $96,059 for a per-screen average of $24,015. IFC Films’ “Swallow” opened in three locations to $14,100 for a per-screen average of $4,700. Searchlight expanded “Wendy” into 69 locations (up from four in its debut last weekend) to $213,799 for a dismal per-screen average of $359 and a cumulative $244,874. 101 Studios’ “Burden” expanded into 31 locations (up from five in its debut last weekend) to $40,205 for a per-screen average of $1,297 and a cumulative $68,243. This week, Sony opens the action drama “Bloodshot,” Universal reveals the controversial political thriller “The Hunt” and Lionsgate premieres the music romance “I Still Believe.” In limited release, Focus Features opens “Never Rarely Sometimes Always.” 
Mar 8, 2020	Shopping carts snaked in a line so long it stretched into the Costco parking lot. It was early Saturday at the Atwater Village location, and hundreds of customers in varying states of concern were counting down the seconds until the doors opened. "Good morning, folks," an employee shouted, "we have a limit on paper towels, water and bath tissue!" As the crowd crushed toward the back of the store, piling their carts high with toilet paper and paper towels, employees stood in the aisles directing carts as if they were traffic controllers.  When he saw the long lines, Matthew Nasser wondered, at first, if there was a celebrity in the store. But then he asked someone what was going on. The commotion, he learned, was about the very thing that had nagged in the back of his mind: the coronavirus. It wasn't why he'd come shopping, but still, he decided to buy water and toilet paper. "While it's here," he said, "I'd better get it." After weeks of watching its spread -- in Italy and Iran, Seattle and South Korea -- the anxiety of a global threat started to settle in across Southern California, creating a strange amalgam of emotions. Some people carried on with their Saturday routines, entirely unfazed, and others -- gym rats, mall shoppers, park lovers -- became disturbingly aware of just how often they came into close contact with others. At a Target in Mid-City, the shelves of bleach were completely emptied. And at a Sephora in Glendale, Mojo Tuheen perused the aisles of the cosmetic store, taking advantage of the smaller-than-usual crowds. She wasn't going to put any makeup samples on her face -- but that's not something she usually does anyway. "I'm an extremely germophobic person," Tuheen said. "I wash my hands 20 times a day, so I haven't really done anything differently." In MacArthur Park, the sidewalks buzzed with the usual energy of vendors hawking smartphone cases and neon sneakers. At the edge of the park, Gina Frankel, who is homeless, sat near her cart of belongings and stared out at the people all around her. "If somebody is coughing or sneezing around me, I hold my breath and get out of the area," said Frankel, 64. "There are places here to wash your hands -- but it's hard to do because of this," she said, displaying her hands, which were cracked from her psoriasis. Around the block, a man feeding pigeons waved off questions about the virus. "It's not that bad in this area," he said, "so I don't really worry about it." But the virus, which has killed more than 3,500 worldwide, is becoming increasingly hard to contain in California, where officials have started to switch gears, focusing less on containment and more on slowing its spread. In the Bay Area, health officials issued aggressive recommendations to the public: Stop shaking hands, stockpile medicine, work from home -- and if you can't, stay an arm's length away from your co-workers. Without decisive action, San Francisco's director of health warned the public, the death toll would surge. "We must reduce the times and places where people come together," Dr. Grant Colfax said Friday. "Human viruses need people to carry them." On Saturday in San Francisco, where officials had recently canceled the St. Patrick's Day Parade, the Grand Princess cruise ship was waiting just offshore. The night before, a U.S. Coast Guard helicopter had swooped down, dropping off gloves and face masks for the 3,000 people aboard, including 21 who had already tested positive for the virus. When a cutter zipped through the water, ferrying off a passenger who was critically ill from something other than COVID-19, many others on board began to wonder how long it would be until they got off the ship. A 75-year-old Rocklin resident, who had taken an earlier voyage on the Grand Princess, died from complications of COVID-19 -- California's only confirmed fatality from the virus, which has sickened more than 80 across the state. In Los Angeles, the city's marathon was still scheduled for Sunday morning, but officials urged spectators to stay at least six feet from strangers -- said to be the maximum distance airborne droplets from a cough or sneeze can travel. Back at the jam-packed Costco on Saturday morning, Larchmont resident Jon Oh said that although he had already stocked up on household essentials last week, he was back for a few more things -- chicken soup, maybe another carton of water. "We always try to be prepared," Oh said. "If something hits, it's going to happen fast. The situation could go from, 'Don't worry about it,' to the opposite." If nothing else, Oh said, he could add the stuff to his earthquake stockpile. An hour south, at a gym in Tustin called OC FIT Las2winz, people had ditched their method of circuit-training class encouragement -- high-fives -- opting instead for elbow bumps. And near the entrance, gym co-owner Natalia Guzman, 30, greeted clients with a smile and a reminder. "Wash your hands," she said, looking over at the extra gallon of Purell she'd set on the counter. "Use hand sanitizer." Normally, Guzman said, her 63-year-old father would be here. He's always the first person in line for workout class, she said, but because of his kidney transplant he takes a medication that suppresses his immune system. She and her twin sister, another co-owner, didn't want to take any risks, Guzman said, so they banned him from their gym. So far, he's the only regular who isn't showing up. Jay Olegario, a nurse who attended a 7:15 a.m. class at the gym, said he uses the same safety precautions here as he does at the hospital. He washes his hands constantly and, like his scrubs, he said he washes his gym clothes as soon as he gets home. "Nothing will keep me from this place," he said. "It's a gamble just being out in general." For Michi Kono, who attended the 8:15 a.m. class, the benefits of coming to the gym -- lower blood pressure, lower cholesterol and weight loss -- still outweigh his fears of catching the virus. Still, the 54-year-old orthopedic surgeon said he had been following news of the virus closely and was taking precautions. While he still plans to attend church on Sunday, Kono said, he has decided not to take Communion or shake anybody's hand. He's healthy and knows he would probably survive the virus, but feels compelled to protect others with weakened immune systems. "If I did become a carrier and I'm not symptomatic and let's say my wife gets it and then she visits her 80-year-old parents?" he said. "It becomes an ethical and medical quandary." Kono said he believes that the virus will continue to spread in Southern California and that eventually officials here will take steps to limit human contact. If that happens, he said, he'll heed all warnings -- even if that means staying away from the gym. A few miles away at a Souplantation restaurant, a maroon sign welcomed guests: "Please use hand sanitizer before going down the salad bar. Thank you." Most patrons complied, pumping a few squirts into their palms, but the restaurant was two-thirds full and customers didn't seem too worried. "It's going to have to get a lot worse for me to panic," said Dixie Shedwill, 79, who was recently diagnosed with breast cancer. Once she starts chemotherapy, she might have to reconsider, Shedwill said, before turning to her 83-year-old boyfriend, Bruce Nameth, and asking what he thought about the coronavirus. Nameth took a long sip of coffee. "If you sit around and worry about everything," he said, "you'll never do anything." Caption: PHOTO: AS COVID-19 spreads across California, Costco has placed limits on the sale of paper towels, water and bath tissue. Above, a shopper and his children don masks at the warehouse club on Saturday in Alhambra. PHOTOGRAPHER:Gina Ferazzi Los Angeles Times 
Mar 8, 2020	If 100 people become infected with the new coronavirus from China, how many will die? For weeks, it seemed that the answer was two. Perhaps a little more, perhaps a little less. The calculation was made by comparing the total number of people with confirmed cases of COVID-19 to the number of people who died of it. As both of those numbers grew, the ratio was bound to shift.  The 2% figure seemed stable Feb. 24, when a massive study of nearly 45,000 Chinese patients whose infections had been confirmed with laboratory tests reported a case fatality rate of 2.3%. Later that week, on Feb. 28, a study of nearly 1,100 Chinese patients suggested a lower death rate, of 1.4%. Four days later, on March 3, the World Health Organization said the global mortality rate was 3.4%. How could it have changed so much in such a short period of time? "It's hard to say what the case-fatality rates are until the dust settles," said Dr. George Rutherford, an epidemiologist and infectious disease expert at UC San Francisco. "It's not a statistic to be looking at kind of on an ongoing basis, even though I do it just as much as everybody else does," he admitted. That includes members of Congress. On Wednesday, they asked Dr. Anthony Fauci, director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, what was going on. He urged them not to get so fixated on the fatality rate, emphasizing that scientists still have a lot to learn about it. The biggest uncertainty surrounds the number of people who have been infected with the coronavirus. The official count has surpassed 100,000 worldwide, but the true number is probably much higher. Scientists suspected that many patients who experienced only mild illnesses never saw a doctor and therefore never got an official lab test to see if they were infected. As a result, they weren't factored into the case-fatality rate. Neither were people who wanted to be tested but weren't because of a lack of resources. In a situation in which test kits are limited, it's better to save them for 80-year-olds with poor lung function and skip the healthier 40-year-olds with a mild illness. Counting problems aside, the case-fatality rate can change over the course of an outbreak. For instance, the authors of the study of nearly 45,000 Chinese patients noted that the case-fatality rate in Hubei, the province at the center of the outbreak, was 2.9%. Elsewhere in China, it was 0.4%. It's possible that as China catches up on counting deaths, the fatality rate outside Hubei will rise. But it's also possible that the difference is real because public health authorities outside Hubei had a chance to get ready for the coronavirus, "so people aren't dying at the same rates as they did before," Rutherford said. At UC San Francisco, for instance, doctors are prepared to treat the coronavirus in a containment facility set up in the parking lot as an emergency room, he said. Other countries are reporting different case-fatality rates. With 7,134 confirmed cases as of late Saturday, South Korea has more coronavirus patients than any country besides China. That high number may in part be a function of the country's sweeping testing program that involved tens of thousands of people. When balanced against the country's 50 deaths, the case-fatality ratio is 0.7%. That figure may offer a better sense of COVID-19's true fatality rate, said Dr. Jeremy Faust, an emergency physician at Brigham and Women's Hospital in Boston and an instructor at Harvard Medical School. "By testing so many people, they were actually able to find more cases," Faust said. "It means they noticed the disease was everywhere, and it doesn't kill that many people. "The more testing you do, the more accurate your numbers become." Rutherford predicted that by the time the dust settles, the overall case-fatality rate for COVID-19 will fall to somewhere between 1% and 2%. Fauci agreed that the death rate could end up being as low as 1%. But even if that's the case, he said, it would still be 10 times worse than the average death rate for the seasonal flu. Caption: PHOTO: A TEMPORARY hospital in Wuhan in China's Hubei province, the epicenter of the coronavirus outbreak. PHOTOGRAPHER:Xiao Yijiu Xinhua PHOTO:DR. ANTHONY Fauci urged Congress not to fixate on fatality rates until scientists get more facts. PHOTOGRAPHER:Manuel Balce Ceneta Associated Press 
Mar 7, 2020	If 100 people become infected with the new coronavirus from China, how many will die? For weeks, it seemed that the answer was 2. Perhaps a little more, perhaps a little less. The calculation was made by comparing the total number of people with confirmed cases of COVID-19 to the number of people who died of it. As both of those numbers grew, the ratio was bound to shift. The 2% figure seemed stable on Feb. 24, when a massive study of nearly 45,000 Chinese patients whose infections had been confirmed with laboratory tests reported a case fatality rate of 2.3%. Newsletter Get our Coronavirus Today newsletter Sign up for the latest news, best stories and what they mean for you, plus answers to your questions. Sign Me Up You may occasionally receive promotional content from the Los Angeles Times. Later that week, on Feb. 28, a study of nearly 1,100 Chinese patients suggested a lower death rate, of 1.4%. Four days later, on March 3, the World Health Organization said the global mortality rate was 3.4%. How could it have changed so much in such a short period of time? “It’s hard to say what the case-fatality rates are until the dust settles,” said Dr. George Rutherford, an epidemiologist and infectious disease expert at UC San Francisco. “It’s not a statistic to be looking at kind of on an ongoing basis, even though I do it just as much as everybody else does,” he admitted. That includes members of Congress. On Wednesday, they asked Dr. Anthony Fauci, director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, what was going on. He urged them not to get so fixated on the fatality rate, emphasizing that scientists still have a lot to learn about it. The biggest uncertainty surrounds the number of people who have been infected with the coronavirus. The official count has surpassed 100,000, but the true number is probably much higher. Scientists suspected that many patients who experienced only mild illnesses never saw a doctor and therefore never got an official lab test to see if they were infected. As a result, they weren’t factored into the case-fatality rate. Neither were people who wanted to be tested but weren’t due to a lack of resources. In a situation where test kits are limited, it’s better to save them for 80-year-olds with poor lung function and skip the healthier 40-year-olds with mild illness. Counting problems aside, the case-fatality rate can change over the course of an outbreak. For instance, the authors of the study of nearly 45,000 Chinese patients noted that the case-fatality rate in Hubei, the province at the center of the outbreak, was 2.9%. Elsewhere in China, it was 0.4%. It’s possible that as China catches up on counting deaths, the fatality rate outside of Hubei will rise. But it’s also possible that the difference is real because public health authorities outside of Hubei had a chance to get ready for the coronavirus, “so people aren’t dying at the same rates as they did before,” Rutherford said. At UCSF, for instance, doctors are prepared to treat the coronavirus in a containment facility set up in the parking lot for the emergency room, he said. Other countries are reporting different case-fatality rates. With 6,767 confirmed cases as of late Friday, South Korea has more coronavirus patients than any country besides China. That high number may in part be a function of the country’s sweeping testing program that involved tens of thousands of people. When balanced against the country’s 44 deaths, the case-fatality ratio is less than 0.7%. That figure may offer a better sense of COVID-19’s true fatality rate, said Dr. Jeremy Faust, an emergency physician at Brigham and Women’s Hospital in Boston and an instructor at Harvard Medical School. “By testing so many people, they were actually able to find more cases,” Faust said. “It means they noticed the disease was everywhere, and it doesn’t kill that many people. “The more testing you do, the more accurate your numbers become,” he added. Rutherford predicted that by the time the dust settles, the overall case-fatality rate for COVID-19 will fall to somewhere between 1% to 2%. Fauci agreed that the death rate could end up being as low as 1%. But even if that’s the case, he said, it would still be 10 times worse than the average death rate for the seasonal flu. 
Mar 7, 2020	But for the notoriety of the killer that claimed his life, the 63-year-old man’s death at a rural hospital may have gone completely unnoticed. After two decades confined to a psych ward, he had no known family, friends or other ties to the outside world — no one to be notified, no one to mourn or claim his ashes. At just over 90 pounds at the time of his passing, the man, whose name has not been disclosed, barely took up any space in this world. His lonely death in the early hours of Feb. 19 became a matter of urgent public interest when he was posthumously confirmed to have the novel coronavirus, becoming the first killed by the illness in South Korea. Six others who’d been housed alongside him at the psych ward at the private Cheongdo Daenam Hospital in southeast South Korea, all in their 50s and 60s, also died within days. Out of 102 patients held in the psych ward, 100 had contracted the deadly virus. Authorities haven’t determined how the virus made its way into the locked ward, but once it got there, it found easy prey in patients with weakened immune systems living together in close, poorly ventilated quarters. As South Korea has scrambled to contain a surge of infections that has topped 6,700 and killed 44 in recent weeks, the virus has in particular seeped into the spaces where society’s most frail are gathered or institutionalized — the elderly, the mentally ill, the disabled. The virus overtook a group home for the disabled in the small southeastern town of Chilgok, infecting a third of its 69 residents and staff , then another in the nearby city of Daegu, the country’s fourth largest city. Pockets of infections were discovered at convalescent hospitals and at nursing homes for the elderly in Gyeongsan, Bonghwa and Cheongdo. Senior centers across the country abruptly shut their doors after three of those who frequent a center in downtown Seoul tested positive for the virus. They had eaten at the cafeteria and interacted at the center, a public facility where many senior citizens take regular classes and spend their days. It’s a similar threat to that dawning on the U.S., as an unfolding outbreak at a nursing home in a Seattle suburb has killed at least ten and infected dozens of others. Nursing homes across the U.S. and the millions who live in them, as well as their relatives, are on edge. The elderly and those with underlying conditions are particularly vulnerable to the virus, which has killed more than 3,400 worldwide and spread to more than 100,000 people in nearly 100 countries. In China, where the vast majority of the deaths have occurred, doctors reported fatality rates of nearly 15% for those 80 years of age or older, compared to 2.3% overall. Those with existing heart disease, diabetes or respiratory problems have also been several times more likely to die. Facilities and institutions where the already weakened are living in close quarters are ideal breeding grounds for pathogens in the best of times. But calamities — epidemics, natural disasters and wars — have a way of further exposing a society’s fault lines. The current outbreak raging across South Korea, some activists and advocates say, is an overdue wake-up call casting light on the country’s reliance on institutionalization as a way of caring for its most vulnerable and forcing a reckoning on the conditions in which they are housed. “It’s not the virus that’s cruel to the weak,” a South Korean newspaper posited last week. “It’s our society, civic groups say, that’s shoved them into isolated environments ideal for the virus to thrive.” The psych ward in the hospital where seven have died and nearly all patients have been infected has in particular raised alarm, as photos and details emerged about how patients have lived for decades with little prospect of healing or leaving. A task force of physicians at South Korea’s National Medical Center overseeing the response to the coronavirus outbreak said the ward had no beds, patients spending most of their days on thin futons on the floor — not a typical standard of care for South Korea. Many of the patients were found to be malnourished, had issues with hygiene and atrophied muscles from rarely, if ever, having left the hospital for a decade or two, the task force reported last week. Making matters worse, ventilation was dismal due to windows being sealed to prevent suicides. “It was characteristically a condition for the virus to rapidly spread once it got in,” Lee So-hee, head of psychiatry at the National Medical Center, told reporters. “Conditions at Cheongdo Daenam Hospital were particularly bad.” As the extent of the outbreak became apparent, an alliance of advocates for the disabled lodged a petition with the National Human Rights Commission of Korea decrying conditions, saying other locked facilities housing the sick, disabled and mentally ill were themselves ticking time bombs. There were more than 1,500 group homes for the disabled in South Korea as of 2018. “We need to examine society’s abuse of having branded the mentally disabled as dangerous and locked them up en masse ,” the group Solidarity against Disability Discrimination said in a statement. “We pray for the deceased who were only freed of the locked ward in death.” Advocates say these vulnerabilities had surfaced in 2015, amid a local outbreak of the Middle East respiratory syndrome, which killed 38 in South Korea. A coalition of groups working with the disabled sued the government alleging discrimination, saying two disabled patients were forced into quarantine after possibly having come into contact with the infected at a hospital without consideration for their severe disabilities. “The government is responsible for this reality in which the disabled are disproportionately affected in a time of disaster,” said Park Kyung-seok, a longtime advocate who heads the group. Those who work with South Korea’s rapidly increasing elderly population — the fastest growing in the world — were also on high alert as infections in the country spiked. Of the fatalities, more than 80% were at least 60 years old. Authorities this week discovered a cluster of more than 50 patients and staffers infected with the novel coronavirus at a convalescent hospital in Bonghwa County, a mountainous area in the east of South Korea. The average age of the infected, many of whom are seriously ill although none have died, is 88. Chun Yong-man, president of the Korea Assn. of Senior Welfare Centers, said many of South Korea’s elderly are warehoused in convalescent hospitals focused on medical treatment rather than nursing homes centered around quality of life. Those hospitals are less regulated and understaffed, making them especially vulnerable to a situation such as the coronavirus epidemic, he said. “Of course, the care is inadequate and they’re vulnerable to the dangers of a virus like this,” he said. “We’re all on edge.” Kim Dong-bae, professor emeritus of social work at Yonsei University, said many of South Korea’s elderly were probably also suffering from an information gap, being less able to navigate the internet and social media for accurate information about how to keep safe. “People are telling me, they haven’t felt this frightened or endangered since the Korean War,” said Kim, who is 70. At Seoul’s Jongmyo Park, the usual crowds of seniors milling about for company, free meals and games of Go had thinned out but not disappeared. Signs taped to a wall and a pathway said Go games were banned indefinitely as a coronavirus prevention measure; regardless, a half dozen games were in full swing nearby. Kim Young-bae, 84, wearing a flat cap and face mask and enjoying the afternoon sun on a bench in the park, was unfazed. He remembered a time after the war when an illness would hit a village and dozens would die at a time, so much so there wasn’t enough cloth to wrap the bodies. His wife is refusing to leave their home, terrified of the virus, he said. She’s stopped going to the daytime discotheque that’s a popular pastime for seniors. “Does it matter, whether you die locked up in your home, or walking around?” he asked. “Whenever it is, we all go some time.” 
Mar 7, 2020	Three UCLA students tested negative for the coronavirus. The students had been in self-isolating off campus. Officials asked students to seek medical attention if they developed flu-like symptoms. Newsletter Get our Coronavirus Today newsletter Sign up for the latest news, best stories and what they mean for you, plus answers to your questions. Sign Me Up You may occasionally receive promotional content from the Los Angeles Times. Like other UC campuses, UCLA has added more hand sanitizer stations, increased cleanings with antiviral and antibacterial solutions and employed electrostatic sprayer systems to disinfect hard-to-reach surfaces in high-use areas. UCLA also is preparing to expand the use of remote tools to stream lectures, create online meeting spaces and administer tests should the campus suspend in-person classes, as the University of Washington announced it would do beginning Monday. Campus health experts are holding information sessions to answer questions, debunk rumors and provide resources. The next one is scheduled for Monday at 5 p.m. at De Neve Auditorium and will be livestreamed and updated information can be found on UCLA’s website for COVID-19. In addition, UCLA is prohibiting official university travel to China, South Korea, Italy, Iran and Japan and “strongly discourages” personal travel to those countries because of their risk level as determined by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, according to campus guidance. Any traveler arriving from these areas must self-isolate for 14 days. The university will keep residence halls open during the weeklong spring break, which begins March 23, for students unable to travel home. Last week, UC Davis announced that a student who was placed in isolation tested negative for the virus. Two of the student’s roommates had also been isolated. At least 12 counties in California have reported confirmed cases of the coronavirus. There are currently at least 60 known cases in the state, and one death. Los Angeles County now has 11 coronavirus cases with the announcement of four new cases Thursday. 
Mar 7, 2020	Sports leagues and federations across the world are addressing the spread of the coronavirus. While most North American sports leagues, including Major League Baseball, the NBA, the NFL and the NHL are monitoring the situation, leagues in other parts of the world are taking action by canceling events and playing in empty stadiums. Los Angeles County officials have discussed the possibility of banning spectators from attending sporting events in Southern California in an attempt to slow the spread of the coronavirus. Here is a sport-by-sport look at what leagues and federations are doing to address the COVID-19 outbreak: United States NBA: In a memo sent to teams March 1, the league and the NBA Players’ Assn. stated they are “closely monitoring the coronavirus situation” and are in consultation with the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. The memo also recommended that players avoid giving high-fives with interacting with fans and avoid borrowing pens and markers from fans requesting autographs. No plans have been made to cancel games or bar fans from attending. However, the league reportedly is asking teams to come up with contingency plans if it decides to ban spectators from games. In a statement, Staples Center encouraged fans who are planning to attend events at the arena to “engage in safe hygiene practices” and “stay home if they feel unwell.” MLB: The league has established an internal task force to deal with issues related to coronavirus in the coming months, according to a memo sent to high-ranking baseball officials on March 3 obtained by ESPN. Baseball has no plans to cancel or ban fans from attending games. The memo advises players not to shake hands with fans and not use pens and markers from fans to sign autographs. It also asks teams to make sure all players have received the 2019-20 flu vaccine and other necessary vaccinations. NFL: NFL Media reported March 3 that the league is “closely monitoring developments” related to coronavirus and that it is still planning to hold the NFL draft in Las Vegas on April 23-25. In addition, individual pro days for draft-eligible players will begin as scheduled on Thursday. The NFL’s annual meeting, which is attended by team owners, general managers and coaches, is still scheduled to be held March 29-April 1 in Palm Beach, Fla. NHL: Starting March 7, the league reportedly is barring media access to locker rooms in concordance with CDC recommendations. Commissioner Gary Bettman said March 4 that the league is monitoring the coronavirus outbreak but declined to say whether games could be altered, canceled or rescheduled. He also wouldn’t speculate on whether the league would consider playing in empty arenas or postponing the playoffs. All NHL employees have been barred from traveling outside North America for business purposes. Scouts based in Europe have to stay in Europe or be quarantined upon arriving in North America, Bettman said. NCAA: The college athletics sanctioning body says it is monitoring the outbreak but that it has no plans to make changes for the upcoming men’s and women’s basketball tournaments. “The NCAA is committed to conducting its championships and events in a safe and responsible manner,” Donald Remy, the NCAA’s chief operating officer, said in a statement on March 3. “Today we are planning to conduct our championships as planned; however, we are evaluating the covid-19 situation daily and will make decisions accordingly.” Missouri-Kansas City and Chicago State announced they are canceling trips to Seattle for scheduled Western Athletic Conference men’s basketball games this week. Johns Hopkins University in Baltimore said it will not allow spectators to attend the Division III basketball tournament games its hosting starting March 6 because of three confirmed cases of coronavirus in Maryland. USC announced all athletic events are being played as scheduled. MLS: The league has created a task force to monitor the coronavirus outbreak. Sports teams in Los Angeles County, including the Galaxy and LAFC, have been warned they may be asked to cancel games or play them in empty stadiums after the county declared a health emergency on March 4 to deal with the coronavirus. “This could be that games are played but there are no spectators,” L.A. County public health director Barbara Ferrer said. “This could be that there are limits to how people are going to gather... But I want to reassure everyone we are not there today.” XFL: The league announced it has launched a task force to closely monitor the spread of the coronavirus. It is also in regular contact with health and public safety officials at the national and local levels. No games have been postponed or canceled. NASCAR: In a statement released on March 4, NASCAR said its racing schedule and business operations remain unchanged as it monitors the outbreak. It said it has been in communication with federal, state and local health officials in addition to teams and tracks. IndyCar: The racing league’s sanctioning body said in a statement on March 4 that it is closely monitoring the situation but does not expect any changes to its season opener, which takes place in St. Petersburg, Fla., on March 15. PGA: The PGA Tour announced March 4 that it has no plans to alter its schedule beyond changes that have already been made with the PGA Tour-Series China (delayed start to season). That could change, the league said, if the CDC and the World Health Organization make recommendations. LPGA: The league has canceled three events in response to the coronavirus outbreak. Events scheduled in Thailand and Singapore were canceled last month, and the Blue Bay LPGA on Hainan Island in China, which was originally scheduled to be played Thursday-Sunday, is also off the LPGA calendar. Their next event, the Founders Cup, is set to be played as scheduled at Wildfire Golf Club in Phoenix from March 19-22. Santa Anita (horse racing): The Arcadia-based horse racing track said in a statement on March 4 that it is monitoring the situation and is “taking procedures necessary for the health and safety and well-being of our fans, staff and horsemen, including adding numerous hand-sanitizing stations throughout the facility.” L.A. Marathon: The Los Angeles Marathon will run as scheduled on March 8, race officials announced. Marathon organizers are offering a deferral option to runners traveling from impacted countries allowing them to delay their participation until next year. International International Olympic Committee (Tokyo 2020 Olympics): No plans have been made to reschedule or cancel the Olympics, scheduled for July 24-Aug. 9. “We remain very confident with regard to the success of these Olympic Games,” IOC President Thomas Bach said on March 3. The IOC has formed a task force that includes representatives from the World Health Organization, the Tokyo 2020 organizing committee and the Japanese government to monitor the situation. Premier League: The English league has informed its clubs of a contingency plan should large gatherings be banned because of the coronavirus spread. In the meantime, the league has advised teams to pay increased attention to hygiene at stadiums and training grounds, reduce the number of nonessential visitors to team facilities and minimize any face-to-face meetings. Bundesliga: The German Football League, which operates Bundesliga, said in a statement last week that it is monitoring the situation but wasn’t considering postponing matches at that point. FC Bayern Munich has advised its players to refrain from signing autographs and posing for selfies with fans. Ligue 1: The French league is altering its pregame routines due to the coronavirus. Handshakes among players, coaches and officials are prohibited until further notice. Players will continue to be escorted to the field by youth players but will hold the youngsters by the shoulder, rather than by hand as is customary. Serie A: Italy has closed all sporting events to the general public until April 3 amid a coronavirus outbreak in the country. The Italian soccer league postponed games on its schedule this week but will resume this weekend, according to the Associated Press. More than 100 people have died in Italy, and more than 3,000 have been infected with COVID-19. WTA: The Kunming Open, which was scheduled for April 27-May 3 in Anning, China, has been canceled. The Xi’an Open in China from April 13-19 also has been canceled. The BNP Paribas Open at Indian Wells is still scheduled to begin March 11, but anyone who has purchased tickets directly from the tournament may request a refund. In addition, organized interaction between players and fans at the BNP Paribas Open will be limited and players will be required to manage their own towels without the help of ball kids. ATP: Two events in China were canceled and another event in Italy was called off last month amid coronavirus concerns. No other events have been canceled or rescheduled. Korean and Japanese baseball leagues: The Japanese baseball league announced last week that it has barred fans from attending exhibition games. The South Korean league canceled its exhibition games. Neither league has committed to starting their regular seasons as scheduled — March 20 in Japan, March 28 in South Korea. Formula One: Ross Brawn, Formula One’s managing director, said races remain scheduled for Australia and Bahrain in March and Vietnam in April, but said the situation could change. “It’s a very serious situation, so I don’t want to underplay it,” Brawn told Reuters on March 3. “But we’re trying to have races. We’ve got to do them in a responsible way.” Formula One earlier postponed the Chinese Grand Prix, which was originally scheduled for April 19. International Ice Hockey Federation: The women’s world championships, scheduled for March 31-April 10 in Canada, have been canceled. Switzerland’s national hockey league has suspended the playing of games from March 2-15. MotoGP: The season-opening Qatar Grand Prix in Doha, which was scheduled for Sunday, has been canceled and the second race of the season in Thailand has been postponed. The season is scheduled to open April 5 at the Circuit of the Americas in Austin, Texas. World Cup Skiing: The competition’s finals in Cortina d’Ampezzo, Italy, scheduled from March 18-22, were called off after an emergency International Ski Federation board meeting March 6. Times staff writers Chuck Schilken, Kevin Baxter, Soumya Karlamangla, Jeff Miller, Helene Elliott, Houston Mitchell and Bill Shaikin contributed to this report. 
Mar 7, 2020	Things felt bleak in Hong Kong for Kathy Mak. The city had just reported its first death from the coronavirus, store shelves were being cleared of basic supplies, and the outbreak was giving a months-old protest movement another troubling dimension. "Life had just stopped," said the 30-year-old dance instructor and performer, who like other people in Hong Kong has been confined mostly to her apartment. "People were being hysterical, grabbing toilet paper." Then, in a fit of inspiration, Mak started jotting down lyrics to a song -- a parody she hoped would lighten the mood at an upcoming charity event.  Sung to the tune of 1990s pop hit "Torn" by Australian singer Natalie Imbruglia, Mak's live performance recorded on her cellphone has racked up more than 270,000 views on YouTube and sparked a minor sensation in a city worn down by numbing headlines and despair. She sings: There's nothing left at the grocery store I can't find bok choy no more There's just white people things Like pasta, cheese and corn Where the hell's the rice? Why's it three times the price? The United States is just now encountering the realities and insecurities of the coronavirus, but in Asia, the deadly illness, with its quarantines and dystopian eeriness, has dominated life for two months. Originating from the Chinese city of Wuhan, the virus has lodged itself into the zeitgeist here, inspiring songs, surrealist art, political cartoons, comics and TikTok memes -- the latter in no small part due to the legions of bored teenagers stuck at home with schools closed. The collective effort -- a surge of humor and creativity in the face of disturbing infection rates -- has highlighted the disease's strain on families and the failings of governments to protect their people. But it's also serving like a coping mechanism, providing levity to a crisis that has shown few bounds. In an animated music video from an unlikely source, Vietnam's Ministry of Health may have unwittingly delivered the epidemic's anthem -- a catchy three-minute tune that sounds like it belongs on Top 40 rotation reminding citizens to wash their hands vigorously, avoid touching their faces and stay clear of crowded places. The song by Vietnamese singers Erik and Min was deemed a "genuine club banger" Sunday by comedian John Oliver on his HBO show "Last Week Tonight." It has spawned a dance on TikTok replete with hand-washing motions and a few "dabs" for good measure. The music and video app is awash with coronavirus-themed clips and memes, including one that features various gags to a song that repeats the line "It's corona time" above an '80s electro beat. One TikTok video of a young Indonesian woman seated on a plane set against the Celia Mara-sampling song "Opaul" begins with a banner for another well-worn meme: the coronavirus check. She then ticks off a safety checklist, putting on a face mask, glasses and the hood to her sweatshirt, whose strings she pulls so tightly that only her eyes and forehead show. Political art inspired by the virus has also accelerated across the region. Badiucao, a Chinese digital cartoonist based in Melbourne, Australia, who's attracted the ire of authorities in Beijing for his stand on human rights, recently shifted his attention from the Hong Kong pro-democracy protests to the Chinese response to the outbreak -- particularly the government's muzzling of doctors who tried to sound the alarm about the virus. The Shanghai native, who uses a pen name to protect his identity, recently posted on Instagram a black and white image of Li Wenliang, the Wuhan physician who died of the coronavirus Feb. 7 and has become a symbol of popular grief and anger. Splashed across Li's left eye is a red puzzle piece dripping blood -- a reference to a Chinese diplomat who appeared on Australian TV and compared Western media coverage of China's virus response to picking pieces of a jigsaw puzzle to portray the country in a bad light. In an earlier image made to look like an informational poster titled "How to Control the Wuhan Pneumonia," Badiucao drew a person holding a white face mask, then scrunching it up and stuffing it in their mouth. Beneath, it reads: "Silence is Health." The 33-year-old artist, who struggles to find venues to exhibit his work because of Chinese pressure, said there was little difference between China's response to the Hong Kong protests and the Wuhan virus. "It shows how easily a domestic problem caused by censorship or bad governance can influence everyone in the world," Badiucao said. "I find it ironic," he added. "As a China-born artist trying to reflect the reality in China, I feel like there's tons of material I can use to expand my artwork. But it's actually very sad. I'd rather have nothing to work with. Our reality is really bad." Censors in China make it nearly impossible for subversive memes to go viral, but Badiucao said he's seen a few attempts from afar. One was a play on Li's so-called letter of reprimand from the Wuhan police forcing the doctor to acknowledge with two fingerprints that he had spread false rumors. To evade censors, an artist created a copy of the document devoid of writing but whose meaning was unmistakable because of the remaining presence of Li's fingerprints. "If you're creative, you can trigger the same emotion in a minimal way," Badiucao said. There's nothing subtle about Hong Kong artist Tommy Fung's work. His fantastical, digitally enhanced photographs used to depict his city in more whimsical times: images of himself sitting as a cross-legged giant atop the iconic Star Ferry, the former Kowloon-Canton Railway clock tower tied in a knot. Today, that creativity is channeled toward reflecting the panic and desperation that's gripped Hong Kong, which has reported two deaths and 107 infections due to the coronavirus as of Friday evening. His work now includes one image of swarms of protesters climbing on top of one another in a "World War Z" motif. They reach for a pair of blue masks floating in the air. Another depicts Hong Kong riot police carrying guns with their heads replaced by giant, spiky, green virus cells. And in another, Fung shows mask-clad pedestrians staring at a man with a tentacled alien head covered in strings of slime. The caption reads: "Nowadays when you see someone coughing and not wearing a mask." "I have to exaggerate things to make it more eye-catching," Fung said. "It's hard to be optimistic right now. I'm trying to make people laugh and entertain them." In South Korea, where the virus has hit the hardest outside China, several dozen cartoonists behind popular online comics began posting a series of virus-themed strips last week titled "Let's overcome this together." Variously styled as horror, cute anime or uplifting public service announcements, some of the comics relayed information about hand-washing and other precautions; others thanked front-line medical staff working to combat the outbreak. One, by a cartoonist with the pen name Quacy, depicted a mother keeping away from her young daughter for two weeks as she awaits the results of her coronavirus test. "We want to hold hands. We want to feel each other's warmth," the comic says. "We need to keep distance because we love each other." Another showed an exhausted medical worker in goggles and the white coverall biohazard suit that has become an all-too-familiar sight. A baby bear sits down next to him and calls him a superhero, asking to be his sidekick. Back in Hong Kong, Mak has tried to keep the mood light. She recently posted a follow-up to her "Torn" cover, a workout video made specially for those under home quarantine. The panic-buying-themed exercises include a jog on the spot with bags of rice and a stretch and reach for toilet paper you might find on the top shelf of a supermarket aisle. That video didn't get nearly as many clicks, but the last few weeks of momentary fame succeeded in one way, Mak said. "This whole viral thing got me distracted from the virus." -- Times staff writer Victoria Kim in Seoul contributed to this report. Caption: PHOTO: PROTEST ART depicting the coronavirus is seen in a pedestrian tunnel this week in Hong Kong. The virus has lodged itself into the zeitgeist in Asia, inspiring songs, surrealist art, political cartoons, comics and TikTok memes fueled by bored teenagers stuck at home. PHOTOGRAPHER: Marcus Yam Los Angeles Times PHOTO:KATHY MAK, in Tamar Park in Hong Kong, has tried to keep the mood light. PHOTOGRAPHER: Marcus Yam Los Angeles Times PHOTO:KATHY MAK'S parody of Natalie Imbruglia's song "Torn" is an online sensation in Hong Kong. PHOTOGRAPHER:Marcus Yam Los Angeles Times 
Mar 7, 2020	Blood donations have started to dwindle as cases of novel coronavirus continue to rise. The toll of the illness has so far been especially pronounced in the West Coast, where at least 11 deaths have been reported in Washington state and at least one in California. But the decrease in donations has been widespread, with the American Assn. of Blood Banks saying that a number of blood drives in the U.S. have been canceled, including one that was expected to collect 500 units -- enough to help about 1,500 patients. (Each donation can help roughly three people.)  The American Red Cross, one of AABB's partners, has also reported cancellations in blood donations. There is currently no blood supply shortage in the country. But Eduardo Nunes, vice president of quality, standards and accreditation for AABB, said it would be cause for serious concern if the decline continues for weeks over fears of falling ill to COVID-19. Experts say the decrease may simply be related to people's fears of gathering in public and contracting the virus from others. A blood donation has a shelf life of 42 days. To keep the supply stable, constant donations are necessary. "The use of blood seems to be steady at this point while collections are dropping," Nunes said. "We've had a steady depletion of inventory over the past few weeks, with no sign that we'll be able to make up deficit." Before the outbreak of coronavirus, there was already a strain on the blood supply, said Dr. Claudia Cohn, chief medical officer for AABB. One possible reason for that is that older people -- who have been deemed one of the most at-risk for the virus -- had been the most engaged when it came to giving blood. But as this demographic shrinks, others are not filling the void. "Younger generations are not showing up in the numbers as the 'Greatest Generation' " Cohn said. "That is the fact." Officials are already taking precautionary measures to boost donations. The San Diego Blood Bank in San Diego County, which has not yet reported any confirmed cases of the virus, is asking for donations in anticipation of possible travel restrictions that may arise as the number of cases continues to grow. In Washington state, where at least 11 people have died, the public health department said this week that the coronavirus has affected the state's blood supply. "The COVID-19 outbreak is starting to impact the blood supply in [Washington]. Anyone who is symptom-free is encouraged to donate blood!" the department tweeted. Curt Bailey, president of Seattle nonprofit Bloodworks, issued a public call for 1,000 people to donate at a local community blood center. Still, the Red Cross is asking that people who have recently traveled to China, Iran, Italy and South Korea or have come into contact with a person suspected of having the virus, refrain from making a donation for 28 days. "We ask that only healthy people give blood," Cohn said, emphasizing that people are unlikely to be exposed to a knowingly sick individual at a blood drive because good health is a requirement to donate. 
Mar 6, 2020	Three UCLA students are being tested for the coronavirus by the Los Angeles County Departement of Public Health, university Chancellor Gene Block told students in a message early Friday morning. The students are self-isolating off campus. Block did not disclose their relationship or possible connection to an exposure. There are currently no positive cases for COVID-19 on the UCLA campus. Block said that school officials are “actively monitoring and responding to the situation” and will keep students privy to any updates. “At this time, there have been no recommendations by [the health department] to suspend campus operations, including modifying class schedules,” Block said. Block asked students to seek medical attention if they developed flu-like symptoms. Newsletter Get our Coronavirus Today newsletter Sign up for the latest news, best stories and what they mean for you, plus answers to your questions. Sign Me Up You may occasionally receive promotional content from the Los Angeles Times. As UCLA awaits testing results, officials already have stepped up preventive measures. Like other UC campuses, UCLA has added more hand sanitizer stations, increased cleanings with antiviral and antibacterial solutions and employed electrostatic sprayer systems to disinfect hard-to-reach surfaces in high-use areas. UCLA also is preparing to expand the use of remote tools to stream lectures, create online meeting spaces and administer tests should the campus suspend in-person classes, as the University of Washington announced it would do beginning Monday. Campus health experts are holding information sessions to answer questions, debunk rumors and provide resources. The next one is scheduled for Monday at 5 p.m. at De Neve Auditorium and will be livestreamed and updated information can be found on UCLA’s website for COVID-19. In addition, UCLA is prohibiting official university travel to China, South Korea, Italy, Iran and Japan and “strongly discourages” personal travel to those countries because of their risk level as determined by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, according to campus guidance. Any traveler arriving from these areas must self-isolate for 14 days. The university will keep residence halls open during the weeklong spring break, which begins March 23, for students unable to travel home. Last week, UC Davis announced that a student who was placed in isolation tested negative for the virus. Two of the student’s roommates had also been isolated. At least 12 counties in California have reported confirmed cases of the coronavirus. There are currently at least 60 known cases in the state, and one death. Los Angeles County now has 11 coronavirus cases with the announcement of four new cases Thursday. 
Mar 6, 2020	For the last decade, the U.S. travel industry has been enjoying an unusually long stretch of growing demand, pushed by a strong economy and relatively cheap jet fuel. But the outbreak of the coronavirus that has killed more than 3,300 people and infected tens of thousands more is already projected to inflict billions of dollars in losses, representing the biggest hit to the $8.8-trillion global travel industry since the economic meltdown of 2008-09. Responding to government-imposed travel restrictions and a steep drop in demand, airlines have cut thousands of international and domestic flights, Walt Disney Co. has closed theme parks in China and Japan, and two of the world’s biggest hotel chains have shuttered hotels in China. Cruise lines are either barring or imposing extra screening on any travelers who have visited 11 countries and regions where the virus has struck hardest. “In my mind, this is worse than the financial crises, but hopefully not as bad as the 9/11 [terrorist attacks] when the whole industry stopped,” said Roger Dow, president and chief executive of the U.S. Travel Assn., the trade group for the country’s travel industry. “The numbers we are losing right now are monstrous.” A trade group for the world’s airlines Thursday dramatically increased its estimated loss in revenue to the airline industry, pushing the figure as high as $113 billion if the outbreak is not contained to the countries where reports of infections are heavy. The loss to U.S. and Canadian airlines could be as high as $21 billion, according to the estimate by the International Air Transport Assn. Newsletter Get our Coronavirus Today newsletter Sign up for the latest news, best stories and what they mean for you, plus answers to your questions. Sign Me Up You may occasionally receive promotional content from the Los Angeles Times. By comparison, the trade group had predicted last month that the worldwide loss would be about $30 billion. “Since that time, the virus has spread to over 80 countries and forward bookings have been severely impacted on routes beyond China,” the trade group said in a statement. Travel and tourism are responsible for 319 million jobs worldwide, or about 1 of every 10 jobs, according to the World Travel and Tourism Council, a branch of the United Nations. Demand for air travel, hotel rooms and cruise trips has been growing relatively steady in the last decade, rebounding from such setbacks as horrific airline disasters in Indonesia and Ethiopia, a cruise ship sinking in Italy and a mass shooting in Las Vegas. But the coronavirus outbreak could have deeper and longer-lasting effects on travel not only because of how fast the infection has spread but also because the outbreak has centered on China, which in the last few years has grown as an economic powerhouse and as the world’s fastest-growing source of international travelers. More coronavirus coverage  About 3 million Chinese travelers visited the U.S. in 2018, up from fewer than 1 million visitors in 2010, according to the U.S. Department of Commerce. With the spread of the virus, most inbound flights from China were halted at the end of January and cruise lines canceled sailings that serve Chinese ports. Airlines have also cut routes from Italy, Japan and South Korea, where new reports of infections have grown. The U.S. Travel Assn. predicted that the number of international visitors to the U.S. would drop by 6% over the next three months, the largest decline since the 2008-09 financial crisis. The effects have been widespread: - At Los Angeles International Airport, the total number of airline departures has dropped 3.9% in March, compared with the same month in 2019, according to Justin Erbacci, interim chief executive at the airport. Concession sales from restaurants and retail stores at the airport are also down 10%, he told a meeting of the Los Angeles City Council on Wednesday. - Tour operators in Los Angeles are reporting heavy cancellations at a time when the upcoming spring break travel period should represent a boost in business. “We have literally lost every single conference group we had,” said Danny Roman, who operates a hiking and biking tour company called Bikes and Hikes. “Our entire spring lineup has canceled.” - Walt Disney Co. has temporarily shuttered two parks in Japan — Tokyo Disneyland and Tokyo DisneySea — along with Hong Kong Disneyland and Shanghai Disneyland, the $5.5-billion park that opened in 2016. - Delta Air Lines, which had previously halted all service to China because of the virus, announced it would reduce the number of flights to Japan and South Korea because of a drop in demand. The Atlanta-based airline also announced it was temporarily suspending its daily flights from New York to Milan, Italy, and was delaying the start of seasonal service to Venice, Italy, by a month. - At United Airlines, the domestic schedule will be cut by 10% in April and international flying will be reduced by 20%, the Chicago-based carrier told employees Wednesday. The company also imposed a hiring freeze through June 30 and deferred merit-based salary increases for management until July 1. In addition, United said it will offer voluntary unpaid leaves of absence. - When Federal Reserve Board Chairman Jerome H. Powell announced Tuesday a cut to short-term interest rates of half a percentage point, he told reporters he had been prompted partly by concerns from business leaders, including those in the travel industry. “The effects are at a very early stage,” he said. “But you are hearing concerns from people, for example, from the travel business or the hotel business.” - Marriott International, one of the world’s largest hotel companies, said in its Feb. 27 earnings report that it had closed 90 hotels in China because of the outbreak. Some of those hotels have since reopened, Marriott officials said. Hilton World Wide said in its Feb. 11 earnings report that the hotel giant had closed about 150 hotels in China, representing about 33,000 rooms.  Dow said he was hopeful that travelers who had canceled plans to visit international destinations might instead stay in the U.S. for the upcoming spring break travel season. He also noted that 62 million people visit China each year, mostly from adjacent Asian countries, representing a group of travelers that Dow said might consider instead flying to the U.S. for a vacation. “We want people to know it’s safe here,” he said. 
Mar 6, 2020	By his own account, President Trump never met a political or business rival or problem he couldn’t sweet-talk or club into submission with tariffs, threats or tweets. But the new coronavirus outbreak that has killed 11 Americans so far, unleashed panic in communities and financial markets, led to emergencies in California and two other states, and ultimately could threaten Trump’s reelection bid, has posed a unique challenge to the president’s credibility and his administration’s managerial competence. “A virus is not to be dominated. A virus is not somebody you get into a room and beat up on,” said Gwenda Blair, a Trump biographer who has studied his mindset for decades. That simple but undeniable reality has frustrated Trump as he confronts the growing health crisis. On Friday, the White House abruptly canceled -- then rescheduled -- the president’s planned visit to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention in Atlanta. A CDC employee was suspected to have contracted the virus but later tested negative. Trump has struggled to portray himself in control of the fast moving threat, which has led to more than 200 confirmed cases in at least 18 states, downplaying the risk and promising a vaccine long before one is likely. And the CDC has been under fire for multiple problems with its testing protocols and practices. “Certainly, the administration is trying to show that it is in charge and on top of things, but sometimes political imperatives, particularly in an election year, don’t mesh with the science,” said Eric Miller, a global fellow at the Wilson Center, a nonpartisan public policy forum established by Congress. “It’s hard to make a deal with diseases,” he added. “They’re going to go where they’re going to go.” Congress clearly thinks the White House should do more. Both chambers this week overwhelmingly passed an $8.3-billion spending package — more than triple what Trump had requested — for additional coronavirus screening, vaccine research and other aid. Trump is expected to sign the bill. But by almost any measure, Trump’s mixed messages have added to the nation’s anxieties, and boosted concerns that the administration lacks a coherent strategy and credible messengers. Trump has pulled out his usual playbook of accusing others, blaming Democrats, the media and former President Obama for what he angrily called a political “hoax” intended to weaken him. He also has offered his version of reality against the sobering advice and assessments of medical professionals. On Wednesday, he disputed the World Health Organization’s recent estimate that the disease has a global mortality rate of 3.4%, asserting without evidence that the WHO figure is “false” and his “hunch” is the disease isn’t so deadly. A lifelong germaphobe, he has been notably frustrated with the pathogen’s elusiveness. “It’s — you know, just unseen,” Trump said in speech Tuesday to the National Assn. of Counties. Though Trump appointed Vice President Mike Pence last week to lead the nation’s response, the president has refused to cede the spotlight. Returning from a visit to the National Institutes of Health in suburban Washington on Tuesday, he interrupted the administration’s top epidemiologist to tell the TV cameras that clinical trials for a vaccine were happening in “record” time. “I don’t want to over-promise,” Dr. Anthony Fauci, head of the NIH’s National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, gingerly clarified, explaining that it’s “only the first stage of the development” and a vaccine probably would take 12 to 18 months to produce. Trump spoke to reporters four times Tuesday, while Pence and the team of medical professionals and other experts the administration had assembled stayed off camera. Pence, pressed on the lack of access to those most familiar with the crisis, explained apologetically that “the president addressed the country today” and promised to allow cameras back for future briefings. Michael Leavitt, who was secretary of Health and Human Services in 2005 during the bird flu outbreak, warned that if the global outbreaks worsen into a pandemic, the government will be overwhelmed. “If you have an expectation that the federal government will be able to come to the rescue, you’ll be frequently disappointed because a pandemic is a unique emergency. Anything you say or have done seems inadequate,” he said. Trump argues that his decision in late January to restrict visitors from China has prevented the coronavirus outbreak from developing into an epidemic here, as it did in China. But some public health experts say his focus on blocking the virus from crossing the border — even as the CDC warned its spread was inevitable — may have hampered the administration’s response. Instead of planning for outbreaks, early efforts focused on screening and quarantining only those people who had traveled to countries with known cases. “They were only looking at the piece that they chose to look at, not seeing the whole board,” said Jeremy Konyndyk, a policy fellow at the Center for Global Development, a nonpartisan think tank, who helped manage the Obama administration’s response to an Ebola outbreak in 2014. As a result, Konyndyk said, the Trump administration was slow to design tests that could deliver more results more quickly. South Korea, which has more than 4,000 confirmed cases, set up drive-through test centers that processed thousands of results while the CDC was mailing limited results to labs with three-day turnarounds. It was only this week that the Trump administration undertook aggressive steps to make more tests available and changed its rules to give more discretion to doctors to order tests for people who had not traveled to known hot spots. Trump’s attempts to downplay the threat aimed in part to ease concerns in financial markets, which the president views as a strong selling point for his reelection. Before last week’s stock market meltdown, share prices had soared to record levels and the economy appeared robust. But analysts are now bracing for a sharp slowdown, and fears have overtaken Wall Street. Financial markets are always to some degree a “referendum on the state of politics,” said Joe Brusuelas, chief economist at the accounting firm RSM US. The toxic climate in Washington — and finger-pointing from Democrats and Republicans as to who was politicizing the virus — were probably a factor in “the mind-bending volatility of the markets,” he said. “It’s an expression of a lack of confidence in the government sector’s ability to address this problem.” Administration officials point to briefings by Fauci and other experts as proof they are deploying experienced scientists to direct the administration’s response. Dr. Deborah Birx, whom Pence picked to coordinate his efforts, is widely praised in the scientific community. To Trump’s critics, the president’s seesawing response to the outbreak reflects his deep skepticism of science and the federal government. When the president said coronavirus could fade like the flu when the weather warms, although that is unknown, Robert Shapiro, chairman of consulting firm Sonecon and a former economic advisor to President Clinton, saw it “as part of a larger disposition by this administration to dismiss science.” Whether Trump believes the science is wrong or, as he has complained, is hyped by the media, he can do little about it. “He’s met his match,” said J. Stephen Morrison, a Clinton administration official who runs the Global Health Policy Center at the Center for Strategic and International Studies, a Washington think tank. “We don’t know if this is a full pandemic, but this is a pretty dangerous outbreak and it has the potential to mow him down,” he added. “It doesn’t really respect a post-fact world.” 
Mar 6, 2020	Things felt bleak in Hong Kong for Kathy Mak. The city had just reported its first death from the coronavirus, store shelves were being cleared of basic supplies, and the outbreak was giving a months-old protest movement another troubling dimension. “Life had just stopped,” said the 30-year-old dance instructor and performer, who like other people in Hong Kong has been confined mostly to her apartment. “People were being hysterical, grabbing toilet paper.” Then, in a fit of inspiration, Mak started jotting down lyrics to a song — a parody she hoped would lighten the mood at an upcoming charity event. Sung to the tune of 1990s pop hit “Torn” by Australian singer Natalie Imbruglia,” Mak’s live performance recorded on her cellphone racked up over 230,000 views on YouTube and sparked a minor sensation in a city worn down by numbing headlines and despair. She sings: There’s nothing left at the grocery store I can’t find bok choy no more There’s just white people things Like pasta, cheese and corn Where the hell’s the rice? Why’s it three times the price? The United States is just now encountering the realities and insecurities of the coronavirus, but in Asia, the deadly illness, with its quarantines and dystopian eeriness, has dominated life for two months. Originating from the Chinese city of Wuhan, the virus has lodged itself into the zeitgeist here, inspiring songs, surrealist art, political cartoons, comics and TikTok memes — the latter in no small part due to the legions of bored teenagers stuck at home with schools closed. The collective effort — a surge of humor and creativity in the face of disturbing infection rates — has highlighted the disease’s strain on families and the failings of governments to protect their people. But it’s also serving like a coping mechanism, providing levity to a crisis that has shown few bounds. In an animated music video from an unlikely source, Vietnam’s Ministry of Health may have unwittingly delivered the epidemic’s anthem — a catchy three-minute tune that sounds like it belongs on Top 40 rotation reminding citizens to wash their hands vigorously, avoid touching their faces and stay clear of crowded places. The song by Vietnamese singers Erik and Min was deemed a “genuine club banger” Sunday by comedian John Oliver on his HBO show “Last Week Tonight.” It has spawned a dance on TikTok replete with hand-washing motions and a few “dabs” for good measure. The music and video app is awash with coronavirus-themed clips and memes, including one that features various gags to a song that repeats the line “It’s corona time” above an ’80s electro beat. One TikTok video of a young Indonesian woman seated on a plane set against the Celia Mara-sampling song “Opaul” begins with a banner for another well-worn meme: the coronavirus check. She then ticks off a safety checklist, putting on a face mask, glasses and the hood to her sweatshirt, whose strings she pulls so tightly that only her eyes and forehead show. Political art inspired by the virus has also accelerated across the region. Badiucao, a Chinese digital cartoonist based in Melbourne, Australia, who’s attracted the ire of authorities in Beijing for his stand on human rights, recently shifted his attention from the Hong Kong pro-democracy protests to the Chinese response to the outbreak — particularly the government’s muzzling of doctors who tried to sound the alarm about the virus. The Shanghai native, who uses a pen name to protect his identity, recently posted on Instagram a black and white image of Li Wenliang, the Wuhan physician who died of the coronavirus Feb. 7 and has become a symbol of popular grief and anger. Splashed across Li’s left eye is a red puzzle piece dripping blood — a reference to a Chinese diplomat who appeared on Australian TV and compared Western media coverage of China’s virus response to picking pieces of a jigsaw puzzle to portray the country in a bad light.  New drawing for Dr #LiWenliang Isn't he just another expendable piece out of the big jigsaw puzzle to Chinese as well？ 为 #李文亮 医生再画，他的生命在党国眼里，只是伟大版图上可有可无的一块鸡肋。 #wuhan #coronavirus #WuhanVirus #wuhanconoravirus #Chinavirus #光复香港时代革命 #五大诉求缺一不可 #freedom #hongkong #antielabhk #standwithhongkong #art #artistsoninstagram #arts #streetart #hongkong #hongkongprotest #humanrights #freespeech #beijing #china #politicalcartoons #australia #melbourne #standwithhongkong #freedomhongkong A post shared by 巴丢草 badiucao (@badiucao) onFeb 25, 2020 at 2:17am PST  In an earlier image made to look like an informational poster titled “How to Control the Wuhan Pneumonia,” Badiucao drew a person holding a white face mask, then scrunching it up and stuffing it in their mouth. Beneath, it reads: “Silence is Health.”  Here comes the newly released official illustration of how to control #WuhanPneumonia in China. Everyone must remember it ：Silence Is Health. 国家卫生防疫部门刚刚公布了最新的控制与预防 #武汉肺炎 方法，请大家务必广传！ #WuhanSARS #ChinaPneumonia #Sars / / / Time for HongKong‘s own Identity！#LennonWallFlag #光复香港时代革命 First Time #LennonWallFlag spotted in HongKong！proud ！ #五大诉求缺一不可 Chinese dissident cartoonist Badiucao has unveiled a flag design that he hopes will “become a new symbol of Hong Kong’s freedom and resistance.” The rainbow-coloured design was inspired by the “Lennon Wall” message boards that have sprung up in communities across Hong Kong since June. #freedom #hongkong #antielabhk #standwithhongkong #art #artistsoninstagram #arts #streetart #hongkong #hongkongprotest #humanrights #freespeech #beijing #china #politicalcartoons #illustrationartists #australia #melbourne #standwithhongkong #freedomhongkong A post shared by 巴丢草 badiucao (@badiucao) onJan 21, 2020 at 2:49am PST  The 33-year-old artist, who struggles to find venues to exhibit his work because of Chinese pressure, said there was little difference between China’s response to the Hong Kong protests and the Wuhan virus. “It shows how easily a domestic problem caused by censorship or bad governance can influence everyone in the world,” Badiucao said. “I find it ironic,” he added. “As a China-born artist trying to reflect the reality in China, I feel like there’s tons of material I can use to expand my artwork. But it’s actually very sad. I’d rather have nothing to work with. Our reality is really bad.” Censors in China make it nearly impossible for subversive memes to go viral, but Badiucao said he’s seen a few attempts from afar. One was a play on Li’s so-called letter of reprimand from the Wuhan police forcing the doctor to acknowledge with two fingerprints that he had spread false rumors. To evade censors, an artist created a copy of the document devoid of writing but whose meaning was unmistakable because of the remaining presence of Li’s fingerprints. “If you’re creative, you can trigger the same emotion in a minimal way,” Badiucao said. There’s nothing subtle about Hong Kong artist Tommy Fung’s work. His fantastical, digitally enhanced photographs used to depict his city in more whimsical times: images of himself sitting as a cross-legged giant atop the iconic Star Ferry, the former Kowloon-Canton Railway clock tower tied in a knot. Today, that creativity is channeled toward reflecting the panic and desperation that’s gripped Hong Kong, which has reported two deaths and 107 infections due to the coronavirus as of Friday evening. His work now includes one image of swarms of protesters climbing on top of one another in a “World War Z” motif. They reach for a pair of blue masks floating in the air. Another depicts Hong Kong riot police carrying guns with their heads replaced by giant, spiky, green virus cells. And in another, Fung shows mask-clad pedestrians staring at a man with a tentacled alien head covered in strings of slime. The caption reads: “Nowadays when you see someone coughing and not wearing a mask.”  Meanwhile in Hong Kong... 一罩難求 #coronavirus #wuhan #WARS #mask #staysafe #photoshop #art #photomanipulation #worldwarz #creativecloud_fantasy #standwithhongkong #武漢肺炎 #口罩 A post shared by My surreal life in Hong Kong (@surrealhk) onFeb 2, 2020 at 3:12am PST  “I have to exaggerate things to make it more eye-catching,” Fung said. “It’s hard to be optimistic right now. I’m trying to make people laugh and entertain them.” In South Korea, where the virus has hit the hardest outside China, several dozen cartoonists behind popular online comics began postinga series of coronavirus-themed strips last week titled “Let’s overcome this together.” Variously styled as horror, cute anime or uplifting public service announcements, some of the comics relayed information about hand-washing and other precautions; others thanked front-line medical staff working to combat the outbreak. One, by a cartoonist with the pen name Quacy, depicted a mother keeping away from her young daughter for two weeks as she awaits the results of her coronavirus test. “We want to hold hands. We want to feel each other’s warmth,” the comic says. “We need to keep distance because we love each other.” Another showed an exhausted medical worker in goggles and the white coverall biohazard suit that has become an all-too-familiar sight. A baby bear sits down next to him and calls him a superhero, asking to be his sidekick. Back in Hong Kong, Mak has tried to keep the mood light. She recently posted a follow-up to her “Torn” cover, a workout video made specially for those under home quarantine. The panic-buying-themed exercises include a jog on the spot with bags of rice, and a stretch and reach for toilet paper you might find on the top shelf of a supermarket aisle. That video didn’t get nearly as many clicks, but the last few weeks of momentary fame succeeded in one way, Mak said. “This whole viral thing got me distracted from the virus.” Times staff writer Victoria Kim in Seoul contributed to this report. 
Mar 6, 2020	As the novel coronavirus continues to spread, a new kind of cancel culture is taking hold in the entertainment industry. In recent weeks, movie releases, film festivals, concerts and other events involving public crowds and international travel have taken a hit from the spread of the COVID-19 respiratory illness. Even the venerable South by Southwest multimedia festival in Austin, Texas, was canceled Friday. From “The Amazing Race” and “Sonic the Hedgehog” to the Louvre and Hong Kong Disneyland, here’s a rundown of what’s been affected by the coronavirus around the world. Events SXSW , which was set to take place March 16-22 in Austin, was canceled Friday. In an afternoon press conference, Austin Mayor Steve Adler said he had declared a local disaster and “together with that I have issued an order that effectively cancels South by Southwest this year.” Major participants including the Concord record label group, Facebook, Twitter, TikTok, Apple, Netflix and Amazon had already pulled out before Friday’s cancellation. Chinese exhibitors will not attend CinemaCon 2020 , the movie industry’s annual trade show, in Las Vegas. The event is set to take place as planned March 30-April 2 at Caesars Palace, though organizers are enhancing “health and sanitation” measures for the convention and maintaining “daily communication” with the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, according to the CinemaCon website. San Francisco’s 2020 Game Developers Conference , a professional gathering for interactive industry members set for March 16-20, has been scrapped after multiple participants pulled out. Microsoft, Sony Interactive Entertainment, Electronic Arts, Facebook Gaming, Unity, Amazon and Activision Blizzard were among the top gaming companies that canceled. MIPTV 2020 , a March 30-April 2 global content conference in Cannes, France, has been canceled. Related events that were scheduled to take place March 28-29 also have been nixed. The 2020 Thessaloniki Documentary Festival in Greece, originally set for March 5-15, has been postponed. Organizers are considering rescheduling the event for the end of May or beginning of June, according to the festival’s website. Saudi Arabia’s inaugural Red Sea International Film Festival has been postponed indefinitely. The event was scheduled to run March 12-21. Venice’s famed Carnival , which had been set to run Feb. 8-25, ended prematurely on Feb. 19. FILMART 2020 , the Hong Kong International Film & TV Market, now will be held Aug. 27-29 instead of the originally scheduled stretch in late March. It is the most significant film market in Asia. DC , the home of Wonder Woman, Batman, Superman and more, will not send staffers to comics conventions in March. The company says it will assess attendance at conventions case by case. With COVID-19 hitting hard in Washington state, Emerald City Comic Con organizers decided Friday to move next week’s event to the summer. Refunds will be issued and details about the rescheduled Seattle event are forthcoming. Movies Almost all movie theaters in mainland China — accounting for 70,000 screens — have been shuttered. Theaters in Milan, Italy, including the iconic La Scala , have also been closed. Italy on Wednesday closed “all theaters and cinema” where a one-meter distance requirement between patrons cannot be accommodated. The forthcoming release of “No Time to Die , ” Daniel Craig’s final film in the James Bond franchise, has been postponed until November, according to MGM, Universal and Bond producers Michael G. Wilson and Barbara Broccoli. The movie, previously slated to debut in the U.S. on April 10, now will hit theaters Nov. 25. China releases for Paramount’s “Sonic the Hedgehog,” Universal’s “1917,” Searchlight’s “Jojo Rabbit” and Universal’s “Dolittle” have been postponed indefinitely. Should precautions related to the outbreak persist, forthcoming titles including Pixar’s “Onward” and Sony Pictures’ “Bloodshot” could also be at risk. Production on Paramount’s latest “Mission: Impossible” project has been delayed. The action flick, starring Tom Cruise, was set to film on location in Italy, which has seen one of the largest outbreaks outside Asia. The seventh film in the franchise is scheduled to hit theaters in July 2021. Major movie studios in China, including Qingdao Oriental Movie Metropolis and Hengdian World Studios , have shut down operations. The Chinese government has put an indefinite halt on all film production in the country. After learning that one of its London employees might have been exposed to the novel coronavirus, Sony Pictures Entertainment closed its offices for a week in London, Paris and Gdynia, Poland. Employees were asked this week to work from home. Music BTS, Green Day , Khalid , New Order , Pentatonix, Stormzy , Mariah Carey, Avril Lavigne , Louis Tomlinson and Testament are among the many music acts who have called off or postponed tour dates and performances in Asia, Italy and Hawaii. The Philharmonic Society of Orange County canceled a Shanghai Chinese Orchestra concert in Costa Mesa last month, despite all of the musicians being in good health. A Chinese New Year celebration was scheduled to take place Feb. 5 at Segerstrom Center for the Arts. The 18th Korea Times Music Festival , set to take place at the Hollywood Bowl on April 25, has been postponed “due to current travel restrictions in Asia,” organizers said. Ticket refunds are available. The Ultra Music Festival , a massive Miami-based electronic music event, has been pushed back. The three-day concert, which draws 165,000 fans from across the globe, likely will be moved from this month to 2021. The Tomorrowland Winter 2020 electronic-music festival, set to run March 14-21 at a ski resort in the French Alps, has been canceled by organizers after the French government banned all indoor gatherings of more than 5,000 people. Tomorrowland Summer 2020 in Belgium was still on the schedule for July. TV The 33rd season of the Emmy-winning TV show “The Amazing Race” has ceased filming indefinitely and “all contestants and production staff are returning home,” according to a statement from CBS. No new production date has been set for the popular reality travel competition. The 16th season of ABC’s “The Bachelorette,” starring 38-year-old Clare Crawley, will no longer shoot episodes in Italy, according to Variety. Filming internationally has not been ruled out entirely. Comcast’s FreeWheel and Fox News pulled out of their annual advertisers upfront presentations scheduled for March 12 and 24 in New York City. Fox Entertainment reportedly canceled program development presentations scheduled for New York, Chicago, Detroit and L.A. during the last week of March. Disney has scrapped a two-day launch event for its new streaming platform, Disney+ . The rollout was set to take place on the Thursday and Friday leading up to the service’s March 24 European debut; it will be replaced by an executive press briefing via webcast next week. Theme parks Universal Studios Japan has closed from Feb. 29 to March 15, with the reopening date subject to change depending on the coronavirus situation. Disney’s themed resorts in Shanghai, Hong Kong and Tokyo have been shuttered until at least March 15. In a recent earnings call, the Mouse House estimated the closures would result in a roughly $175-million hit to operating income in its second fiscal quarter, should the parks remain shut down for two months. Books The London Book Fair 2020 , which was scheduled for March 10-12, has been nixed. Around 25,000 publishers, authors and agents were expected at one of the world’s biggest international literary events. The 2020 Livre Paris Book Fair , which attracts 160,000 annually and was scheduled for March 20-23, has been canceled in accordance with France’s new indoor-gatherings policy. The Bologna Children’s Book Fair , which had been set for March 30-April 2, has been moved to May 4-7. The event in Bologna, Italy, typically draws 1,400 exhibitors and 30,000 professional visitors. Museums Museums in Italy that can accommodate a 1-meter distance requirement between patrons have been allowed to stay open, but attendance is down dramatically. The Louvre in Paris shut down for a few days after employees walked out, demanding further protections against the virus, but it reopened Wednesday. The National Museum of Korea and the National Museum of Modern and Contemporary Art in South Korea, Beijing’s Palace Museum in the Forbidden City and Japan’s Mori Art Museum , National Museum of Modern Art and Kyoto National Museum are among closures in Asia. Museums (and theaters) in the Los Angeles area are operating as usual unless they hear otherwise from public health authorities but are more aggressively cleaning and disinfecting facilities and coming up with plans in case the virus spreads further. Opera Performances at La Scala in Milan have been suspended through April 3, with the box office closed through March 15. New York’s Metropolitan Opera on Tuesday mandated a 14-day self-imposed preshow quarantine for all performers and staff traveling to New York City from China, Iran, South Korea, Japan, Italy and Hong Kong. This list will be updated as more closures, cancellations and postponements are announced. 
Mar 6, 2020	Sports leagues and federations across the world are addressing the spread of the coronavirus. While most North American sports leagues, including Major League Baseball, the NBA, the NFL and the NHL are monitoring the situation, leagues in other parts of the world are taking action by canceling events and playing in empty stadiums. Los Angeles County officials have discussed the possibility of banning spectators from attending sporting events in Southern California in an attempt to slow the spread of the coronavirus. Here is a sport-by-sport look at what leagues and federations are doing to address the COVID-19 outbreak: United States NBA: In a memo sent to teams Sunday, the league and the NBA Players’ Assn. stated they are “closely monitoring the coronavirus situation” and are in consultation with the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. The memo also recommended that players avoid giving high-fives with interacting with fans and avoid borrowing pens and markers from fans requesting autographs. No plans have been made to cancel games or bar fans from attending. In a statement, Staples Center encouraged fans who are planning to attend events at the arena to “engage in safe hygiene practices” and “stay home if they feel unwell.” MLB: The league has established an internal task force to deal with issues related to coronavirus in the coming months, according to a memo sent to high-ranking baseball officials Tuesday obtained by ESPN. Baseball has no plans to cancel or ban fans from attending games. The memo advises players not to shake hands with fans and not use pens and markers from fans to sign autographs. It also asks teams to make sure all players have received the 2019-20 flu vaccine and other necessary vaccinations. NFL: NFL Media reported Tuesday that the league is “closely monitoring developments” related to coronavirus and that it is still planning to hold the NFL draft in Las Vegas on April 23-25. In addition, individual pro days for draft-eligible players will begin as scheduled on Thursday. The NFL’s annual meeting, which is attended by team owners, general managers and coaches, is still scheduled to be held March 29-April 1 in Palm Beach, Fla. NHL: Commissioner Gary Bettman said Wednesday that the league is monitoring the coronavirus outbreak but declined to say whether games could be altered, canceled or rescheduled. He also wouldn’t speculate on whether the league would consider playing in empty arenas or postponing the playoffs. All NHL employees have been barred from traveling outside North America for business purposes. Scouts based in Europe have to stay in Europe or be quarantined upon arriving in North America, Bettman said. Switzerland’s national hockey league has suspended the playing of games from March 2-15. NCAA: The college athletics sanctioning body says it is monitoring the outbreak but that it has no plans to make changes for the upcoming men’s and women’s basketball tournaments. “The NCAA is committed to conducting its championships and events in a safe and responsible manner,” Donald Remy, the NCAA’s chief operating officer, said in a statement Tuesday. “Today we are planning to conduct our championships as planned; however, we are evaluating the covid-19 situation daily and will make decisions accordingly.” Missouri-Kansas City and Chicago State announced they are canceling trips to Seattle for scheduled Western Athletic Conference men’s basketball games this week. Johns Hopkins University in Baltimore said it will not allow spectators to attend the Division III basketball tournament games its hosting starting March 6 because of three confirmed cases of coronavirus in Maryland. USC announced all athletic events are being played as scheduled. MLS: The league has created a task force to monitor the coronavirus outbreak. Sports teams in Los Angeles County, including the Galaxy and LAFC, have been warned they may be asked to cancel games or play them in empty stadiums after the county declared a health emergency Wednesday to deal with the coronavirus. “This could be that games are played but there are no spectators,” L.A. County public health director Barbara Ferrer said. “This could be that there are limits to how people are going to gather... But I want to reassure everyone we are not there today.” XFL: The league announced it has launched a task force to closely monitor the spread of the coronavirus. It is also in regular contact with health and public safety officials at the national and local levels. No games have been postponed or canceled. NASCAR: In a statement released Wednesday, NASCAR said its racing schedule and business operations remain unchanged as it monitors the outbreak. It said it has been in communication with federal, state and local health officials in addition to teams and tracks. IndyCar: The racing league’s sanctioning body said in a statement Wednesday that it is closely monitoring the situation but does not expect any changes to its season opener, which takes place in St. Petersburg, Fla., on March 15. PGA: The PGA Tour announced Wednesday that it has no plans to alter its schedule beyond changes that have already been made with the PGA Tour-Series China (delayed start to season). That could change, the league said, if the CDC and the World Health Organization make recommendations. LPGA: The league has canceled three events in response to the coronavirus outbreak. Events scheduled in Thailand and Singapore were canceled last month, and the Blue Bay LPGA on Hainan Island in China, which was originally scheduled to be played Thursday-Sunday, is also off the LPGA calendar. Their next event, the Founders Cup, is set to be played as scheduled at Wildfire Golf Club in Phoenix from March 19-22. Santa Anita (horse racing): The Arcadia-based horse racing track said in a statement Wednesday that it is monitoring the situation and is “taking procedures necessary for the health and safety and well-being of our fans, staff and horsemen, including adding numerous hand-sanitizing stations throughout the facility.” L.A. Marathon: The Los Angeles Marathon will run as scheduled on March 8, race officials announced. Marathon organizers are offering a deferral option to runners traveling from impacted countries allowing them to delay their participation until next year. WWE: Over the April 5 weekend, travelers from all over the world will descend on Tampa, Fla., for WWE’s WrestleMania weekend, which should draw well over 100,000 people. According to the WWE, “The health and safety of our fans, performers and employees are our top priorities and we are monitoring the situation closely with our partners and government officials in Tampa Bay. We remain committed to hosting WrestleMania at Raymond James Stadium on Sunday, April 5, and like other entertainment properties in the U.S., there are currently no plans to cancel or postpone our upcoming events.” International International Olympic Committee (Tokyo 2020 Olympics): No plans have been made to reschedule or cancel the Olympics, scheduled for July 24-Aug. 9. “We remain very confident with regard to the success of these Olympic Games,” IOC President Thomas Bach said Tuesday. The IOC has formed a task force that includes representatives from the World Health Organization, the Tokyo 2020 organizing committee and the Japanese government to monitor the situation. Premier League: The English league has informed its clubs of a contingency plan should large gatherings be banned because of the coronavirus spread. In the meantime, the league has advised teams to pay increased attention to hygiene at stadiums and training grounds, reduce the number of nonessential visitors to team facilities and minimize any face-to-face meetings. Bundesliga: The German Football League, which operates Bundesliga, said in a statement last week that it is monitoring the situation but wasn’t considering postponing matches at that point. FC Bayern Munich has advised its players to refrain from signing autographs and posing for selfies with fans. Ligue 1: The French league is altering its pregame routines due to the coronavirus. Handshakes among players, coaches and officials are prohibited until further notice. Players will continue to be escorted to the field by youth players but will hold the youngsters by the shoulder, rather than by hand as is customary. Serie A: Italy has closed all sporting events to the general public until April 3 amid a coronavirus outbreak in the country. The Italian soccer league postponed games on its schedule this week but will resume this weekend, according to the Associated Press. More than 100 people have died in Italy, and more than 3,000 have been infected with COVID-19. WTA: The Kunming Open, which was scheduled for April 27-May 3 in Anning, China, has been canceled. The Xi’an Open in China from April 13-19 also has been canceled. The BNP Paribas Open at Indian Wells is still scheduled to begin March 11, but anyone who has purchased tickets directly from the tournament may request a refund. In addition, organized interaction between players and fans at the BNP Paribas Open will be limited and players will be required to manage their own towels without the help of ball kids. ATP: Two events in China were canceled and another event in Italy was called off last month amid coronavirus concerns. No other events have been canceled or rescheduled. Korean and Japanese baseball leagues: The Japanese baseball league announced last week that it has barred fans from attending exhibition games. The South Korean league canceled its exhibition games. Neither league has committed to starting their regular seasons as scheduled — March 20 in Japan, March 28 in South Korea. Formula One: Ross Brawn, Formula One’s managing director, said races remain scheduled for Australia and Bahrain in March and Vietnam in April, but said the situation could change. “It’s a very serious situation, so I don’t want to underplay it,” Brawn told Reuters on Tuesday. “But we’re trying to have races. We’ve got to do them in a responsible way.” Formula One earlier postponed the Chinese Grand Prix, which was originally scheduled for April 19. MotoGP: The season-opening Qatar Grand Prix in Doha, which was scheduled for Sunday, has been canceled and the second race of the season in Thailand has been postponed. The season is scheduled to open April 5 at the Circuit of the Americas in Austin, Texas. World Cup Skiiing: The competition’s finals in Cortina d’Ampezzo, Italy, scheduled from March 18-22, were called off after an emergency International Ski Federation board meeting March 6. Times staff writers Chuck Schilken, Kevin Baxter, Soumya Karlamangla, Jeff Miller, Helene Elliott, Houston Mitchell and Bill Shaikin contributed to this report. 
Mar 6, 2020	By his own account, President Trump never met a political or business rival or problem he couldn't sweet-talk or club into submission with tariffs, threats or tweets. But the coronavirus outbreak that has killed 11 Americans so far, unleashed panic in communities and financial markets, led to emergencies in California and two other states, and ultimately could threaten Trump's reelection bid, has posed a unique challenge to the president's credibility and his administration's managerial competence. "A virus is not to be dominated. A virus is not somebody you get into a room and beat up on," said Gwenda Blair, a Trump biographer who has studied his mind-set for decades.  That simple but undeniable reality has frustrated Trump as he confronts the growing health crisis. On Friday, he will visit the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention in Atlanta and attempt to portray himself in control of the fast-moving threat, which has led to more than 200 confirmed cases in at least 18 states. He may try, as he has earlier, to downplay the virus or give an unrealistic assessment of how quickly a vaccine can be ready. But that could come back to haunt him if many more communities report infection cases and deaths, and the economy slows further. "Certainly, the administration is trying to show that it is in charge and on top of things, but sometimes political imperatives, particularly in an election year, don't mesh with the science," said Eric Miller, a global fellow at the Wilson Center. "It's hard to make a deal with diseases," he added. "They're going to go where they're going to go." Congress clearly thinks the White House should do more. Both chambers this week overwhelmingly passed an $8.3-billion spending package -- more than triple what Trump had requested -- for additional coronavirus screening, vaccine research and other aid. Trump is expected to sign the bill. But by almost any measure, Trump's mixed messages have added to the nation's anxieties, and boosted concerns that the administration lacks a coherent strategy and credible messengers. Trump has pulled out his usual playbook of accusing others, blaming Democrats, the media and former President Obama for what he called a political "hoax" intended to weaken him. He also has offered his version of reality against the sobering advice and assessments of medical experts. On Wednesday, he disputed the World Health Organization's recent estimate that the disease has a global mortality rate of 3.4%, asserting without evidence that the WHO figure is "false" and his "hunch" is the disease isn't so deadly. A lifelong germaphobe, he has been notably frustrated with the pathogen's elusiveness. "It's -- you know, just unseen," Trump said in speech Tuesday to the National Assn. of Counties. Though Trump appointed Vice President Mike Pence last week to lead the nation's response, the president has refused to cede the spotlight. Returning from a visit to the National Institutes of Health on Tuesday, he interrupted the administration's top epidemiologist to tell the TV cameras that clinical trials for a vaccine were happening in "record" time. "I don't want to over-promise," Dr. Anthony Fauci, head of the NIH's National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, gingerly clarified, explaining that it's "only the first stage of the development" and a vaccine probably would take 12 to 18 months to produce. Trump spoke to reporters four times Tuesday, while Pence and the team of medical experts the administration had assembled stayed off camera. Pence, pressed on the lack of access to those most familiar with the crisis, explained apologetically that "the president addressed the country today" and promised to allow cameras back for future briefings. Michael Leavitt, who was secretary of Health and Human Services in 2005 during the bird flu outbreak, warned that if the global outbreaks worsen into a pandemic, the government will be overwhelmed. "If you have an expectation that the federal government will be able to come to the rescue, you'll be frequently disappointed because a pandemic is a unique emergency. Anything you say or have done seems inadequate," he said. Trump argues that his decision in late January to restrict visitors from China has prevented the coronavirus outbreak from developing into an epidemic here, as it did in China. But some public health experts say his focus on blocking the virus from crossing the border -- even as the CDC warned its spread was inevitable -- may have hampered the administration's response. Instead of planning for outbreaks, early efforts focused on screening and quarantining only those people who had traveled to countries with known cases. "They were only looking at the piece that they chose to look at, not seeing the whole board," said Jeremy Konyndyk, a policy fellow at the Center for Global Development, a nonpartisan think tank, who helped manage the Obama administration's response to an Ebola outbreak in 2014. As a result, Konyndyk said, the Trump administration was slow to design tests that could deliver more results more quickly. South Korea, which has more than 4,000 confirmed cases, set up drive-through test centers that processed thousands of results while the CDC was mailing limited results to labs with three-day turnarounds. It was only this week that the Trump administration undertook aggressive steps to make more tests available and changed its rules to give more discretion to doctors to order tests for people who had not traveled to known hot spots. Trump's attempts to downplay the threat aimed in part to ease concerns in financial markets, which the president views as a strong selling point for his reelection. Before last week's stock market meltdown, share prices had soared to record levels and the economy appeared robust. But analysts are now bracing for a sharp slowdown, and fears have overtaken Wall Street. Financial markets are always to some degree a "referendum on the state of politics," said Joe Brusuelas, chief economist at the accounting firm RSM US. The toxic climate in Washington -- and finger-pointing from Democrats and Republicans as to who was politicizing the virus -- were probably a factor in "the mind-bending volatility of the markets," he said. "It's an expression of a lack of confidence in the government sector's ability to address this problem." Administration officials point to briefings by Fauci and other experts as proof they are deploying experienced scientists to direct the administration's response. To Trump's critics, the president's seesawing response to the outbreak reflects his deep skepticism of science and the federal government. When Trump said this virus could fade like the flu when the weather warms, although that is unknown, Robert Shapiro, chairman of consulting firm Sonecon, saw it "as part of a larger disposition by this administration to dismiss science." Whether the president believes the science is wrong or, as he has complained, is hyped by the media, he can do little about it. "He's met his match," said J. Stephen Morrison, who runs the Global Health Policy Center at the Center for Strategic and International Studies. "We don't know if this is a full pandemic, but this is a pretty dangerous outbreak." "It doesn't really respect a post-fact world." Caption: PHOTO: BY ALMOST any measure, President Trump's mixed messages have stirred anxieties and concerns that the administration lacks a coherent strategy. PHOTOGRAPHER:Tasos Katopodis Getty Images PHOTO:THE CORONAVIRUS threat is an undeniable reality that has frustrated President Trump as he confronts a fast-growing and unpredictable health crisis. PHOTOGRAPHER:Roberto Schmidt AFP/Getty Images 
Mar 6, 2020	For the last decade, the U.S. travel industry has been enjoying an unusually long stretch of growing demand, pushed by a strong economy and relatively cheap jet fuel. But the outbreak of the coronavirus that has killed more than 3,300 people and infected tens of thousands more is already projected to inflict billions of dollars in losses, representing the biggest hit to the $8.8-trillion global travel industry since the economic meltdown of 2008-09. Responding to government-imposed travel restrictions and a steep drop in demand, airlines have cut thousands of international and domestic flights, Walt Disney Co. has closed theme parks in China and Japan, and two of the world's biggest hotel chains have shuttered hotels in China. Cruise lines are either barring or imposing extra screening on any travelers who have visited 11 countries and regions where the virus has struck hardest.  "In my mind, this is worse than the financial crises, but hopefully not as bad as the 9/11 [terrorist attacks] when the whole industry stopped," said Roger Dow, president and chief executive of the U.S. Travel Assn., the trade group for the country's travel industry. "The numbers we are losing right now are monstrous." A trade group for the world's airlines Thursday dramatically increased its estimated loss in revenue to the airline industry, pushing the figure as high as $113 billion if the outbreak is not contained to the countries where reports of infections are heavy. The loss to U.S. and Canadian airlines could be as high as $21 billion, according to the estimate by the International Air Transport Assn. By comparison, the trade group had predicted last month that the worldwide losses would be about $30 billion. "Since that time, the virus has spread to over 80 countries and forward bookings have been severely impacted on routes beyond China," the trade group said in a statement. Travel and tourism are responsible for 319 million jobs worldwide, or about 1 of every 10 jobs, according to the World Travel and Tourism Council, a branch of the United Nations. Demand for air travel, hotel rooms and cruise trips has been growing relatively steady in the last decade, rebounding from such setbacks as horrific airline disasters in Indonesia and Ethiopia, a cruise ship sinking in Italy and a mass shooting in Las Vegas. But the coronavirus outbreak could have deeper and longer-lasting effects on travel not only because of how fast the infection has spread but also because the outbreak has centered on China, which in the last few years has grown as an economic powerhouse and as the world's fastest-growing source of international travelers. About 3 million Chinese travelers visited the U.S. in 2018, up from fewer than 1 million visitors in 2010, according to the U.S. Department of Commerce. With the spread of the virus, most inbound flights from China were halted at the end of January and cruise lines canceled sailings that serve Chinese ports. Airlines have also cut routes from Italy, Japan and South Korea, where new reports of infections have grown. The U.S. Travel Assn. predicted that the number of international visitors to the U.S. would drop by 6% over the next three months, the largest decline since the 2008-09 financial crisis. The effects have been widespread: * At Los Angeles International Airport, the total number of airline departures has dropped 3.9% in March, compared with the same month in 2019, according to Justin Erbacci, interim chief executive at the airport. Concession sales from restaurants and retail stores at the airport are also down 10%, he told a meeting of the Los Angeles City Council on Wednesday. * Tour operators in Los Angeles are reporting heavy cancellations at a time when the upcoming spring break travel period should represent a boost in business. "We have literally lost every single conference group we had," said Danny Roman, who operates a hiking and biking tour company called Bikes and Hikes. "Our entire spring lineup has canceled." * Walt Disney Co. has temporarily shuttered two parks in Japan -- Tokyo Disneyland and Tokyo DisneySea -- along with Hong Kong Disneyland and Shanghai Disneyland, the $5.5-billion park that opened in 2016. * Delta Air Lines, which had previously halted all service to China because of the virus, announced it would reduce the number of flights to Japan and South Korea because of a drop in demand. The Atlanta-based airline also announced it was temporarily suspending its daily flights from New York to Milan, Italy, and was delaying the start of seasonal service to Venice, Italy, by a month. * At United Airlines, the domestic schedule will be cut by 10% in April and international flying will be reduced by 20%, the Chicago-based carrier told employees Wednesday. The company also imposed a hiring freeze through June 30 and deferred merit-based salary increases for management until July 1. In addition, United said it will offer voluntary unpaid leaves of absence. * When Federal Reserve Board Chairman Jerome H. Powell announced Tuesday a cut to short-term interest rates of half a percentage point, he told reporters he had been prompted partly by concerns from business leaders, including those in the travel industry. "The effects are at a very early stage," he said. "But you are hearing concerns from people, for example, from the travel business or the hotel business." * Marriott International, one of the world's largest hotel companies, said in its Feb. 27 earnings report that it had closed 90 hotels in China because of the outbreak. Some of those hotels have since reopened, Marriott officials said. Hilton World Wide said in its Feb. 11 earnings report that the hotel giant had closed about 150 hotels in China, representing about 33,000 rooms. Dow said he was hopeful that travelers who had canceled plans to visit international destinations might instead stay in the U.S. for the upcoming spring break travel season. He also noted that 62 million people visit China each year, mostly from adjacent Asian countries, representing a group of travelers that Dow said might consider instead flying to the U.S. for a vacation. "We want people to know it's safe here," he said. Caption: PHOTO: DEMAND FOR air travel, hotel rooms and cruise trips has been growing for the last decade, but the coronavirus outbreak could have longer-lasting effects than any recent setback. Airlines have cut routes to and from affected areas, and some major hotels have closed. PHOTOGRAPHER:Luis Sinco Los Angeles Times 
Mar 6, 2020	As more consumers isolate themselves at home because of concerns about the new coronavirus, 23-year-old gamer Brian Silva hopes they'll entertain themselves by watching him online. The larger the audience he has, the more advertising dollars he'll earn from his Twitch channel, where he livestreams his "Fortnite" game play. "With coronavirus on the rise, no better time to follow me on Twitch!" Silva said on Twitter on Wednesday. "If you have to self quarantine, I'm streaming 5 days a week to keep you entertained," the Minnesota resident added.  The coronavirus, which has caused 12 U.S. deaths, including one in California, has hurt a wide spectrum of businesses. Airlines have reduced flights, large tech companies canceled conferences and movie theaters have suffered in South Korea and China. But there are a handful of businesses, including ones in home entertainment or food delivery, that may even be helped by the health scare. JC O'Hara, chief market technician for equity research at trading firm MKM Partners, compiled what he called a "Stay at Home" portfolio of stocks. Among the companies that he believed could hold up better against the coronavirus were online retail giant Amazon, streaming service Netflix, food delivery business Grubhub and gaming company Activision Blizzard. "We tried to identify what products/services/companies would potentially benefit in a world of quarantined individuals," O'Hara said in a report. "What would people do if stuck inside all day?" Some stocks of streaming services are performing well in a weak market. On Thursday, Netflix shares slipped 2.9% to $372.78 and Grubhub shares fell 2.2% to $51.62, compared with the S&P 500's 3.4% decline amid a broad market sell-off. Netflix declined to comment on whether it is seeing an increase in subscribers or time spent on its platform. Grubhub declined to comment. Some businesses in the space have already seen an increase in demand. Instacart, which offers same-day delivery of groceries and other items, said requests for health-related items rose in response to the virus' spread. "Over the last few days we've seen a surge in customer demand for pantry items such as powdered milk and canned goods, as well as personal-care products like hand sanitizer and vitamins," the company said. Some Amazon customers said delivery windows were no longer available for certain products and even California Gov. Gavin Newsom complained about the steep price of hand sanitizer sold on the company's website. Amazon did not respond to a request for comment. Meanwhile, John Stankey, AT&T's chief operating officer and president, in a conference this week acknowledged his TV business could see a boost. "Maybe if a few more people are going to be staying home, they might find more utility in watching TV for a period of time here that might help us in the short term," Stankey said. AT&T is launching its HBO Max streaming service in May. The combination of people not wanting to be near crowds and the allure of an almost infinite amount of programming available through streaming services can be appealing to people who choose to isolate themselves at home, said Robert Thompson, a director for the Bleier Center for Television and Popular Culture at Syracuse University. "Quarantine and bingeing are actually a match made in some macabre sort of heaven," Thompson said. Movies such as the 2011 thriller "Contagion" are gaining newfound popularity. The movie was the 270th most-watched film in the Warner Bros. catalog in December, and this year it is the second most-watched movie, the company said. If the coronavirus continues to spread, analysts believe U.S. consumers will adopt behavior similar to that of Chinese consumers. China this year has seen a surge in people downloading apps on their smartphones in such areas as games and entertainment, according to San Francisco mobile data and analytics firm App Annie. Weekly game app downloads on Apple devices last month were up 80% in China, compared with a monthly average of downloads for 2019, the company said. Already, some Californians like Rohit Kulkarni are changing their routines. Recently the equity analyst decided to play video games with his kids indoors instead of playing outdoor sports such as soccer. If the coronavirus continues to spread, he will probably skip going to the movie theater with the kids and watch a documentary on Netflix instead, said Kulkarni, who lives in San Mateo. "As you tend to stay at home more, you tend to watch more Netflix, you tend to order food in as there are more options to deliver food at home," he added. So far, since the coronavirus fears took hold, box office numbers have been down markedly in certain affected countries, including South Korea, Italy and Japan. Chinese theaters have been shut down for weeks. Ticket sales in South Korea are down about 70% from what they would normally be at this time of year, according to Bruce Nash, who runs data website The-Numbers.com. "We're losing China, we're seeing a big hole in South Korea, and we're down a little in Italy and Japan," Nash said. "And of course, looking forward, we have no idea what's going to happen. I suspect you're going to see reductions on a global basis over the next few weeks, and it all depends on how the disease breaks out." There's little indication yet that U.S. consumers are staying home from theaters. However, studios have canceled film premieres, delayed productions and pushed back release dates to respond to the global situation. The newest James Bond movie, "No Time To Die," was delayed until November, MGM said Wednesday. Businesses including WarnerMedia, Sony Pictures and Creative Artists Agency have also restricted travel for employees. Culver City-based Sony Pictures on Wednesday confirmed that it has restricted employee travel that is not for production or crucial to business. This includes international and domestic travel, including within the United States. Apple was among the companies that pulled out of the SXSW conference that was set to begin in Austin, Texas, next week, canceling showings of series "Home" and "Central Park" as well as documentaries "Beastie Boys Story" and "Boys State." Those programs will be airing on Apple's streaming service, Apple TV+. Netflix also has withdrawn from the conference. The silver lining is that Apple TV+ and other new streaming services could see an upswing in home viewing, said Brahm Eiley, president of Victoria, Canada-based Convergence Research Group. "Ultimately, it could drive more and more people to stay home and to stream," Eiley said. "It probably will have an impact; the question is how much that impact will really be." If the outbreak disrupts releases for only the next few weeks, studios may be able to adapt by shuffling certain films for later in the year, Nash said. However, some have speculated that if theaters are shut down on a larger scale for a long period, studios may consider putting releases out through premium video on demand. "Overall consumer spending on movies tends to be fairly flat," Nash said. "If the virus takes $1 billion out of the box office, that billion dollars in consumer spending could shift to streaming services. I think it's kind of a zero-sum game, unless things get really out of control." -- Times staff writer James Peltz contributed to this report. Caption: PHOTO: NETFLIX and other streaming services could see demand rise if the coronavirus keeps people home. PHOTOGRAPHER:AFP via Getty Images PHOTO:A GRUHUB order is filled at Colony in Los Angeles, a kitchen where restaurants prepare meals for delivery. A health scare could aid food delivery businesses. PHOTOGRAPHER:Patrick T. Fallon For The Times 
Mar 5, 2020	Gov. Gavin Newsom declared a state of emergency over the novel coronavirus after a California man died after falling ill with the virus while on a cruise ship. Officials are trying to locate hundreds of other Californians who disembarked from the Grand Princess ship in San Francisco last month after a trip to Mexico. Officials want to determine whether they also might have contracted the virus. That same ship, after a subsequent trip to Hawaii, canceled its stop in Baja California and was scheduled to return early to San Francisco on Wednesday, but it was being held off the coast so public health officials could screen everyone onboard, the governor said. Some passengers on the vessel — both current and those exposed earlier — told The Times the response by the company and health officials has been filled with missteps. In particular, passengers interviewed by the Times said the company, Princess Cruises, was lax on health screening protocols prior to boarding and withheld information about the risks they faced, even as the ship’s condition became international news. The virus has now been reported in 12 counties in the state and has sickened more than 50 people. Newsletter Get our Coronavirus Today newsletter Sign up for the latest news, best stories and what they mean for you, plus answers to your questions. Sign Me Up You may occasionally receive promotional content from the Los Angeles Times. Newsom said he felt confident that the state could prevent the virus from being spread by passengers of the cruise who already had returned to California. “We have the resources,” Newsom said. “We have the capacity. By this evening, we will have contacted every county health official that has someone who came off this cruise. They will have their contact information and begin a process to contact those individuals.” Newsom said his emergency declaration is intended to help California prepare for and contain the spread of the coronavirus by allowing state agencies to more easily procure equipment and services, share information on patients and alleviate restrictions on the use of state-owned properties and facilities. “This proclamation, I want to point out, is not about money,” Newsom said of the emergency declaration. “It’s about resourcefulness. It’s about our ability to add tools to the tool kit.” Placer County public health officials announced that patient who had tested positive for COVID-19 after returning from a cruise to Mexico last month died. The individual, later identified as a 71-year-old Rocklin resident, had underlying health conditions and was the county’s second confirmed case of COVID-19, reported Tuesday night. Officials said close contacts of the patient were being quarantined and monitored for the illness. The person’s likely exposure occurred during travel on a Princess Cruises ship that departed Feb. 10 from San Francisco and sailed to Mexico, returning Feb. 21, officials said. The patient tested positive Tuesday and had been placed in isolation at Kaiser Permanente Roseville Medical Center. The person probably had minimal community exposure between returning from the cruise and arriving at the hospital by ambulance Thursday, health officials said. Ten Kaiser Permanente healthcare workers and five emergency responders, who were exposed before the patient was put in isolation, are now in quarantine. None of those 15 workers is exhibiting symptoms, officials said. It’s possible that other cruise passengers may have been exposed, officials said. Placer County Public Health is working closely with Sacramento County Public Health and the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention to identify and contact other cruise passengers. By one estimate, more than 50% of the roughly 2,500 passengers who traveled from San Francisco to Mexico and back on the cruise ship with the Placer County victim are Californians, Newsom said. “We extend our deepest condolences to the loved ones of this patient,” Placer County health officer Dr. Aimee Sisson said. “While we have expected more cases, this death is an unfortunate milestone in our efforts to fight this disease, and one that we never wanted to see. “While most cases of COVID-19 exhibit mild or moderate symptoms, this tragic death underscores the urgent need for us to take extra steps to protect residents who are particularly vulnerable to developing more serious illness, including elderly persons and those with underlying health conditions.” Sisson said the resident first developed symptoms while on the cruise and continued to show symptoms while traveling through the Port of San Francisco. The individual called 911 and was taken to the hospital Thursday, then tested for COVID-19 on Sunday. The results returned positive Tuesday, and the patient died Wednesday morning, Sisson said. Placer County has six pending tests for COVID-19, and Sisson said she expects to see cases of community transmission soon. “I urge Placer County residents to be vigilant and to take steps to protect themselves,” Sisson said. “Wash your hands. Wash your hands. Wash your hands…. We are not at the point where I would consider canceling events, closing schools or requiring widespread distancing measures, but we do want the public to prepare for that possibility.” Sisson recommended that residents have two weeks of supplies on hand in case they are asked to quarantine. Rocklin Fire Chief Bill Hack said emergency responders are wearing protective masks and goggles when responding to 911 calls until it is clear whether a person has respiratory symptoms that could indicate COVID-19. Three of the five emergency responders who have been quarantined related to the Placer County death are Rocklin city firefighters. “They’re obviously being hyper-vigilant that if they start to become symptomatic they know what to look for and they know what steps to take,” Hack said. “They’re in good spirits at this point.” Placer County is requesting that any other individuals who were on the Grand Princess cruise to Mexico self-quarantine. Princess Cruises said it was notified by the CDC that it is investigating a small cluster of cases in Northern California among guests who sailed on the Grand Princess Mexican voyage. The next voyage on the boat was canceled. The company said 62 guests on that voyage remain onboard for the trip to Hawaii that was returning to San Francisco after canceling its stop in Ensenada, Mexico. Eleven passengers and 10 crew members on the boat were showing symptoms Wednesday, the governor said. “That number may significantly understate” the scope of infection, he said, or “it may indeed be abundance of caution.” The state will contact every county health official with passengers in their area by Wednesday night, he said. Newsom addressed the death shortly after the announcement. “Jennifer and I extend our deepest condolences to the family and loved ones affected by this death in Placer County,” he said in a statement. “The state is working with federal officials to follow up on contact tracing of individuals that may have been exposed to provide treatment and protect public health. “This case demonstrates the need for continued local, state and federal partnership to identify and slow the spread of this virus. California is working around the clock to keep our communities safe, healthy and informed.” Newsom previously requested that the Legislature make $20 million available for the state to respond to the coronavirus and announced the California Department of Public Health is dipping into its reserves of millions of N95 masks to distribute to healthcare workers on the front lines of the coronavirus fights. Newsom said Wednesday that a coronavirus lab test is now considered an essential benefit covered by government-sponsored health plans and private insurers. The governor added he is also extending price gouging protections in response to Amazon vendors’ taking advantage of people seeking hand sanitizer and other in-demand goods. Los Angeles County, meanwhile, declared a health emergency Wednesday as the number of coronavirus cases in the county increased to seven, including six new patients. None of the new cases are believed to be “community spread,"officials said. All individuals were exposed to COVID-19 through close contacts with others who were infected. The additional cases were confirmed Tuesday night. Officials said three of the new cases were travelers who had visited northern Italy, two were family members who had close contact with a person outside of the county who was infected, and one had a job that put them in contact with travelers. One patient has been hospitalized, and the others are isolated at home. Additionally, the cities of Pasadena and Long Beach are declaring public health emergencies related to the novel coronavirus. There are currently no confirmed cases of the virus in either city. The county’s move comes as the government has increased testing, which officials have warned will result in the identification of a significant number of new cases. L.A. joins a growing number of California jurisdictions to take health-emergency action, which is designed to better marshal resources from across government agencies and give the fight against the virus more focus. “I want to reiterate this is not a response rooted in panic,” L.A. County Supervisor Kathryn Barger said at a news briefing. “We need every tool at our disposal.” Supervisor Hilda Solis acknowledged the ongoing spread of misinformation about the virus and xenophobia toward Asian communities. “There’s been too much misinformation spreading around,” Solis said. “As we expected, it’s cultivating fears and leading to racial profiling.” Los Angeles County will increase its capacity for testing of the virus at its public health laboratory. Officials will begin daily radio briefings for the public, post new guidelines for schools and colleges, and over the next week will send “technical assistance teams” to make site visits to temporary housing facilities including homeless shelters. Officials urged the public to frequently wash their hands, opt for verbal salutations in place of hugs and handshakes and try to maintain a distance of six feet from strangers. “We have to be prepared. We have to protect the well-being of our loved ones and our neighbors,” Los Angeles Mayor Eric Garcetti said. Officials said they had tested more than two dozen people for COVID-19 before these recent test results came back positive and reiterated that there had been no sign of community spread in the county. “I want to reassure everyone — we are not there today,” L.A. County Department of Public Health Director Barbara Ferrer said. A screener of incoming flights from China and surrounding countries at Los Angeles International Airport is among the new cases that have tested positive for coronavirus in L.A. County, according to two sources familiar with the report. The screener, who is attached to the CDC, last worked Feb. 21 at LAX and, after developing potential symptoms, alerted medical professionals and authorities. The person was formally identified Tuesday as having the COVID-19 virus and so far has a mild case and is isolated at home. Family members of the person have also been tested, according to one of the sources. So far, nothing has been done to change intake at the airport. Sources say the person was wearing protective clothing during the screening process. Marin County health officials Tuesday declared a local health emergency despite there being no cases of coronavirus reported among county residents. San Francisco, which has no reported cases, and Orange County, which has three cases, declared health emergencies last week. The move comes amid more sobering news about the spread of the virus in the United States, including nine deaths in Washington state, a new quarantine in the suburbs of New York City and a warning that more cases are on the horizon. “I want them to be prepared for the reality that they, there are going to be more cases in the community,” said Dr. Robert Redfield, director of the CDC. “But I want them to continue their daily lives. I want them to be mindful of the opportunity again to prepare themselves and their families.” The World Health Organization announced Tuesday that the global mortality rate from coronavirus had risen to 3.4%, with more than 3,000 fatalities. The death rate so far is many times higher than the mortality rate of the seasonal flu, which is 0.1%. WHO Director-General Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus said that is at least partly because COVID-19 is a new disease, and no one has built up an immunity to it. Still, he and other health officials said there was still time to slow the spread of the virus. Officials say they have learned the coronavirus is less transmissible than the flu, which is often spread by people who are infected yet don’t have symptoms. That doesn’t seem to be the case for COVID-19, he said. “There are not yet any vaccines or therapeutics … which is why we must do everything we can to contain it,” Tedros said. Earlier reports had pointed to a mortality rate of about 2% for COVID-19. Experts say they suspect all analyses so far have overestimated the disease’s fatality rate because milder cases are largely not being diagnosed. In 80% of people, the disease causes only mild illness, experts say. More than 50 people in California have the virus, with new cases reported in Berkeley and Santa Clara, Placer and Orange counties. Kaiser Permanente announced late Tuesday it was treating a patient in Los Angeles. The city of Berkeley said its case involved an individual who visited a country with an outbreak. That person has remained at home in a self-imposed quarantine since returning. “While the risk of infection remains low, the expanded presence of the virus in our community is a reality we should all prepare for,” said Berkeley’s public health officer, Dr. Lisa Hernandez. “There are steps that all of us in the community can take now to improve basic hygiene and also prepare for a wider spread in the future.” In Orange County, two cases are pending confirmation from the CDC. The cases involve a man in his 60s and a woman in her 30s who had both recently traveled to countries with widespread transmission, according to the Orange County Health Care Agency. Santa Clara County announced three more cases of coronavirus Wednesday, bringing the total count there to 14 — the highest number of cases in the sate. One is a man who’s currently hospitalized. The source of his exposure to the virus is currently under investigation. Two other men are close contacts of an existing case. California is also speeding up testing of possible coronavirus patients. This more aggressive testing, Newsom said, “may lead to a more rapid increase in the number of confirmed cases reported. That is not necessarily a sign that the rate of infection is increasing, but that our ability to test more people more rapidly is leading to better detection.” Dr. Mike Ryan, who runs WHO‘s emergencies program, pushed back against officials who wanted to “wave the white flag” and surrender to the disease’s hold. China took drastic steps to fight the virus, he said, and case numbers are now on the decline there. Countries such as China and South Korea “implemented very, very strong measures that have affected their own economies and their own societies,” Ryan said. “It’s really a duty of others to use the time that has been bought. Dr. Anthony Fauci, director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, said there remained many unknowns about the virus, including the degree to which people who do not express symptoms can transmit it to others. He said doctors know that it happens but have not yet gauged the extent, a key piece of data that will help determine decisions on how to contain it. Fauci said that Chinese data are believed to be accurate and that the spread of the virus there is slowing thanks to “draconian” methods that would never occur in the United States, including stringent travel and public gathering restrictions. “They have taken social distancing to its furthest extreme,” he said. Times staff writers Noah Bierman, Rong-Gong Lin II , Hannah Fry, Taryn Luna, Phil Willon, Richard Winton and Melody Gutierrez contributed to this report. 
Mar 5, 2020	As more consumers isolate themselves at home because of concerns about the new coronavirus, 23-year-old gamer Brian Silva hopes they’ll entertain themselves by watching him online. The larger the audience he has, the more advertising dollars he’ll earn from his Twitch channel, where he livestreams his “Fortnite” gameplay. “With coronavirus on the rise, no better time to follow me on Twitch!” Silva said Wednesday on Twitter. “If you have to self quarantine, I’m streaming 5 days a week to keep you entertained,” the Minnesota resident added. The coronavirus, which has caused 12 U.S. deaths, including one in California, has hurt a wide spectrum of businesses. Airlines have reduced flights, large tech companies canceled conferences and movie theaters have suffered in South Korea and China. But there are a handful of businesses, including ones in home entertainment or food delivery, that may even be helped by the health scare. JC O’Hara, chief market technician for equity research at trading firm MKM Partners, compiled what he called a “Stay at Home” portfolio of stocks. Among the list of companies that he believed could hold up better against the coronavirus was online retail giant Amazon, streaming service Netflix, food delivery business Grubhub and gaming company Activision Blizzard. “We tried to identify what products/services/companies would potentially benefit in a world of quarantined individuals,” O’Hara said in a report. “What would people do if stuck inside all day?” Some stocks of streaming services are performing well in a weak market. On Thursday, Netflix shares slipped 2.9% to $372.78 and Grubhub shares fell 2.2% to $51.62, compared with the S&P 500’s 3.4% decline amid a broad market sell-off. Netflix declined to comment on whether it is seeing an increase in subscribers or time spent on its platform. Grubhub declined to comment. Some businesses in the space have already seen an increase in demand. Instacart, which offers same-day delivery of groceries and other items, said requests for health-related items rose in response to the virus’ spread. “Over the last few days we’ve seen a surge in customer demand for pantry items such as powdered milk and canned goods, as well as personal-care products like hand sanitizer and vitamins,” the company said. Some Amazon customers said delivery windows were no longer available for certain products and even California Gov. Gavin Newsom complained about the steep price of hand sanitizer sold on the company’s website. Amazon did not respond to a request for comment. Meanwhile, John Stankey, AT&T’s chief operating officer and president, in a conference this week acknowledged his TV business could see a boost. “Maybe if a few more people are going to be staying home, they might find more utility in watching TV for a period of time here that might help us in the short term,” Stankey said. AT&T is launching its HBO Max streaming service in May. The combination of people not wanting to be near crowds and the allure of an almost infinite amount of programming available through streaming services can be appealing to people who choose to isolate themselves at home, said Robert Thompson, a director for the Bleier Center for Television and Popular Culture at Syracuse University. “Quarantine and bingeing are actually a match made in some macabre sort of heaven,” Thompson said. Movies such as the 2011 thriller “Contagion” are gaining newfound popularity. The movie was the 270th most watched film in the Warner Bros. catalog in December, and this year it is the second most watched movie, the company said. If the coronavirus continues to spread, analysts believe U.S. consumers will adopt behavior similar to that of Chinese consumers. China this year has seen a surge in people downloading apps on their smartphones in such areas as games and entertainment, according to San Francisco mobile data and analytics firm App Annie. Weekly game app downloads on Apple devices last month were up 80% in China, compared with a monthly average of downloads for 2019, the company said. Already, some Californians like Rohit Kulkarni are changing their routines. Recently the equity analyst decided to play video games with his kids indoors instead of playing outdoor sports such as soccer. If the coronavirus continues to spread, he will probably skip going to the movie theater with the kids and watch a documentary on Netflix instead, said Kulkarni, who lives in San Mateo. “As you tend to stay at home more, you tend to watch more Netflix, you tend to order food in as there are more options to deliver food at home,” he added. So far, since the coronavirus fears took hold, box office numbers have been down markedly in certain affected countries, including South Korea, Italy and Japan. Chinese theaters have been shut down for weeks. Ticket sales in South Korea are down about 70% from what they would normally be at this time of year, according to Bruce Nash, who runs data website The-Numbers.com. “We’re losing China, we’re seeing a big hole in South Korea, and we’re down a little in Italy and Japan,” Nash said. “And of course, looking forward, we have no idea what’s going to happen. I suspect you’re going to see reductions on a global basis over the next few weeks, and it all depends on how the disease breaks out.” There’s little indication yet that U.S. consumers are staying home from theaters. However, studios have canceled film premieres, delayed productions and pushed back release dates to respond to the global situation. The newest James Bond movie, “No Time To Die,” was delayed until November, MGM said Wednesday. Businesses including WarnerMedia, Sony Pictures and Creative Artists Agency have also restricted travel for employees. Culver City-based Sony Pictures on Wednesday confirmed that it has restricted employee travel that is not for production or crucial to business. This includes international and domestic travel, including within the United States. Apple was among the companies that pulled out of the SXSW conference that was set to begin in Austin, Texas, next week, canceling showings of series “Home” and “Central Park” as well as documentaries “Beastie Boys Story” and “Boys State.” Those programs will be airing on Apple’s streaming service, Apple TV+. Netflix also has withdrawn from the conference. The silver lining is that Apple TV+ and other new streaming services could see an upswing in home viewing, said Brahm Eiley, president of Victoria, Canada-based Convergence Research Group. “Ultimately, it could drive more and more people to stay home and to stream,” Eiley said. “It probably will have an impact; the question is how much that impact will really be.” If the outbreak disrupts releases for only the next few weeks, studios may be able to adapt by shuffling certain films for later in the year, Nash said. However, some have speculated that if theaters are shut down on a larger scale for a long period, studios may consider putting releases out through premium video on demand. “Overall consumer spending on movies tends to be fairly flat,” Nash said. “If the virus takes $1 billion out of the box office, that billion dollars in consumer spending could shift to streaming services. I think it’s kind of a zero-sum game, unless things get really out of control.” Times staff writer James Peltz contributed to this report. 
Mar 5, 2020	Much of the sports world is already dealing with a new reality: life amid the coronavirus outbreak. Major competitions have been postponed, moved or canceled throughout Asia. In Italy, government officials announced that no fans may attend sporting events, including big-time soccer matches, for at least a month. Could the same thing happen closer to home?  Los Angeles County declared a health emergency Wednesday, with officials discussing the possibility of banning spectators from stadiums and arenas across the region. In other parts of the U.S., the NBA and Major League Baseball have issued safety recommendations and at least two colleges are skipping games. All of this comes as crowds are expected to flock to spring training baseball and the upcoming NCAA men's and women's basketball tournaments. "If at any point we think that there's good reason for us to be worried about extensive, extensive community transmission ... we may ask for modifications at large public events," L.A. County health director Barbara Ferrer said. "This could be that games are played but there are no spectators. This could be that there are limits to how people are going to gather at public events." As Dodgers President Stan Kasten said: "None of it is great news, but they have stressed also that this is not a time to be panicking." The current version of the coronavirus, COVID-19, has infected more than 95,000 people and killed more than 3,200 worldwide since it was first detected in China late last year. There have been 157 reported cases and 11 deaths in 16 U.S. states, according to the COVID-19 database of Johns Hopkins. California reported its first death -- an elderly adult with underlying health issues -- on Wednesday. Globally, the outbreak has forced schedule and location changes for soccer games, car races, a cycling tour and other competitions. At a news conference on Wednesday, the leader of the International Olympic Committee faced a barrage of questions about the 2020 Summer Games, which are scheduled to begin in Tokyo on July 24. Though many countries have been forced to delay qualifying events, the IOC has said on numerous occasions that, in consultation with the World Health Organization, it expects the Games to take place as planned. "I can assure you I will not get tired of repeating the statement I made," IOC President Thomas Bach told reporters. "The IOC is fully committed, and we are not participating in any kind of speculation." Some health experts agree it is too early to make any predictions about the spread and lethality of the virus over the next six months. Others have expressed concern about the prospect of large public gatherings. There is a history of external forces disrupting the sports world. The Olympics were canceled three times during the first and second World Wars. NFL games were played but not televised following John F. Kennedy's assassination in 1963 and baseball halted games for almost a week after the Sept. 11, 2001, terrorist attacks. This time, American sports officials have reacted cautiously, instituting relatively minor changes while vowing to consult with health officials, monitor the situation and take steps as necessary. Few have been willing to discuss the potential for drastic action, though Kasten acknowledged: "We could, in the extreme, wind up either canceling games or holding games without spectators." College basketball faces a particular challenge with men's and women's conference tournaments and March Madness prompting hundreds of thousands of fans to follow their teams around the country in coming weeks. Staples Center is scheduled to host a men's West Regional beginning March 26. "As a result of the latest briefing update from the Los Angeles County Public Health Department, we have posted messaging throughout our venues reminding fans to engage in safe hygiene practices and to stay home if they feel unwell," a Staples Center statement read. "We also have increased access to hand sanitizers throughout the building." A campus task force at Stanford has recommended postponing or adjusting events through mid-April. Other schools, such as Chicago State University, have canceled road trips and some home games. The NCAA has established an advisory panel to address the issue. "Today we are planning to conduct our championships as planned," Chief Operating Officer Donald Remy said in a statement. "However, we are evaluating the COVID-19 situation daily and will make decisions accordingly." This announcement follows an NBA memo that was circulated among teams and later obtained by The Times. It recommends that players limit physical contact with fans, meaning no high-fives or accepting pens and other items for autographs. "I think everybody has a common sense feel of what's being reported and what's out there," Lakers coach Frank Vogel said after a practice Wednesday, "and we all have to be cautious." Before the Clippers' game Tuesday night in Oklahoma City, reserve guard Lou Williams was signing autographs for fans who leaned over the tunnel railing. As soon as he finished, a team security guard waiting nearby squirted a glob of sanitizer into his hands. One NBA official called it a "fist-bump-only league right now." Major League Baseball has issued similar advice during spring training, a time when teams make an effort to interact with fans after games or at special events. Players have been told to get flu shots and avoid taking balls or pens from spectators; teams have been warned about disinfecting clubhouses. "Would you tell our players to carry their own Sharpie for autographs?" Kasten said. "I'm going to ask more doctors before we carry out a policy." Additional concerns have been raised about scouts traveling overseas. Tampa Bay Rays first baseman Ji-Man Choi, who is from South Korea, has reportedly been giving interviews to media from his homeland away from the rest of the team, saying: "I just want to be cautious, especially around the players." The NHL has banned business travel outside of North America for its employees and will quarantine scouts returning from Europe. Though there are no plans for postponing the playoffs next month, NHL Commissioner Gary Bettman told the Canadian Press that the situation is "day to day" and that the league is "aware of and focused on all possibilities." The NFL, which has its draft in late April, said it is similarly monitoring developments. Locally, the 2020 L.A. Marathon is scheduled for Sunday and organizers are offering to defer entries until next year for runners who must travel from affected countries. This comes shortly after the Tokyo Marathon abruptly downsized its field to elite and wheelchair athletes only. Otherwise, official responses from Southern California pro teams and university athletic departments followed a similar theme: a wait-and-see approach amid daily news reports. A spokesman for AEG, which operates Staples Center and Dignity Health Sports Park where teams from the NBA, WNBA, NHL, MLS and XFL play, said his company will follow the guidelines set forth by health and county officials. For now, "the teams are being administered essentially by the league," said AEG's Michael Roth, who pointed out while one league might postpone games, another could play as scheduled. "We're providing a safe and clean venue for everybody, and if the team shows up to play, if the league wants to play, we're opening our doors." A spokesman for LAFC, which consistently sells out its 22,000-seat stadium in Exposition Park, said the conference call with county health officials included some discussion of worst-case scenarios. "And obviously the worst is the city can come in and cancel events," said Seth Burton, the team's vice president of communications. "And another option would be for games to be played with no fans. "Everyone knows that could happen," he continued. "But, hopefully, we're not there yet." -- Times staff writers Kevin Baxter, Mike DiGiovanna, Ryan Kartje, Jeff Miller, Andrew Greif, Soumya Karlamangla, Helene Elliott, Arash Markazi and Jack Harris contributed to this report. 
Mar 5, 2020	To shake or not to shake. That is the question bedeviling billions around the world as the coronavirus spreads nefariously from continent to continent. Whether it's still safe to shake hands in the age of the epidemic is an especially touchy issue in Germany and across Europe, where the handshake custom is thought to have originated more than 2,000 years ago and it's arguably more commonplace than anywhere else. Angst about the wisdom of continuing such a deeply entrenched tradition before and after essentially every meeting of friends, family and business partners is spreading across Europe as fast as the virus itself. In Germany, even its leader, Chancellor Angela Merkel, felt a need to weigh in on the issue Friday evening with a message to all Germans -- not shaking is OK now.  "I'm not going to shake anyone's hand tonight," Merkel said bluntly at the end of a speech to about 400 local business leaders and constituents in her electoral district of Stralsund, where she would normally be expected to press the flesh with hundreds, if not quite all those in attendance. She urged Germans to stay calm and respond prudently to the epidemic that spread to Europe from Asia in recent weeks. There are now 262 confirmed cases of coronavirus in Germany -- although no deaths have been reported -- and the number has been rising daily. "Germany is among the countries with the best possible conditions to deal with this virus," she said, just hours after Berlin organizers announced that the world's biggest travel convention, the March 4-8 ITB Berlin, was being canceled even though 160,000 people from around the world were expected. "Not every event needs to be canceled. And on top of that, every single one of us can make a contribution," she said, before making the reference to not shaking hands. The Western custom of shaking hands is believed to date to antiquity. A funeral stone from the 5th century BC on display in Berlin's Pergamon Museum shows two Greek soldiers shaking hands. The act was believed to be a symbol of peace -- to show that that neither man was carrying a weapon in his right hand. Some historians have said the shaking gesture was added by knights in the Middle Ages as a way to probe if any knives were being concealed up the other person's sleeve and could be shaken out. Whatever the origins of the gesture now considered a polite and almost essential way to greet someone in many Western cultures, it is the ubiquitous manner in which Germans of essentially all ages introduce themselves. It's customary for Germans to shake hands when they meet someone for the first time, as is the case in many other countries. But foreigners are often bewildered by how widespread handshaking is here: Germans will also often shake hands with everyone in the room at the start and end of meetings -- as well as on their birthdays with just about everyone in the office or even the entire building. Children readily learn the ins and outs of haendeschuetteln from a preschool age and every member of a soccer, basketball or volleyball team will usually shake hands with everyone else before and after every practice or game. Construction workers and tradesmen often spend the first five or 10 minutes of their shifts shaking hands with everyone on site -- and repeat the practice at quitting time. There is also a strict etiquette that men have to first offer their hand to women present before shaking hands with any other men around, and that those with a higher rank in the pecking order are supposed to initiate the handshake. Also, it is generally impolite for the younger person involved to initiate the handshake. These rules occasionally lead to awkwardly comical scenes where Germans are seen thrusting but then dramatically withdrawing in embarrassment their outstretched arms when they realize either a woman or a more senior man is discovered standing nearby. To decline an invitation to shake an outstretched hand is considered a serious insult in Germany -- and President's Trump intentional or unintentional avoidance of Merkel's hand at the White House in March 2017 continues to reverberate as the ultimate rebuke in the German media. Trump later said he did not hear photographers asking for the two leaders to shake hands. "I've been avoiding shaking anyone's hand lately because of the coronavirus," said Dagmar Rettkowski, a 72-year-old retired airline worker who used to shake scores of hands with everyone on her Berlin volleyball team -- and recalled that in Communist East Germany shaking hands was even more prevalent than in reunited Germany. "Now I just smile, raise my arm and wave and say 'hello' to everyone. It works fine." German companies such as Volkswagen and Lufthansa have issued warnings to their employees to refrain from shaking hands with colleagues and customers. "Do not shake other people's hands and try to avoid contact with doorknobs as well as pens and other belongings from other people," Lufthansa wrote in a medical advisory to employees in Germany. Posters reading " Hoeflich ohne Haendedruck - Machen Sie mit" (Being polite without shaking hands -- take part) were seen at Volkswagen plants, according to Bild newspaper. The coach of German professional soccer team TSV 1860 Muenchen, Michael Koellner, said last week that he and his players would no longer shake hands with one another or opposing teams before and after games and hoped the entire Bundesliga professional league would follow suit. "I've stopped shaking hands with patients, and I've been trying to avoid shaking anyone's hand anymore, even though it's sometimes almost impossible to avoid," said Martina Henrich, a general practitioner in Berlin. "People can pass along more germs shaking hands than through kissing. In times like this, I'd urge everyone to avoid unnecessary hand-shaking." That's a message Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu was evidently trying to spread last week when he declined to shake hands at a campaign event in Hebron. Instead, he reportedly bowed and offered the Hindu greeting "namaste" -- which is made by placing the palms together, thumbs against the chest and head bowed. Handshakes are considered a Western custom in many Asian countries and so, aside from handshake-filled business meetings, the issue may not be as pressing. Bowing at a 45-degree angle is considered the polite salutation in Japan while bows or nods without physical contact are sufficient in South Korea, Taiwan and elsewhere. There is also a Chinese greeting that involves making a fist with one hand and using the other hand to cup it. "In a lot of other countries and cultures, people tend to shake hands far less than we do in Germany," said Markus Fruehwein in an interview. The Munich physician and tropical medicine expert said he had been avoiding handshakes. "If you're looking for ways to help prevent the spread of illnesses, skipping the handshake and offering a smile instead is a good idea. It sometimes doesn't go down well when you pull back from shaking hands with patients, but most understand it now." "Usually it's completely normal to shake hands as a sign of respect and appreciation, but who would really want to endanger someone else so unnecessarily?" said Barbara Engelmann, a 56-year-old Berlin teacher. "A friendly smile and being direct about the issue works wonders. I've had nothing but good experience so far in turning down handshakes like that." Along with smiles instead of handshakes, some Europeans are switching to fist bumps, elbow bumps, hat tips and simple nods. Others are hoping for the coronavirus to pass soon enough so that no one will be afraid of shaking hands anymore. "I think this is just going to be a temporary adjustment in behavior because of the coronavirus situation," said Cem Oezdemir, a leader in the Greens party, in an interview that took place without a handshake. "I don't think shaking hands will disappear forever from Germany. It's part of who we are. It makes sense to refrain now. But I'm sure it'll come back and I'm looking forward to it because shaking hands is an important part of my job." Caption: PHOTO: ANGELA Merkel, right, with other leaders in December, told Germans it is OK not to shake hands. PHOTOGRAPHER:Peter Nicholls Pool Photo Credit: Kirschbaum is a special correspondent. 
Mar 5, 2020	Beyond short-term economic disruptions and increased recession worries, the spreading coronavirus is sowing the seeds of a broad transformation of the global supply chains that for years brought low consumer prices and high corporate profits on products such as cellphones, computers and household goods. China looks to be the biggest loser as U.S. producers step up plans to reduce their reliance on the world's second-biggest economy, which has long enjoyed a central, dominant role in an international manufacturing network that ships parts and materials back and forth among different countries before assembling them into finished products. A slow U.S. exodus from China was already underway because of soaring wages in China and President Trump's trade and tech wars, with companies such as Apple announcing plans last year to diversify its manufacturing, which was heavily reliant on China. Trump's punitive tariffs on Chinese imports and the increasingly broad bipartisan support in the U.S. to get tough with Beijing have added to the cost and political pressure for companies operating in China.  "If any company was thinking of moving, they're now really exploring it or working on an executed plan," said Ethan Harris, global economist at Bank of America Merrill Lynch. For many American companies, the coronavirus crisis has highlighted the downside of their dependency on China. Supply lines have been crippled by quarantines, factory closings, travel restrictions and other stringent measures taken by China and other countries to contain the outbreak. Some companies that previously relocated parts of their operations to Vietnam and elsewhere have been able to offset some of their lost production capacity. But the sharp decline in China's globally leading manufacturing economy has had widespread knock-on effects. Apple, Microsoft and Procter & Gamble are among many corporations that have warned of weaker-than-expected profits because of their exposure to China. Worries about prolonged supply disruptions were partly behind last week's stock market meltdown. P&G, for example, said it has 387 suppliers in China that ship 9,000 materials globally, affecting about 17,600 finished products. A recent BofA survey showed just how wide the remapping of supply chains may be. Analysts who cover 3,000 firms reported that companies in 10 out of 12 global industries, including semiconductors, autos and medical equipment, have shifted, or plan to shift, at least part of their supply chains from current locations. China is almost certain to take the biggest hit because of its outsized role. South Asia and Mexico may have the most to gain. "These movements are tectonic," Harris said. Bhawnesh Mathur, chief executive of Masterwork Electronics, is starting to look more at Mexico. The Chula Vista company already has a plant in Mexicali, as well as one in Sonoma County, Calif. Those two facilities make printed circuit boards and other electronics assemblies for various manufacturers, using relays, connectors and many other components imported from China. Masterwork contracts with about 100 factories in China. Before the virus outbreak, the company could place an order and have it confirmed in two to four days. Last month, Mathur said, it was taking two to three weeks -- and even then, they couldn't say when the products would be shipped. Mathur had been thinking about reconfiguring his supply chain: He was feeling the heat from the Trump administration's 25% tariffs on many machinery parts from China, as well as the rising political pressure in America to bring industrial production of things such as electronic circuit boards closer to home. Now with the coronavirus, he said, "there will be changes." China hawks in the Trump administration couldn't be happier. Some of them have been blunt in saying that the coronavirus provides an opportunity for a U.S. decoupling from China. Trump has sent more mixed messages about U.S. business relations with China, but he also has echoed remarks that drugmakers should diversify and overhaul supply chains, which today rely heavily on Chinese pharmaceutical ingredients. "A lot of the coronavirus shows the importance of bringing manufacturing back to America so that we are producing at home the medicines and equipment and everything else that we need to protect the public's health," Trump said Monday at a White House meeting with drug company executives. But few predict a manufacturing renaissance is on the horizon for America. Nor is a mass retreat from China likely to be swift. It took decades to build the current industrial ecosystem, and China's huge labor force and superior infrastructure will be hard to replace or re-create anytime soon, if ever. Still, there have been growing worries that supply chains were too concentrated or getting stretched thin. Over the years, automation helped companies manage inventories so they have just enough materials and parts on hand to meet immediate needs, with goods arriving just in time. That freed up cash for other uses. But this innovation also made the system more vulnerable. In 2011, a powerful earthquake and tsunami in Japan struck a large swath of the country's eastern coastland, temporarily closing key producers of sensors and other electronic parts for the auto industry. The effect was that car assembly operations as far away as Louisiana had to cut production. Since then, some Japanese producers have added backup facilities in other countries. Overall, however, the situation has only "marginally improved," said Joel Scheiman, a veteran analyst for MF Global Holdings in Tokyo. With Japan, South Korea and Italy now dealing with rising caseloads of the disease, there could be more and longer disruptions to global supply lines. China does a lot of manufacturing for Japan and South Korea, but Chinese factories also depend on them for parts. In recent days China has largely reopened for business, although employees remain wary of returning. Companies in hard-hit Hubei province -- epicenter of the novel coronavirus outbreak -- are set to resume operations March 10. U.S. manufacturers including Nike and Ashley Furniture have reduced their exposure to China, mostly by turning to Vietnam and others in Southeast Asia. Reliance on China, however, remains very high for a host of consumer products, including electronics. Many of the world's cellphones, for example, come from China, even though the coding and communication chips that make them "smart" are produced in the United States and other advanced economies. Other components that go into Apple iPhones originate in still other countries. Apple relies on plants in China for parts as well as for the final assembly of much of its products sold worldwide. When the coronavirus spread through China, Apple told investors that it wasn't going to meet its revenue projections in the current quarter. The company said its contract factories weren't resuming production as quickly as it had expected. Apple's chief executive, Tim Cook, has suggested that the company's supply chain didn't need a major overhaul, but it has taken baby steps to diversify and depend less on China. And in the wake of the outbreak, Commerce Secretary Wilbur Ross has singled out Apple's China-centric production system as illustrative of what's wrong with today's globalized economy. "Globalization had gotten out of control. It takes 200 suppliers in 43 countries on six continents to make an iPhone," Ross said in a speech last month in England. In fact, more than half of all chips of all types produced in the world are sent to China, said Chris Richard, a partner at Deloitte Consulting in Phoenix. As Richard sees it, industries will probably accelerate moves to localize supply chains so they're more closely tied to final markets as opposed to extending them farther out. The coronavirus fallout, he said, "is another proof in point that if you concentrate too much, you're exposing yourself." Caption: PHOTO: WORKERS at Paulson Manufacturing in Temecula assemble medical goggles for shipment to China. PHOTOGRAPHER:Gina Ferazzi Los Angeles Times 
Mar 5, 2020	Last week, organizers announced that the Korea Times Music Festival at the Hollywood Bowl was being postponed "due to current travel restrictions in Asia" over fears of COVID-19, the strain of coronavirus that has swept across Asia, Europe and the Middle East and spread to the U.S. too. While few U.S. concerts have been affected yet, it's clear that the virus will hit the live music industry in some way here. As acts cancel major shows across Asia, and with the start of the spring-summer festival season just weeks away, artists, booking agents and promoters are warily eyeing the disease's spread. It's mainly affected the Asian concert business for the time being, but it could be a severe blow if and when the virus spreads more widely in the U.S. "It's so hard to tell. This was going to be one of the busiest summers ever for festivals and stadium shows, so any disruption is going to have an impact," said Dave Brooks, senior director of live and touring for Billboard. "If there are cancellations, and if it's a down year for the industry, [top concert promoters] Live Nation and AEG could probably weather it, but it could be a death knell for some independent promoters."  So far, there have only been about 11 confirmed U.S. deaths, including one in California , but officials do expect it to spread more widely in the coming weeks. At least 51 people in California have been diagnosed with the virus, and both Los Angeles, San Francisco, Orange County have declared health emergencies. While many industry professionals are trying not to be alarmist, they are making plans for the possibility of the virus -- or even just fears of it -- having a deep impact on the concert business this year. "If a pandemic like this restricts travel, if bands from here can't tour Asia and K-pop and J-pop acts can't come here, everyone's going to take a hit," said one high-level concert promotion executive in the U.S. who requested anonymity to be able to speak freely. "You'll see venues closed down. If people become alarmed and alert, they're more likely to stay away from air travel or large groups." So far, most of the bigger concert cancellations have been in China, South Korea and Japan, where Western acts like Green Day, Khalid, New Order and Stormzy, and K-Pop groups like Seventeen and Twice, have canceled planned appearances. Even K-pop juggernaut BTS, which planned a massive stadium tour tied to its "Map of the Soul: 7" album, has canceled hometown gigs in Seoul. Several acts, including the metal band Testament, have also canceled dates in Milan, Italy, where the virus has also spread in the northern part of the country. That's left U.S. promoters wondering whether acts that have passed through affected countries may eventually be hit with travel restrictions preventing performances, or if risks of the virus spreading could shut down U.S. shows as well. Several prominent booking agents, when reached for comment, acknowledged the seriousness of the fears but declined interviews, citing the uncertainty around the possibility of a pandemic in the U.S. Others were already making plans should it prove to be an obstacle to touring. "There's a general fear. Other offers for later in the year are still being entertained, but we're wondering," said Eric Dimenstein, president of Ground Control Touring, a booking agency that handles rock acts like Bright Eyes, Jenny Lewis and Deafheaven. Ground Control handles Asia touring for several of its acts, and one of its U.K. acts has already canceled tour dates in an affected country over fears of being let back into Britain afterward. Dimenstein acknowledged that COVID-19 will likely have an impact and said he is in conversations with managers about potential fallout. But he was cautious about making assumptions in either direction. "Right now, we're just watching. Some artists seem to understand that the media makes things bigger than they are," he said. "But no one wants to do it and then have the consequences and bad PR for going ahead when others don't. I wouldn't be surprised if in the next week or two, we see more cancellations. Some shows didn't even get to confirmation because of these fears. It's gonna take a hit, everyone is." -- Festival concerns So far, not much has changed for major U.S. events. Marquee events like Indio's Coachella Valley Music and Arts Festival, scheduled for April 10-12 and 17-19, have already sold out dates, and beyond the Korea Times event, no major U.S. concerts have been affected yet. Kim Saruwatari, director of public health for Riverside County, in which Indio is located, said the county is well aware of how COVID-19 might affect the festival, which draws 125,000 fans over each weekend. "One of our tasks is to survey any large event in the county over the next several months, and we've been reaching out to organizers to have conversations. We're not ready to pull the trigger on anything, but we want to make sure we can protect the community," Saruwatari said. Dr. Cameron Kaiser, the health officer for Riverside County, "has broad authority to protect public health, and if he deems that being at the fest would pose a risk, he has the authority to shut it down," Saruwatari said. But conversations about those risks are nowhere near that stage yet. "This virus is changing day by day, hour by hour," Saruwatari said. "We're monitoring it very closely. We don't have a timeline or cutoff. We're going to have conversations with the organizers and do our best to give advance notice, but it's a fluid situation." This month's South by Southwest festival in Austin, Texas, is already facing calls for preemptive action, if not outright cancellation. Andy Langer, a longtime "Austin City Limits" radio host and Texas Monthly writer who covers SXSW, wrote this week in a widely circulated Facebook post that "the logistics and optics of 10-day festival hosting thousands from all corners of the earth partying it up -- even if guided by an abundance of caution -- puts too many entities at risk. Not just by way of public health, but in a potentially legally liable/uninsurable way and places them potentially sideways with the almighty court of public opinion. "Fear is contagious and it snowballs quickly into an icy wall of pile-on backlash." The Concord record label group confirmed that it has canceled a planned SXSW event over COVID-19 concerns, as have executives for Twitter, Facebook and Tik Tok. Ruth Martinez, the senior vice president for worldwide human resources at Concord, said in an email, "Our decision to cancel our SXSW Happy Hour is based on the travel policy that we put into effect for the entire company last week. For the foreseeable future, we are not permitting our team to travel internationally and we are strongly discouraging travel domestically." A change.org petition to cancel the event completely has gathered more than 25,000 signatures. Festival officials said in a statement that "SXSW is working closely on a daily basis with local, state, and federal agencies to plan for a safe event. As a result of this dialogue and the recommendations of Austin Public Health, the 2020 event is proceeding with safety as a top priority." -- Resilient business In an earnings call last week, Live Nation President Joe Berchtold said that while "we expect there will be further areas of breakouts, we have seen no pullback in fan demand outside of the affected areas." He added that Live Nation, the country's largest concert promoter, has canceled 17 shows in Asia so far, and that "attendance is weighted to the latter part of year." The firm has 70 shows planned in the next three months in Asia, and 30 in Italy. Yet if the virus spreads more widely in the U.S., or if fans begin fearing that it might, that could put the concert business on edge if it leads to cancellations or slowing sales. "Obviously, we're going to be monitoring it closely and reaching out to affected areas and governments if it goes on and on," said the top concert industry executive. "It's our job to monitor this on a global, national and regional level to have steps in place if it comes to a place where we have to deal with it. Outdoor shows are less susceptible, but it's a risk for anybody." Still, fears of coronavrius could snowball even if it doesn't rise to a pandemic in the U.S. With some grocery stores sold out of staple provisions and a nationwide run on hand sanitizer and face masks, audiences are clearly anticipating a long spring and summer watching the possible spread of the virus. Perhaps with precautions, most shows will eventually go on as planned in the U.S. and Europe. "At the end of the day, the venues will still be standing and people will still like music," Billboard's Brooks said. "There's no reason to think there will be much long-term damage. The shootings at Route 91 in Las Vegas and the Bataclan in Paris didn't stop people." But if fans avoid crowded spaces like festivals, or if travel becomes too difficult, this year could be a blow to a business that depends on touring for its subsistence. "There's a lot of conversation, but until we see what happens, it's tough to tell," the anonymous concert industry executive said. "We're better prepared than China was. But man plans, and God laughs." Caption: PHOTO: COACHELLA Valley Music and Arts Festival, seen in 2019, is scheduled for two sold-out weekends in April. Its plans are as yet unchanged. PHOTOGRAPHER:Brian van der Brug Los Angeles Times PHOTO:FANS wear masks at a concert in Thailand, on Feb. 1. The spread of COVID-19 could cause cancellations. PHOTOGRAPHER:Mladen Antonov AFP via Getty Images 
Mar 4, 2020	As three more deaths in the United States were linked to the coronavirus Tuesday, World Health Organization officials warned the virus could be far more dangerous than the flu, with a mortality rate of 3.4%. During an off-camera news conference at the White House with the task force charged with overseeing the federal government’s response, Robert Redfield, director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, delivered a message to the American public: “I want them to be prepared for the reality that ... there are going to be more cases in the community,” he said. “But I want them to continue their daily lives. I want them to be mindful of the opportunity again to prepare themselves and their families.” Redfield said scientists did not have the data to predict the future spread. “What we do know for sure is that in the right setting, it does have the potential to move quickly,” Redfield said. “When you think that just a couple of weeks ago there were less than three cases in Korea, now there’s 2,500.” Public health officials confirmed a nursing home patient in Washington state was admitted to Harborview Medical Center in Seattle on Feb. 24 and died two days later. The patient, a 54-year-old man who had underlying medical conditions, was transported from Life Care Center of Kirkland and died days before several other patients at the nursing home were linked to the coronavirus, hospital spokeswoman Susan Gregg said. The Seattle and King County Public Health Department on Tuesday reported two additional deaths from COVID-19, bringing the King County total to eight. The other person who died was from Snohomish County, health officials said. A North Carolina resident who visited the Kirkland facility has since tested positive for the virus, becoming that state’s first case of COVID-19, Gov. Roy Cooper announced Tuesday. Health department officials in North Carolina are working to identify anyone else who may have come in contact with the individual. “I know that people are worried about this virus and I want to assure North Carolinians our state is prepared,” Cooper said in a statement, noting that the person represents an isolated case. New York City confirmed its first case of “community spread” coronavirus — the second case of the virus in the state. The individual is a man in his 50s who lives in Westchester County but works at a law firm in Manhattan. The man is hospitalized and in severe condition. The global mortality rate — which includes more than 3,000 deaths — is many times higher than the mortality rate of the flu, which is less than 1%. WHO Director-General Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus said that is at least partly because COVID-19 is a new disease, and no one has built up an immunity to it. Still, Tedros reiterated the WHO’s belief that containment was still within reach. “We don’t even talk about containment for seasonal flu,” Tedros said. “It’s just not possible, but it’s possible for COVID-19.” Officials say they have learned the coronavirus is less transmissible than the flu, which is often spread by people who are infected yet don’t have symptoms. That doesn’t seem to be the case for COVID-19, he said. “There are not yet any vaccines or therapeutics, which is why we must do everything we can to contain it.” Mike Ryan, who runs the agency’s emergencies program, pushed back against officials who wanted to “wave the white flag” and surrender to the disease’s hold. China took drastic steps to fight the virus, he said, and case numbers are now on the decline there. Countries such as China and South Korea “implemented very, very strong measures that have affected their own economies and their own societies,” Ryan said. “It’s really a duty of others to use the time that has been bought. “That is not a reverse you can achieve with influenza. If that is a failure, we’ll have slowed down the virus.” There can be a big benefit in slowing the virus’ arrival in a country for a few months, Ryan said. Many countries, including the U.S, are in the middle of flu season, so large numbers of coronavirus cases would overwhelm the health system. In Italy, COVID-19 patients and flu patients are already stretching hospitals and healthcare facilities, he said. Tedros said he’s concerned by shortages of masks, gowns and other equipment needed by healthcare workers to stop the spread of disease “caused by rising demands and hoarding and misuse.” “We can’t stop COVID-19 without protecting our health workers,” said Tedros, noting that prices of surgical masks have increased sixfold. Current information suggests that most COVID-19 cases are mild, said Dr. Nancy Messonnier, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention’s director of the National Center for Immunization and Respiratory Diseases. According to a report out of China, the most serious illnesses occur in 16% of cases, she said, and older people and those with underlying health conditions are twice as likely to develop serious outcomes. Speaking during a media briefing Tuesday, Messonnier said that cases similar to those reported abroad were now appearing in the United States. The CDC is relying on local health clinicians to determine testing needs. In addition to CDC test kits, commercial manufacturers overseen by the Food and Drug Administration are providing tests directly to states. These types of tests are typically what are on the front lines in the United States, Messonnier said. Vice President Mike Pence said Tuesday that 77 cases of coronavirus have been diagnosed in the U.S. That number excludes the 45 people who were passengers aboard the Diamond Princess cruise ship in Japan and were repatriated to America, which brings the total to more than 120. Pence said that a task force will issue new guidance from the CDC to make it clear that any American can be tested for the virus and no restrictions subject to doctor’s orders. Commercial laboratories are expected to have 2,500 test kits available to provide 1.5 million tests. And the Office of Management and Budget will direct all federal government agencies to review internal travel and adhere to State Department guidance. “The threat of the coronavirus to the American pubic remains low,” Pence said.  Pence also said that chief executives of all major airlines are expected to meet at the White House Wednesday to discuss contact tracing data for the coronavirus. The West Coast continues to bear the brunt of the illnesses in the U.S., with the focus on Northern California and Washington. At least five Northern California counties reported new cases of COVID-19 on Monday. On Tuesday, the city of Berkeley reported its first case after an individual visited a country with an outbreak. That individual has remained at home in a self-imposed quarantine since returning. “While the risk of infection remains low, the expanded presence of the virus in our community is a reality we should all prepare for,” said Berkeley Health Officer Dr. Lisa Hernandez. “There are steps that all of us in the community can take now to improve basic hygiene and also prepare for a wider spread in the future.” Gov. Gavin Newsom announced Tuesday that the California Department of Public Health received approval from the CDC and the National Institute of Occupational Safety and Health to dip into its emergency planning reserves of 21 million N-95 face masks for medical workers on the front lines. Though the flurry of positive test results in recent days does signal that the virus is circulating within the U.S., experts advised the public to avoid reading too much into those numbers. Until late last week, federal officials were not allowing widespread testing for the virus, so many people who were already sick are only now being diagnosed, said Harvard epidemiology professor Marc Lipsitch. “Some of the numbers are changing because new things are happening, but a lot of the numbers are changing because we’re discovering things that have already happened,” Lipsitch said in a forum Monday hosted by Harvard’s public health school. “It’s really important to distinguish ‘Oh, goodness, there’s a new cluster’ from ‘Oh, goodness, we just discovered that there’s a cluster that’s been there for some time.’ ” As the virus spreads, officials are trying to push back against Asian American bias and misinformation surrounding the outbreak. Amid signs that some are staying away from Chinatowns and other Asian communities in the U.S., Sen. Dianne Feinstein (D-Calif.) sharply criticized the xenophobia that had been displayed toward ethnic communities. “We’ve also seen a rise in racism toward Asian Americans because the virus is associated with China,” she said. “This is unconscionable, and it’s not the American way. People of all ages, races and ethnicities are susceptible to this disease. Bigotry toward any one group for a virus they have nothing to do with makes no sense.” Several areas in California have declared local emergencies amid the outbreak. Sonoma County on Monday issued a declaration after announcing two people had been diagnosed with the virus. One infected person returned from a cruise to Mexico 10 days ago and was hospitalized, but the case “is a cause for concern,” said county health officer Dr. Celeste Philip. Declaring a state of emergency will allow the county to respond properly to the outbreak as well as “work in tandem with our cities and healthcare providers to ensure we are prepared to combat an outbreak of COVID-19 in our communities,” Philip said in a statement. Meanwhile, more COVID-19 cases were reported in Santa Clara County, bringing its total to 11 — the most of any California county. The source of infection for the latest two cases, reported Tuesday, is still under investigation. Many initial reports of COVID-19 have been among healthcare workers, who are likely to encounter sick patients. Hundreds of healthcare workers in California have already been asked to stay home due to contact with patients diagnosed with the disease over the last few weeks. On Monday, Placer County reported a confirmed case of COVID-19 in a healthcare worker at NorthBay VacaValley Hospital in Vacaville, where a COVID-19 patient had been admitted. County spokeswoman Katie Combs Prichard said the medical worker, who lives in Placer County, came into contact with that patient and was likely infected by her. Conferences in the state and elsewhere are being canceled or scaled back amid fears of the virus, but the WHO’s Ryan said decisions to cancel mass gatherings, including sporting events, should be determined by a country’s leadership, based on how severe the outbreak is in their region. Officials recently had a call with the International Olympic Committee to discuss the Summer Olympics scheduled in Tokyo and decided to continue monitoring the situation, with three months given before a decision must be made. “I have confidence in Japan that there will hopefully be progress,” Tedros said. “Deciding now could be too early.” President Trump said Tuesday during a speech to the National Assn. of Counties’ legislative conference in Washington that he expected Congress would pass a special funding bill providing $8.5 billion — far more than he requested — to fight the spread of the illness in the United States. “It just shows you what can happen — six weeks ago, eight weeks ago, you never heard of this. All of a sudden, it’s got the world aflutter,” Trump said, noting later while leaving the White House to visit the National Institutes of Health that he is looking at further international travel restrictions involving Italy, Japan and South Korea, but will not limit domestic travel. Anthony Fauci, director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, said there remained many unknowns about the virus, including the degree to which people who do not express symptoms can transmit it to others. He said doctors know that it happens but have not yet gauged the extent, a key piece of data that will help determine decisions on how to contain it. Fauci said that Chinese data are believed to be accurate and that the spread of the virus there is slowing thanks to “draconian” methods that would never occur in the United States, including stringent travel and public gathering restrictions. “They have taken social distancing to its furthest extreme,” he said. Bierman reported from Washington, D.C., Read from Kirkland, Wash., and Shalby and Karlamangla from Los Angeles. 
Mar 4, 2020	The battle against the coronavirus was reaching a critical moment in the United States, with the number of deaths rising Tuesday as public health leaders said there was limited window to contain the virus. The death toll in Washington state rose to 10, and Los Angeles and other Southern California communities delcared state of emergency amid new local cases. “I want them to be prepared for the reality that they, there are going to be more cases in the community,” said Robert Redfield, director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. “But I want them to continue their daily lives. I want them to be mindful of the opportunity again to prepare themselves and their families.” The World Health Organization announced Tuesday the global mortality rate from coronavirus was 3.4%. The death rate so far — which includes more than 3,000 deaths — is many times higher than the mortality rate of the seasonal flu, which is 0.1%. WHO Director-General Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus said that is at least partly because COVID-19 is a new disease, and no one has built up an immunity to it. Still, he and other health officials said there was still time to slow the spread of the virus. Officials say they have learned the coronavirus is less transmissible than the flu, which is often spread by people who are infected yet don’t have symptoms. That doesn’t seem to be the case for COVID-19, he said. “There are not yet any vaccines or therapeutics ... which is why we must do everything we can to contain it,” Tedros said. Earlier reports have pointed to a mortality rate of about 2% for COVID-19. Experts say they suspect all analyses so far have overestimated the disease’s fatality rate because milder cases are largely not being diagnosed. In 80% of people, the disease causes only mild illness, experts say. President Trump met with a group of airline executives at the White House Wednesday and tried to reassure the public that it is safe to fly “in large portions of the world.” As public health officials reiterated pleas to wash hands and avoid touching faces, Trump joked about his own practices: “I haven’t touched my face in weeks. In weeks — I miss it.” Former President Obama also urged Americans to follow the guidance of health officials and remain calm. “Protect yourself and your community from coronavirus with common sense precautions: wash your hands, stay home when sick and listen to the @CDCgov and local health authorities. Save the masks for health care workers. Let’s stay calm, listen to the experts, and follow the science.” Mike Ryan, who runs the WHO‘s emergencies program, pushed back against officials who wanted to “wave the white flag” and surrender to the disease’s hold. China took drastic steps to fight the virus, he said, and case numbers are now on the decline there. Countries such as China and South Korea “implemented very, very strong measures that have affected their own economies and their own societies,” Ryan said. “It’s really a duty of others to use the time that has been bought. “That is not a reverse you can achieve with influenza. If that is a failure, we’ll have slowed down the virus,” he said. There can be a big benefit in slowing the virus’ arrival in a country for a few months, Ryan said. Many countries, including the U.S, are in the middle of flu season, so large numbers of coronavirus cases would overwhelm the health system. In Italy, COVID-19 patients and flu patients are already stretching hospitals and healthcare facilities, he said. Tedros said he’s concerned by shortages of masks, gowns and other equipment needed by healthcare workers to stop the spread of disease “caused by rising demands and hoarding and misuse.” “We can’t stop COVID-19 without protecting our health workers,” said Tedros, noting that prices of surgical masks have increased sixfold. Current information suggests that most COVID-19 cases are mild, said Dr. Nancy Messonnier, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention’s director of the National Center for Immunization and Respiratory Diseases. According to a report from China, the most serious illnesses occur in 16% of cases, she said, and older people and those with underlying health conditions are twice as likely to develop serious outcomes. Speaking during a media briefing Tuesday, Messonnier said that cases similar to those reported abroad were now appearing in the United States. The CDC is relying on local health clinicians to determine testing needs. In addition to CDC test kits, commercial manufacturers overseen by the Food and Drug Administration are providing tests directly to states. These types of tests are typically what are on the front lines in the United States, Messonnier said. As of Monday evening, 60 cases of coronavirus had been diagnosed in the U.S. plus an additional 45 people who were passengers aboard the Diamond Princess cruise ship in Japan and were repatriated to America. That puts the total at about 105 cases, according to the CDC. The West Coast continues to bear the brunt of the illnesses in the U.S., with the focus on Northern California and Washington state. Public health officials confirmed a nursing home patient in Washington state was admitted to Harborview Medical Center in Seattle on Feb. 24 and died two days later. The patient, a 54-year-old man who had underlying medical conditions, was transported from Life Care Center of Kirkland and died days before several other patients at the nursing home were linked to the coronavirus, hospital spokeswoman Susan Gregg said. The Seattle and King County Public Health Department on Tuesday reported two additional deaths from COVID-19, bringing the King County total to eight. The other person who died was from Snohomish County, health officials said. A North Carolina resident who visited the Kirkland facility has since tested positive for the virus, becoming that state’s first case of COVID-19, Gov. Roy Cooper announced Tuesday. Health department officials in North Carolina are working to identify anyone else who may have come in contact with the individual. “I know that people are worried about this virus and I want to assure North Carolinians our state is prepared,” Cooper said in a statement, noting that the person represents an isolated case. More than 50 people in California have the virus, with new cases reported in Santa Clara County, Berkeley and two presumptive cases in Orange County. There is some debate about how the coronavirus outbreak will play out and its place in history. The 1918 Spanish flu — the worst pandemic of the 20th century — is estimated to have killed at least 50 million people worldwide over the course of three years. That includes 675,000 in the U.S. Among those who were infected, the death rate is estimated to be greater than 2.5%. The most recent pandemic flu — caused by the H1N1 virus that emerged from pigs in 2009 — caused between 152,000 and 575,000 deaths around the world. An estimated 12,500 of those fatalities occurred in the U.S. during the first year of the outbreak; an estimated 60.8 million nationwide were infected. The new coronavirus could wind up somewhere in between, said Dr. Otto Yang, an infectious disease expert at UCLA. Based on what’s known right now, his best guess is that it might resemble the pandemic flu of 1968, which killed about 1 million people globally, including 100,000 in the U.S. That time, the fatality rate for those infected was about 0.03%. Since 2010, the death toll of a single flu season has ranged between 12,000 to 61,000 in the U.S., according to the CDC. The current flu season, which began in October, has seen about 18,000 deaths so far. Though the flurry of positive test results in recent days does signal that the virus is circulating within the U.S., experts advised the public to avoid reading too much into those numbers. Until late last week, federal officials were not allowing widespread testing for the virus, so many people who were already sick are only now being diagnosed, Harvard epidemiology professor Marc Lipsitch said. “Some of the numbers are changing because new things are happening, but a lot of the numbers are changing because we’re discovering things that have already happened,” Lipsitch said in a forum Monday hosted by Harvard’s public health school. “It’s really important to distinguish ‘Oh, goodness, there’s a new cluster’ from ‘Oh, goodness, we just discovered that there’s a cluster that’s been there for some time.’” Times staff writers Noam N. Levey in Washington, Andrew J, Campa, Hannah Fry and Anh Do in Los Angeles and Phil Willon in Sacramento contributed to this report. Read reported from Seattle. 
Mar 4, 2020	Last week, organizers announced that the Korea Times Music Festival at the Hollywood Bowl was being postponed “due to current travel restrictions in Asia” over fears of COVID-19, the strain of coronavirus that has swept across Asia, Europe and the Middle East and spread to the U.S. too. While few U.S. concerts have been affected yet, it’s clear that the virus will hit the live music industry in some way here. As acts cancel major shows across Asia, and with the start of the spring-summer festival season just weeks away, artists, booking agents and promoters are warily eyeing the disease’s spread. It’s mainly affected the Asian concert business for the time being, but it could be a severe blow if and when the virus spreads more widely in the U.S. “It’s so hard to tell. This was going to be one of the busiest summers ever for festivals and stadium shows, so any disruption is going to have an impact,” said Dave Brooks, senior director of live and touring for Billboard. “If there are cancellations, and if it’s a down year for the industry, [top concert promoters] Live Nation and AEG could probably weather it, but it could be a death knell for some independent promoters.” So far, there have only been about 11 confirmed U.S. deaths, including one in California , but officials do expect it to spread more widely in the coming weeks. At least 51 people in California have been diagnosed with the virus, and both Los Angeles, San Francisco, Orange County have declared health emergencies. While many industry professionals are trying not to be alarmist, they are making plans for the possibility of the virus — or even just fears of it — having a deep impact on the concert business this year. “If a pandemic like this restricts travel, if bands from here can’t tour Asia and K-pop and J-pop acts can’t come here, everyone’s going to take a hit,” said one high-level concert promotion executive in the U.S. who requested anonymity to be able to speak freely. “You’ll see venues closed down. If people become alarmed and alert, they’re more likely to stay away from air travel or large groups.” So far, most of the bigger concert cancellations have been in China, South Korea and Japan, where Western acts like Green Day, Khalid, New Order and Stormzy, and K-Pop groups like Seventeen and Twice, have canceled planned appearances. Even K-pop juggernaut BTS, which planned a massive stadium tour tied to its “Map of the Soul: 7” album, has canceled hometown gigs in Seoul. Several acts, including the metal band Testament, have also canceled dates in Milan, Italy, where the virus has also spread in the northern part of the country. That’s left U.S. promoters wondering whether acts that have passed through affected countries may eventually be hit with travel restrictions preventing performances, or if risks of the virus spreading could shut down U.S. shows as well. Several prominent booking agents, when reached for comment, acknowledged the seriousness of the fears but declined interviews, citing the uncertainty around the possibility of a pandemic in the U.S. Others were already making plans should it prove to be an obstacle to touring. “There’s a general fear. Other offers for later in the year are still being entertained, but we’re wondering,” said Eric Dimenstein, president of Ground Control Touring, a booking agency that handles rock acts like Bright Eyes, Jenny Lewis and Deafheaven. Ground Control handles Asia touring for several of its acts, and one of its U.K. acts has already canceled tour dates in an affected country over fears of being let back into Britain afterward. Dimenstein acknowledged that COVID-19 will likely have an impact and said he is in conversations with managers about potential fallout. But he was cautious about making assumptions in either direction. “Right now, we’re just watching. Some artists seem to understand that the media makes things bigger than they are,” he said. “But no one wants to do it and then have the consequences and bad PR for going ahead when others don’t. I wouldn’t be surprised if in the next week or two, we see more cancellations. Some shows didn’t even get to confirmation because of these fears. It’s gonna take a hit, everyone is.” So far, not much has changed for major U.S. events. Marquee events like Indio’s Coachella Valley Music and Arts Festival, scheduled for April 10-12 and 17-19, have already sold out dates, and beyond the Korea Times event, no major U.S. concerts have been affected yet. Kim Saruwatari, director of public health for Riverside County, in which Indio is located, said the county is well aware of how COVID-19 might affect the festival, which draws 125,000 fans over each weekend. “One of our tasks is to survey any large event in the county over the next several months, and we’ve been reaching out to organizers to have conversations. We’re not ready to pull the trigger on anything, but we want to make sure we can protect the community,” Saruwatari said. Dr. Cameron Kaiser, the health officer for Riverside County, “has broad authority to protect public health, and if he deems that being at the fest would pose a risk, he has the authority to shut it down,” Saruwatari said. But conversations about those risks are nowhere near that stage yet. “This virus is changing day by day, hour by hour,” Saruwatari said. “We’re monitoring it very closely. We don’t have a timeline or cutoff. We’re going to have conversations with the organizers and do our best to give advance notice, but it’s a fluid situation.” This month’s South by Southwest festival in Austin, Texas, is already facing calls for preemptive action, if not outright cancellation. Andy Langer, a longtime “Austin City Limits” radio host and Texas Monthly writer who covers SXSW, wrote this week in a widely circulated Facebook post that “the logistics and optics of 10-day festival hosting thousands from all corners of the earth partying it up — even if guided by an abundance of caution — puts too many entities at risk. Not just by way of public health, but in a potentially legally liable/uninsurable way and places them potentially sideways with the almighty court of public opinion. “Fear is contagious and it snowballs quickly into an icy wall of pile-on backlash.” The Concord record label group confirmed that it has canceled a planned SXSW event over COVID-19 concerns, as have executives for Twitter, Facebook and Tik Tok. Ruth Martinez, the senior vice president for worldwide human resources at Concord, said in an email, “Our decision to cancel our SXSW Happy Hour is based on the travel policy that we put into effect for the entire company last week. For the foreseeable future, we are not permitting our team to travel internationally and we are strongly discouraging travel domestically.” A change.org petition to cancel the event completely has gathered more than 25,000 signatures. Festival officials said in a statement that “SXSW is working closely on a daily basis with local, state, and federal agencies to plan for a safe event. As a result of this dialogue and the recommendations of Austin Public Health, the 2020 event is proceeding with safety as a top priority.” In an earnings call last week, Live Nation President Joe Berchtold said that while “we expect there will be further areas of breakouts, we have seen no pullback in fan demand outside of the affected areas.” He added that Live Nation, the country’s largest concert promoter, has canceled 17 shows in Asia so far, and that “attendance is weighted to the latter part of year.” The firm has 70 shows planned in the next three months in Asia, and 30 in Italy. Yet if the virus spreads more widely in the U.S., or if fans begin fearing that it might, that could put the concert business on edge if it leads to cancellations or slowing sales. “Obviously, we’re going to be monitoring it closely and reaching out to affected areas and governments if it goes on and on,” said the top concert industry executive. “It’s our job to monitor this on a global, national and regional level to have steps in place if it comes to a place where we have to deal with it. Outdoor shows are less susceptible, but it’s a risk for anybody.” Still, fears of coronavrius could snowball even if it doesn’t rise to a pandemic in the U.S. With some grocery stores sold out of staple provisions and a nationwide run on hand sanitizer and face masks, audiences are clearly anticipating a long spring and summer watching the possible spread of the virus. Perhaps with precautions, most shows will eventually go on as planned in the U.S. and Europe. “At the end of the day, the venues will still be standing and people will still like music,” Billboard’s Brooks said. “There’s no reason to think there will be much long-term damage. The shootings at Route 91 in Las Vegas and the Bataclan in Paris didn’t stop people.” But if fans avoid crowded spaces like festivals, or if travel becomes too difficult, this year could be a blow to a business that depends on touring for its subsistence. “There’s a lot of conversation, but until we see what happens, it’s tough to tell,” the anonymous concert industry executive said. “We’re better prepared than China was. But man plans, and God laughs.” 
Mar 4, 2020	Beyond short-term economic disruptions and increased recession worries, the spreading coronavirus is sowing the seeds of a broad transformation of the global supply chains that for years brought low consumer prices and high corporate profits on products such as cellphones, computers and household goods. China looks to be the biggest loser as U.S. producers step up plans to reduce their reliance on the world’s second-biggest economy, which has long enjoyed a central, dominant role in an international manufacturing network that ships parts and materials back and forth among different countries before assembling them into finished products. A slow U.S. exodus from China was already underway because of soaring wages in China and President Trump’s trade and tech wars, with companies such as Apple announcing plans last year to diversify its manufacturing, which was heavily reliant on China. Trump’s punitive tariffs on Chinese imports and the increasingly broad bipartisan support in the U.S. to get tough with Beijing have added to the cost and political pressure for companies operating in China. “If any company was thinking of moving, they’re now really exploring it or working on an executed plan,” said Ethan Harris, global economist at Bank of America Merrill Lynch. For many American companies, the coronavirus crisis has highlighted the downside of their dependency on China. Supply lines have been crippled by quarantines, factory closings, travel restrictions and other stringent measures taken by China and other countries to contain the outbreak. Some companies that previously relocated parts of their operations to Vietnam and elsewhere have been able to offset some of their lost production capacity. But the sharp decline in China’s globally leading manufacturing economy has had widespread knock-on effects. Apple, Microsoft and Procter & Gamble are among many corporations that have warned of weaker-than-expected profits because of their exposure to China. Worries about prolonged supply disruptions were partly behind last week’s stock market meltdown. P&G, for example, said it has 387 suppliers in China that ship 9,000 materials globally, affecting about 17,600 finished products. A recent BofA survey showed just how wide the remapping of supply chains may be. Analysts who cover 3,000 firms reported that companies in 10 out of 12 global industries, including semiconductors, autos and medical equipment, have shifted, or plan to shift, at least part of their supply chains from current locations. China is almost certain to take the biggest hit because of its outsized role. South Asia and Mexico may have the most to gain. “These movements are tectonic,” Harris said. Bhawnesh Mathur, chief executive of Masterwork Electronics, is starting to look more at Mexico. The Chula Vista company already has a plant in Mexicali, as well as one in Sonoma County, Calif. Those two facilities make printed circuit boards and other electronics assemblies for various manufacturers, using relays, connectors and many other components imported from China. Masterwork contracts with about 100 factories in China. Before the virus outbreak, the company could place an order and have it confirmed in two to four days. Last month, Mathur said, it was taking two to three weeks — and even then, they couldn’t say when the products would be shipped. Mathur had been thinking about reconfiguring his supply chain: He was feeling the heat from the Trump administration’s 25% tariffs on many machinery parts from China, as well as the rising political tide in America to bring industrial production of things such as electronic circuit boards closer to home. Now with the coronavirus, he said, “there will be changes.” China hawks in the Trump administration couldn’t be happier. Some of them have been blunt in saying that the coronavirus provides an opportunity for a U.S. decoupling from China. Trump has sent more mixed messages about U.S. business relations with China, but he also has echoed remarks that drug makers should diversify and overhaul supply chains, which today rely heavily on Chinese pharmaceutical ingredients. “A lot of the coronavirus shows the importance of bringing manufacturing back to America so that we are producing at home, the medicines and equipment and everything else that we need to protect the public’s health,” Trump said Monday at a White House meeting with drug company executives. But few predict a manufacturing renaissance is on the horizon for America. Nor is a mass retreat from China likely to be swift. It took decades to build the current industrial ecosystem, and China’s huge labor force and superior infrastructure will be hard to replace or re-create anytime soon, if ever. Still, there have been growing worries that supply chains were too concentrated or getting stretched thin. Over the years, automation helped companies manage inventories so they have just enough materials and parts on hand to meet immediate needs, with goods arriving just in time. That freed up cash for other uses. But this innovation also made the system more vulnerable. In 2011, a powerful earthquake and tsunami in Japan struck a large swath of the country’s eastern coastland, temporarily closing key producers of sensors and other electronic parts for the auto industry. The effect was that car assembly operations as far away as Louisiana had to cut production. Since then, some Japanese producers have added backup facilities in other countries. Overall, however, the situation has only “marginally improved,” said Joel Scheiman, a veteran analyst for MF Global Holdings in Tokyo. With Japan, South Korea and Italy now dealing with rising caseloads of the disease, there could be more and longer disruptions to global supply lines. China does a lot of manufacturing for Japan and South Korea, but Chinese factories also depend on them for parts. In recent days China has largely reopened for business, although employees remain wary of returning. Companies in hard-hit Hubei province — epicenter of the novel coronavirus outbreak — are set to resume operations March 10. U.S. manufacturers including Nike and Ashley Furniture have reduced their exposure to China, mostly by turning to Vietnam and others in Southeast Asia. Reliance on China, however, remains very high for a host of consumer products, including electronics. Many of the world’s cellphones, for example, come from China, even though the coding and communication chips that make them “smart” are actually produced in the United States and other advanced economies. Other components that go into Apple iPhones originate in still other countries. Apple relies on plants in China for parts as well as for the final assembly of much of its products sold worldwide. When the coronavirus spread through China, Apple told investors that it wasn’t going to meet its revenue projections in the current quarter. The company said its contract factories weren’t resuming production as quickly as it had expected. Apple’s chief executive, Tim Cook, has suggested that the company’s supply chain didn’t need a major overhaul, but it has taken baby steps to diversify and depend less on China. And in the wake of the outbreak, Commerce Secretary Wilbur Ross has singled out Apple’s China-centric production system as illustrative of what’s wrong with today’s globalized economy. “Globalization had gotten out of control. It takes 200 suppliers in 43 countries on six continents to make an iPhone,” Ross said in a speech last month in England. In fact, more than half of all chips of all types produced in the world are sent to China, said Chris Richard, a partner at Deloitte Consulting in Phoenix. As Richard sees it, industries will probably accelerate moves to localize supply chains so they’re more closely tied to final markets as opposed to extending them farther out. The coronavirus fallout, he said, “is another proof in point that if you concentrate too much, you’re exposing yourself.” 
Mar 4, 2020	Ultra Music Festival, the massive Miami electronic music event scheduled for later this month, has been called off over coronavirus fears, according to city officials. Miami Mayor Francis Suarez and Commissioner Joe Carollo told reporters for the Miami Herald that the risks were too great for the festival, which draws 165,000 fans from around the world over three days to Miami’s Bayfront Park. The festival, while technically only postponed, is likely to be held into 2021, they said. A formal announcement from the festival is expected Friday. “We’re saying suspend it to a later date when we’ll have a better idea of where we’re heading with the coronavirus,” Carollo told the Herald. “I can tell you that just in the last 24 hours, I have received countless emails and messages of all kinds urging the city to act,” Mayor Suarez added. The state has confirmed at least three cases of COVID-19, with more expected to come. Ultra is the first major U.S. music festival to be canceled over fears of the COVID-19 virus (the Korea Times Music Festival in Los Angeles was postponed over travel difficulties resulting from the outbreak), and the first time in 21 years that Ultra will not produce an event in Miami. The popular Calle Ocho festival may also be at risk, city officials said. The cancellation may set a precedent for caution that others like South By Southwest might look to in the coming weeks, as fears of COVID-19 have rattled the music industry. While flagship events like South by Southwest and Indio’s Coachella Valley Music and Arts Festival have yet to announce any changes in plans, Ultra’s cancellation suggests promoters are deeply worried about the virus’ potential impact. 
Mar 4, 2020	Much of the sports world is already dealing with a new reality: life amid the coronavirus outbreak. Major competitions have been postponed, moved or canceled throughout Asia. In Italy, government officials announced that no fans may attend sporting events, including big-time soccer matches, for at least a month. Could the same thing happen closer to home? Los Angeles County declared a health emergency on Wednesday, with officials discussing the possibility of banning spectators from stadiums and arenas across the region. In other parts of the U.S., the NBA and Major League Baseball have issued safety recommendations and at least two colleges are skipping games. All of this comes as crowds are expected to flock to spring training baseball and the upcoming NCAA men’s and women’s basketball tournaments. “If at any point we think that there’s good reason for us to be worried about extensive, extensive community transmission … we may ask for modifications at large public events,” L.A. County health director Barbara Ferrer said. “This could be that games are played but there are no spectators. This could be that there are limits to how people are going to gather at public events.” As Dodgers president Stan Kasten said: : “None of it is great news, but they have stressed also that this is not a time to be panicking.”  The current version of the coronavirus, COVID-19, has infected more than 95,000 people and killed more than 3,200 worldwide since it was first detected in China late last year. There have been 157 reported cases and 11 deaths in 16 U.S. states, according to the coronavirus COVID-19 database of Johns Hopkins.California reported its first death — an elderly adult with underlying health issues — on Wednesday. Globally, the outbreak has forced schedule and location changes for soccer games, car races, a cycling tour and other competitions. At a news conference on Wednesday, the leader of the International Olympic Committee faced a barrage of questions about the 2020 Summer Games, which are scheduled to begin in Tokyo on July 24. Though many countries have been forced to delay qualifying events, the IOC has said on numerous occasions that, in consultation with the World Health Organization, it expects the Games to take place as planned. “I can assure you I will not get tired of repeating the statement I made,” IOC president Thomas Bach told reporters. “The IOC is fully committed, and we are not participating in any kind of speculation.” Some health experts agree it is too early to make any predictions about the spread and lethality of the virus over the next six months. Others have expressed concern about the prospect of large public gatherings. There is a history of external forces disrupting the sports world. The Olympics were canceled three times during the first and second World Wars. NFL games were played but not televised following John F. Kennedy’s assassination and baseball halted games for almost a week after the Sept. 11, 2001, terrorist attacks. This time, American sports officials have generally reacted cautiously, instituting relatively minor changes while vowing to consult with health officials, monitor the situation and take further steps if necessary. Few have been willing to discuss the potential for drastic action, though Kasten acknowledged: “We could, in the extreme, wind up either canceling games or holding games without spectators, as has been done in some places.” College basketball faces a particular challenge with men’s and women’s conference tournaments and March Madness prompting hundreds of thousands of fans to follow their teams around the country in coming weeks. Staples Center is scheduled to host a men’s West Regional beginning on March 26. “As a result of the latest briefing update from the Los Angeles County Public Health Department, we have posted messaging throughout our venues reminding fans to engage in safe hygiene practices and to stay home if they feel unwell,” a Staples Center statement read. “We also have increased access to hand sanitizers throughout the building.” A campus task force at Stanford has recommended postponing or adjusting events through mid-April. Other schools, such as Chicago State University, have canceled road trips and some home games. The NCAA has established an advisory panel to address the issue. “Today we are planning to conduct our championships as planned,” chief operating officer Donald Remy said in a statement. “However, we are evaluating the COVID-19 situation daily and will make decisions accordingly.” This announcement follows an NBA memo that was circulated among teams and later obtained by the Times. It recommends that players limit physical contact with fans, meaning no high-fives or accepting pens and other items for autographs. “I think everybody has a common sense feel of what’s being reported and what’s out there,” Lakers coach Frank Vogel said after a practice Wednesday, “and we all have to be cautious.” Before the Clippers’ game Tuesday night in Oklahoma City, reserve guard Lou Williams was signing autographs for fans who leaned over the tunnel railing. As soon as he finished, a team security guard waiting nearby squirted a glob of sanitizer into his hands. One NBA official called it a “fist-bump-only league right now.” Major League Baseball has issued similar advice during spring training, a time when teams make an effort to interact with fans after games or at special events. Players have been told to get flu shots and avoid taking balls or pens from spectators; teams have been warned about disinfecting clubhouses. “Would you tell our players to carry their own Sharpie for autographs?” Kasten said. “I’m going to ask more doctors before we carry out a policy.” Additional concerns have been raised about scouts traveling overseas. Tampa Bay Rays first baseman Ji-Man Choi, who is from South Korea, has reportedly been giving interviews to media from his homeland away from the rest of the team, saying: “I just want to be cautious, especially around the players.” The NHL has banned business travel outside of North America for its employees and will quarantine scouts returning from Europe. Though there are no plans for postponing the playoffs next month, NHL Commissioner Gary Bettman told The Canadian Press that the situation is “day-to-day” and that the league is “aware of and focused on all possibilities.” The NFL, which has its draft in late April, said it is similarly monitoring developments. Locally, the 2020 L.A. Marathon is scheduled for Sunday and organizers are offering to defer entries until next year for runners who must travel from affected countries. This comes shortly after the Tokyo Marathon abruptly downsized its field to elite and wheelchair athletes only. Otherwise, official responses from Southern California pro teams and university athletic departments followed a similar theme: a wait-and-see approach amid daily news reports. A spokesman for AEG, which operates Staples Center and Dignity Health Sports Park where teams from the NBA, WNBA, NHL, MLS and XFL play, said his company will follow the guidelines set forth by health and county officials. For now, “the teams are being administered essentially by the league,” said AEG’s Michael Roth, who pointed out while one league might postpone games, another could play as scheduled. “We’re providing a safe and clean venue for everybody, and if the team shows up to play, if the league wants to play, we’re opening our doors.” A spokesman for LAFC, which consistently sells out its 22,000-seat stadium in Exposition Park, said the conference call with county health officials included some discussion of worst-case scenarios. “And obviously the worst is the city can come in and cancel events,” said Seth Burton, the team’s vice president of communications. “And another option would be for games to be played with no fans. “Everyone knows that could happen,” he continued. “But hopefully we’re not there yet.” Times staff writers Kevin Baxter, Mike DiGiovanna, Ryan Kartje, Jeff Miller, Andrew Greif, Soumya Karlamangla, Helene Elliott, Arash Markazi and Jack Harris contributed to this report. 
Mar 4, 2020	Sports leagues and federations across the world are addressing the spread of the coronavirus. While most North American sports leagues, including Major League Baseball, the NBA, the NFL and the NHL are monitoring the situation, leagues in other parts of the world are taking action by canceling events and playing in empty stadiums. Los Angeles County officials have discussed the possibility of banning spectators from attending sporting events in Southern California in an attempt to slow the spread of the coronavirus. Here is a sport-by-sport look at what leagues and federations are doing to address the COVID-19 outbreak: United States NBA: In a memo sent to teams Sunday, the league and the NBA Players’ Assn. stated they are “closely monitoring the coronavirus situation” and are in consultation with the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. The memo also recommended that players avoid giving high-fives with interacting with fans and avoid borrowing pens and markers from fans requesting autographs. No plans have been made to cancel games or bar fans from attending. In a statement, Staples Center encouraged fans who are planning to attend events at the arena to “engage in safe hygiene practices” and “stay home if they feel unwell.” MLB: The league has established an internal task force to deal with issues related to coronavirus in the coming months, according to a memo sent to high-ranking baseball officials Tuesday obtained by ESPN. Baseball has no plans to cancel or ban fans from attending games. The memo advises players not to shake hands with fans and not use pens and markers from fans to sign autographs. It also asks teams to make sure all players have received the 2019-20 flu vaccine and other necessary vaccinations. NFL: NFL Media reported Tuesday that the league is “closely monitoring developments” related to coronavirus and that it is still planning to hold the NFL draft in Las Vegas on April 23-25. In addition, individual pro days for draft-eligible players will begin as scheduled on Thursday. The NFL’s annual meeting, which is attended by team owners, general managers and coaches, is still scheduled to be held March 29-April 1 in Palm Beach, Fla. NHL: Commissioner Gary Bettman said Wednesday that the league is monitoring the coronavirus outbreak but declined to say whether games could be altered, canceled or rescheduled. He also wouldn’t speculate on whether the league would consider playing in empty arenas or postponing the playoffs. All NHL employees have been barred from traveling outside North America for business purposes. Scouts based in Europe have to stay in Europe or be quarantined upon arriving in North America, Bettman said. Switzerland’s national hockey league has suspended the playing of games from March 2-15. NCAA: The college athletics sanctioning body says it is monitoring the outbreak but that it has no plans to make changes for the upcoming men’s and women’s basketball tournaments. “The NCAA is committed to conducting its championships and events in a safe and responsible manner,” Donald Remy, the NCAA’s chief operating officer, said in a statement Tuesday. “Today we are planning to conduct our championships as planned; however, we are evaluating the covid-19 situation daily and will make decisions accordingly.” Missouri-Kansas City and Chicago State announced they are canceling trips to Seattle for scheduled Western Athletic Conference men’s basketball games this week. USC announced all athletic events are being played as scheduled. MLS: The league has created a task force to monitor the coronavirus outbreak. Sports teams in Los Angeles County, including the Galaxy and LAFC, have been warned they may be asked to cancel games or play them in empty stadiums after the county declared a health emergency Wednesday to deal with the coronavirus. “This could be that games are played but there are no spectators,” L.A. County public health director Barbara Ferrer said. “This could be that there are limits to how people are going to gather... But I want to reassure everyone we are not there today.” XFL: The league announced it has launched a task force to closely monitor the spread of the coronavirus. It is also in regular contact with health and public safety officials at the national and local levels. No games have been postponed or canceled. NASCAR: In a statement released Wednesday, NASCAR said its racing schedule and business operations remain unchanged as it monitors the outbreak. It said it has been in communication with federal, state and local health officials in addition to teams and tracks. IndyCar: The racing league’s sanctioning body said in a statement Wednesday that it is closely monitoring the situation but does not expect any changes to its season opener, which takes place in St. Petersburg, Fla., on March 15. PGA: The PGA Tour announced Wednesday that it has no plans to alter its schedule beyond changes that have already been made with the PGA Tour-Series China (delayed start to season). That could change, the league said, if the CDC and the World Health Organization make recommendations. LPGA: The league has canceled three events in response to the coronavirus outbreak. Events scheduled in Thailand and Singapore were canceled last month, and the Blue Bay LPGA on Hainan Island in China, which was originally scheduled to be played Thursday-Sunday, is also off the LPGA calendar. Their next event, the Founders Cup, is set to be played as scheduled at Wildfire Golf Club in Phoenix from March 19-22. Santa Anita (horse racing): The Arcadia-based horse racing track said in a statement Wednesday that it is monitoring the situation and is “taking procedures necessary for the health and safety and well-being of our fans, staff and horsemen, including adding numerous hand-sanitizing stations throughout the facility.” L.A. Marathon: The Los Angeles Marathon will run as scheduled on March 8, race officials announced. Marathon organizers are offering a deferral option to runners traveling from impacted countries allowing them to delay their participation until next year. WWE: Over the April 5 weekend, travelers from all over the world will descend on Tampa, Fla., for WWE’s WrestleMania weekend, which should draw well over 100,000 people. According to the WWE, “The health and safety of our fans, performers and employees are our top priorities and we are monitoring the situation closely with our partners and government officials in Tampa Bay. We remain committed to hosting WrestleMania at Raymond James Stadium on Sunday, April 5, and like other entertainment properties in the U.S., there are currently no plans to cancel or postpone our upcoming events.” International International Olympic Committee (Tokyo 2020 Olympics): No plans have been made to reschedule or cancel the Olympics, scheduled for July 24-Aug. 9. “We remain very confident with regard to the success of these Olympic Games,” IOC President Thomas Bach said Tuesday. The IOC has formed a task force that includes representatives from the World Health Organization, the Tokyo 2020 organizing committee and the Japanese government to monitor the situation. Premier League: The English league has informed its clubs of a contingency plan should large gatherings be banned because of the coronavirus spread. In the meantime, the league has advised teams to pay increased attention to hygiene at stadiums and training grounds, reduce the number of nonessential visitors to team facilities and minimize any face-to-face meetings. Bundesliga: The German Football League, which operates Bundesliga, said in a statement last week that it is monitoring the situation but wasn’t considering postponing matches at that point. FC Bayern Munich has advised its players to refrain from signing autographs and posing for selfies with fans. Ligue 1: The French league is altering its pregame routines due to the coronavirus. Handshakes among players, coaches and officials are prohibited until further notice. Players will continue to be escorted to the field by youth players but will hold the youngsters by the shoulder, rather than by hand as is customary. Serie A: Italy has closed all sporting events to the general public until April 3 amid a coronavirus outbreak in the country. The Italian soccer league postponed games on its schedule this week but is expected to resume this weekend, according to the Associated Press. More than 100 people have died in Italy, and more than 3,000 have been infected with COVID-19. WTA: The Kunming Open, which was scheduled for April 27-May 3 in Anning, China, has been canceled. The Xi’an Open in China from April 13-19 also has been canceled. The BNP Paribas Open at Indian Wells is still scheduled to begin March 11. “We are closely watching the developments with the coronavirus. We remain very positive about this year’s BNP Paribas Open and look forward to welcoming everyone to Indian Wells very soon,” BNP Paribas Open tournament officials said in a statement. ATP: Two events in China were canceled and another event in Italy was called off last month amid coronavirus concerns. No other events have been canceled or rescheduled. Korean and Japanese baseball leagues: The Japanese baseball league announced last week that it has barred fans from attending exhibition games. The South Korean league canceled its exhibition games. Neither league has committed to starting their regular seasons as scheduled — March 20 in Japan, March 28 in South Korea. Formula One: Ross Brawn, Formula One’s managing director, said races remain scheduled for Australia and Bahrain in March and Vietnam in April, but said the situation could change. “It’s a very serious situation, so I don’t want to underplay it,” Brawn told Reuters on Tuesday. “But we’re trying to have races. We’ve got to do them in a responsible way.” Formula One earlier postponed the Chinese Grand Prix, which was originally scheduled for April 19. MotoGP: The Qatar Grand Prix in Doha, which was scheduled for Sunday, has been canceled. Times staff writers Chuck Schilken, Kevin Baxter, Soumya Karlamangla, Jeff Miller, Helene Elliott, Houston Mitchell and Bill Shaikin contributed to this report. 
Mar 4, 2020	Los Angeles County officials have discussed the possibility of banning spectators from attending sporting events in Southern California in an attempt to slow the spread of the coronavirus. The county declared a health emergency Wednesday as the number of coronavirus cases in the region increased to seven. “If at any point we think that there’s good reason for us to be worried about extensive, extensive community transmission ... we may ask for modifications at large public events,” county health director Barbara Ferrer said. “This could be that games are played but there are no spectators. This could be that there are limits to how people are going to gather at public events. But I want to reassure everyone we are not there today.” Ferrer called such measures “extreme.” “What this is,” she added “is a call for preparedness.” A spokesman for LAFC, which has played before 38 consecutive sellout crowds in its 22,000-seat stadium in Exposition Park, said the team participated this week in a conference call with health officials and the operators of other Los Angeles sports and entertainment venues over how to deal with a “worst-case” scenario. “And obviously the worst is the city can come in and cancel events,” said Seth Burton, the team’s vice president of communication. “Another option would be for games to be played with no fans. So there’s all degrees of it. Everyone knows that could happen. But hopefully we’re not there yet.” LAFC is expecting another sellout crowd for Sunday’s game against the Philadelphia Union. Brendan Hannan, vice president of marketing and communications for the Galaxy, said the team’s parent company, AEG, which also owns the Kings and manages both the Staples Center and Dignity Health Sports Park, has been developing contingency plans should the situation worsen. The Galaxy is expecting more than 27,000, its biggest crowd in at least four seasons, for Saturday’s home opener with the Vancouver Whitecaps. MLS commissioner Don Garber said the league is monitoring the situation closely. “I think you’re going to see coordination discussions,” said Garber, who said MLS is in contact with other leagues around the world. “All of the leagues have their own programs.” MLS has formed a task force under the direction of Margot Putukian, its chief medical officer, and is working closely with the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention in Atlanta and Canada’s Public Health Agency in Ottawa. “We’re no different than any other league, any other business that’s catering to the public,” Garber said. “We, like every other citizen in the world, are paying close attention to it.” Coronavirus fears have led soccer officials in Japan, South Korea and China to delay the start of the regular season. In Italy, more than a dozen matches, including this week’s Coppa Italia semifinals, have been postponed, leaving that country’s soccer association considering the possibility of playing future matches in empty stadium as well. 
Mar 4, 2020	The beach chairs lie empty on the fine white sand. The cavernous seafood restaurants are dark, a few crustaceans floating lazily in their tanks. Hotels are sending employees home without pay and golf courses might soon do the same. The coronavirus has decimated tourism in Vietnam and throughout Southeast Asia, spreading economic pain across a region that had expected 2020 to be another year of robust growth. Businesses in Vietnam are seeing mass cancellations as virus-related travel restrictions bite. The government has warned of $5.9 billion to $7.7 billion in losses through April — and no telling what happens after that. “It’s gone from everything to nothing,” said Mark Wyndham, a 44-year-old Australian who operates a motorcycle tour business here along Vietnam’s sun-splashed central coast. Da Nang’s beaches, golf resorts and casinos have been a magnet for visitors from China and South Korea, who made up more than half of Vietnam’s 18 million tourists in 2019. Their numbers have collapsed as the two countries grapple with the largest outbreaks of the coronavirus, which has sickened more than 80,000 in China and nearly 5,000 in South Korea. It is a similar story across much of the world as the disease known as COVID-19 hopscotches from Iran to Italy to Washington state, prompting an ever widening web of travel restrictions, flight bans and canceled trips. “This year is going to be a pretty bad year for the tourism sector and all the ancillaries that are attached to it,” said Anwita Basu, head of country risk research for Asia at Fitch Solutions. “And a lot of the travel bans we think will last for a much longer period of time than the risk of the contagion itself.” The downturn will particularly affect the emerging markets of Southeast Asia, where tourism has helped drive a decade of world-leading economic growth. In Laos and Thailand, tourism accounts for more than 12% of the entire economic output, according to Fitch. In Bangkok, food markets and temples are deserted. Conventions and exhibitions in Singapore — a $1.6-billion industry — have been called off. On the Indonesian island of Bali, hoteliers and villa owners reported tens of thousands of cancellations. “People don’t want to come to Asia at the moment,” said Trent Davies, an advisor in Vietnam at Dezan Shira & Associates, a business consultancy. No country has been more important for Asian — and global — travel in recent years than China, which sent some 170 million travelers overseas last year, more than three times as many a decade earlier, according to the China Outbound Tourism Research Institute, or COTRI. In 2018, travelers from China spent $277 billion abroad, more than the combined total of the next two countries, the U.S. and Germany. When China banned tour groups from leaving the country to keep from spreading the virus, it was as if the world’s biggest tourism spender suddenly closed its pocketbook. “ For a lot of small companies in Thailand and Vietnam this will be disastrous,” said Wolfgang Georg Arlt, the chief executive of COTRI. “A lot of souvenir shops, small restaurants, taxi drivers, pickpockets, prostitutes — many of them will go bust.” The impact of Chinese visitors is clear in Da Nang, once a nondescript beach town between the former imperial city of Hue and the picturesque canals and lantern-filled lanes of ancient Hoi An, a UNESCO World Heritage Site. Casinos and Cantonese restaurants have sprouted across the city. Massage parlors and souvenir gem shops beckon with signs printed in Chinese. At Gyumaru, a 12-table Japanese restaurant serving steaks and craft beers to predominantly East Asian clientele, only four diners came through the doors one day last week, said manager Tuyen Tran. The staff’s hours had been cut in half, and within a few days she expected that two of the kitchen’s three chefs would be let go. “We really don’t have any choice,” said the 20-year-old Tran, who added that the restaurant had no bookings for the next several days and was surviving on a few online orders. “It’s sad to see this happen to our staff,” she said. “Some of them are students who work part-time to pay their tuition. We are trying just to hold on and hopefully it will get better.” At the 770-room beachfront Crowne Plaza Danang, part of the international IHG hotel chain and owned by a Chinese investor, the only guests last week were a handful of well-off Chinese families that had been on vacation for Lunar New Year when the travel restrictions hit — and opted to stay. One family milled about the empty lobby, their toddler’s cries echoing under the vaulted hardwood ceiling. A pair of hotel employees wiped down and dusted cafe tables that appeared not to have been used in days. Anna Tren, the assistant front office manager, said most employees had gone on leave, but that if things didn’t improve soon, the hotel might start sending some home without pay. “Maybe we will lose our jobs,” said Tren, who is eight months pregnant. “More than 90% of our guests are from China, so we are worried.” Vietnam said this week it would roll out a $1.16-billion stimulus package to help businesses recover from the epidemic. Governments in South Korea, Malaysia and Indonesia are among those that have announced or are considering similar measures. Vietnamese authorities moved quickly to ban flights from China and from virus-affected areas of South Korea, and the measures appear to have helped the country avoid a major epidemic: All 16 patients infected with COVID-19 have recovered, the government says. But the virus’ spread to Europe and North America dashed hopes that tourists from other regions might soon resume travel. Wyndham, who began offering motorcycle tours a decade ago and has large numbers of European and Australian clients, said a group of Italian guests canceled bookings worth $30,000 after the outbreak in their country, because they feared they would be denied visas to Vietnam. “If you have a Korean- or Chinese-focused tour business, you’re taking the hit now,” Wyndham said. “I’ve got a horrible feeling that our hit is about to come.” 
Mar 4, 2020	Gov. Gavin Newsom declared a state of emergency over the novel coronavirus after a California man died after falling ill with the virus while on a cruise ship. Officials are trying to locate hundreds of other Californians who disembarked from the Grand Princess ship in San Francisco last month after a trip to Mexico. Officials want to determine whether they also might have contracted the virus. That same ship, after a subsequent trip to Hawaii, canceled its stop in Baja California and was scheduled to return early to San Francisco on Wednesday, but it was being held off the coast so public health officials could screen everyone onboard, the governor said. The virus has now been reported in 12 counties in the state and has sickened more than 50 people. Newsom said he felt confident that the state could prevent the virus from being spread by passengers of the cruise who already had returned to California. “We have the resources,” Newsom said. “We have the capacity. By this evening, we will have contacted every county health official that has someone who came off this cruise. They will have their contact information and begin a process to contact those individuals.” Newsom said his emergency declaration is intended to help California prepare for and contain the spread of the coronavirus by allowing state agencies to more easily procure equipment and services, share information on patients and alleviate restrictions on the use of state-owned properties and facilities. “This proclamation, I want to point out, is not about money,” Newsom said of the emergency declaration. “It’s about resourcefulness. It’s about our ability to add tools to the tool kit.” Placer County public health officials announced that patient who had tested positive for COVID-19 after returning from a cruise to Mexico last month died. The individual, later identified as a 71-year-old Rocklin resident, had underlying health conditions and was the county’s second confirmed case of COVID-19, reported Tuesday night. Officials said close contacts of the patient were being quarantined and monitored for the illness. The person’s likely exposure occurred during travel on a Princess Cruises ship that departed Feb. 10 from San Francisco and sailed to Mexico, returning Feb. 21, officials said. The patient tested positive Tuesday and had been placed in isolation at Kaiser Permanente Roseville Medical Center. The person probably had minimal community exposure between returning from the cruise and arriving at the hospital by ambulance Thursday, health officials said. Ten Kaiser Permanente healthcare workers and five emergency responders, who were exposed before the patient was put in isolation, are now in quarantine. None of those 15 workers is exhibiting symptoms, officials said. It’s possible that other cruise passengers may have been exposed, officials said. Placer County Public Health is working closely with Sacramento County Public Health and the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention to identify and contact other cruise passengers. By one estimate, more than 50% of the roughly 2,500 passengers who traveled from San Francisco to Mexico and back on the cruise ship with the Placer County victim are Californians, Newsom said. “We extend our deepest condolences to the loved ones of this patient,” Placer County health officer Dr. Aimee Sisson said. “While we have expected more cases, this death is an unfortunate milestone in our efforts to fight this disease, and one that we never wanted to see. “While most cases of COVID-19 exhibit mild or moderate symptoms, this tragic death underscores the urgent need for us to take extra steps to protect residents who are particularly vulnerable to developing more serious illness, including elderly persons and those with underlying health conditions.” Sisson said the resident first developed symptoms while on the cruise and continued to show symptoms while traveling through the Port of San Francisco. The individual called 911 and was taken to the hospital Thursday, then tested for COVID-19 on Sunday. The results returned positive Tuesday, and the patient died Wednesday morning, Sisson said. Placer County has six pending tests for COVID-19, and Sisson said she expects to see cases of community transmission soon. “I urge Placer County residents to be vigilant and to take steps to protect themselves,” Sisson said. “Wash your hands. Wash your hands. Wash your hands…. We are not at the point where I would consider canceling events, closing schools or requiring widespread distancing measures, but we do want the public to prepare for that possibility.” Sisson recommended that residents have two weeks of supplies on hand in case they are asked to quarantine. Rocklin Fire Chief Bill Hack said emergency responders are wearing protective masks and goggles when responding to 911 calls until it is clear whether a person has respiratory symptoms that could indicate COVID-19. Three of the five emergency responders who have been quarantined related to the Placer County death are Rocklin city firefighters. “They’re obviously being hyper-vigilant that if they start to become symptomatic they know what to look for and they know what steps to take,” Hack said. “They’re in good spirits at this point.” Placer County is requesting that any other individuals who were on the Grand Princess cruise to Mexico self-quarantine. Princess Cruises said it was notified by the CDC that it is investigating a small cluster of cases in Northern California among guests who sailed on the Grand Princess Mexican voyage. The company said 62 guests on that voyage remain onboard for the trip to Hawaii that was returning to San Francisco after canceling its stop in Ensenada, Mexico. Eleven passengers and 10 crew members on the boat were showing symptoms Wednesday, the governor said. “That number may significantly understate” the scope of infection, he said, or “it may indeed be abundance of caution.” The state will contact every county health official with passengers in their area by Wednesday night, he said. Newsom addressed the death shortly after the announcement. “Jennifer and I extend our deepest condolences to the family and loved ones affected by this death in Placer County,” he said in a statement. “The state is working with federal officials to follow up on contact tracing of individuals that may have been exposed to provide treatment and protect public health. “This case demonstrates the need for continued local, state and federal partnership to identify and slow the spread of this virus. California is working around the clock to keep our communities safe, healthy and informed.” Newsom previously requested that the Legislature make $20 million available for the state to respond to the coronavirus and announced the California Department of Public Health is dipping into its reserves of millions of N95 masks to distribute to healthcare workers on the front lines of the coronavirus fights. Newsom said Wednesday that a coronavirus lab test is now considered an essential benefit covered by government-sponsored health plans and private insurers. The governor added he is also extending price gouging protections in response to Amazon vendors’ taking advantage of people seeking hand sanitizer and other in-demand goods. Los Angeles County, meanwhile, declared a health emergency Wednesday as the number of coronavirus cases in the county increased to seven, including six new patients. None of the new cases are believed to be “community spread,"officials said. All individuals were exposed to COVID-19 through close contacts with others who were infected. The additional cases were confirmed Tuesday night. Officials said three of the new cases were travelers who had visited northern Italy, two were family members who had close contact with a person outside of the county who was infected, and one had a job that put them in contact with travelers. One patient has been hospitalized, and the others are isolated at home. Additionally, the cities of Pasadena and Long Beach are declaring public health emergencies related to the novel coronavirus. There are currently no confirmed cases of the virus in either city. The county’s move comes as the government has increased testing, which officials have warned will result in the identification of a significant number of new cases. L.A. joins a growing number of California jurisdictions to take health-emergency action, which is designed to better marshal resources from across government agencies and give the fight against the virus more focus. “I want to reiterate this is not a response rooted in panic,” L.A. County Supervisor Kathryn Barger said at a news briefing. “We need every tool at our disposal.” Supervisor Hilda Solis acknowledged the ongoing spread of misinformation about the virus and xenophobia toward Asian communities. “There’s been too much misinformation spreading around,” Solis said. “As we expected, it’s cultivating fears and leading to racial profiling.” Los Angeles County will increase its capacity for testing of the virus at its public health laboratory. Officials will begin daily radio briefings for the public, post new guidelines for schools and colleges, and over the next week will send “technical assistance teams” to make site visits to temporary housing facilities including homeless shelters. Officials urged the public to frequently wash their hands, opt for verbal salutations in place of hugs and handshakes and try to maintain a distance of six feet from strangers. “We have to be prepared. We have to protect the well-being of our loved ones and our neighbors,” Los Angeles Mayor Eric Garcetti said. Officials said they had tested more than two dozen people for COVID-19 before these recent test results came back positive and reiterated that there had been no sign of community spread in the county. “I want to reassure everyone — we are not there today,” L.A. County Department of Public Health Director Barbara Ferrer said. A screener of incoming flights from China and surrounding countries at Los Angeles International Airport is among the new cases that have tested positive for coronavirus in L.A. County, according to two sources familiar with the report. The screener, who is attached to the CDC, last worked Feb. 21 at LAX and, after developing potential symptoms, alerted medical professionals and authorities. The person was formally identified Tuesday as having the COVID-19 virus and so far has a mild case and is isolated at home. Family members of the person have also been tested, according to one of the sources. So far, nothing has been done to change intake at the airport. Sources say the person was wearing protective clothing during the screening process. Marin County health officials Tuesday declared a local health emergency despite there being no cases of coronavirus reported among county residents. San Francisco, which has no reported cases, and Orange County, which has three cases, declared health emergencies last week. The move comes amid more sobering news about the spread of the virus in the United States, including nine deaths in Washington state, a new quarantine in the suburbs of New York City and a warning that more cases are on the horizon. “I want them to be prepared for the reality that they, there are going to be more cases in the community,” said Dr. Robert Redfield, director of the CDC. “But I want them to continue their daily lives. I want them to be mindful of the opportunity again to prepare themselves and their families.” The World Health Organization announced Tuesday that the global mortality rate from coronavirus had risen to 3.4%, with more than 3,000 fatalities. The death rate so far is many times higher than the mortality rate of the seasonal flu, which is 0.1%. WHO Director-General Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus said that is at least partly because COVID-19 is a new disease, and no one has built up an immunity to it. Still, he and other health officials said there was still time to slow the spread of the virus. Officials say they have learned the coronavirus is less transmissible than the flu, which is often spread by people who are infected yet don’t have symptoms. That doesn’t seem to be the case for COVID-19, he said. “There are not yet any vaccines or therapeutics … which is why we must do everything we can to contain it,” Tedros said. Earlier reports had pointed to a mortality rate of about 2% for COVID-19. Experts say they suspect all analyses so far have overestimated the disease’s fatality rate because milder cases are largely not being diagnosed. In 80% of people, the disease causes only mild illness, experts say. More than 50 people in California have the virus, with new cases reported in Berkeley and Santa Clara, Placer and Orange counties. Kaiser Permanente announced late Tuesday it was treating a patient in Los Angeles. The city of Berkeley said its case involved an individual who visited a country with an outbreak. That person has remained at home in a self-imposed quarantine since returning. “While the risk of infection remains low, the expanded presence of the virus in our community is a reality we should all prepare for,” said Berkeley’s public health officer, Dr. Lisa Hernandez. “There are steps that all of us in the community can take now to improve basic hygiene and also prepare for a wider spread in the future.” In Orange County, two cases are pending confirmation from the CDC. The cases involve a man in his 60s and a woman in her 30s who had both recently traveled to countries with widespread transmission, according to the Orange County Health Care Agency. Santa Clara County announced three more cases of coronavirus Wednesday, bringing the total count there to 14 — the highest number of cases in the sate. One is a man who’s currently hospitalized. The source of his exposure to the virus is currently under investigation. Two other men are close contacts of an existing case. California is also speeding up testing of possible coronavirus patients. This more aggressive testing, Newsom said, “may lead to a more rapid increase in the number of confirmed cases reported. That is not necessarily a sign that the rate of infection is increasing, but that our ability to test more people more rapidly is leading to better detection.” Dr. Mike Ryan, who runs WHO‘s emergencies program, pushed back against officials who wanted to “wave the white flag” and surrender to the disease’s hold. China took drastic steps to fight the virus, he said, and case numbers are now on the decline there. Countries such as China and South Korea “implemented very, very strong measures that have affected their own economies and their own societies,” Ryan said. “It’s really a duty of others to use the time that has been bought. Dr. Anthony Fauci, director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, said there remained many unknowns about the virus, including the degree to which people who do not express symptoms can transmit it to others. He said doctors know that it happens but have not yet gauged the extent, a key piece of data that will help determine decisions on how to contain it. Fauci said that Chinese data are believed to be accurate and that the spread of the virus there is slowing thanks to “draconian” methods that would never occur in the United States, including stringent travel and public gathering restrictions. “They have taken social distancing to its furthest extreme,” he said. Times staff writers Noah Bierman, Rong-Gong Lin II , Hannah Fry, Taryn Luna, Phil Willon, Richard Winton and Melody Gutierrez contributed to this report. 
Mar 4, 2020	As the Los Angeles Marathon approaches, some athletes and city residents are worried that the race could be a hotbed for the spread of the novel coronavirus. The marathon, scheduled for Sunday, is one of the largest in the country. Runners traverse the city, starting at Dodger Stadium and ending near the Santa Monica Pier. This year, roughly 27,000 athletes have registered from all 50 states and more than 78 countries, according to the marathon’s website. That total doesn’t include the thousands of volunteers and others who watch from the sidelines each year. Many have raised questions about whether the marathon will continue given the spread of coronavirus cases in the United States. More than 100 cases of the virus have been diagnosed nationwide, with 90,000 cases around the world. In California, the state’s first coronavirus-related death was announced Wednesday as the number of cases continue to rise. L.A. County officials confirmed Wednesday that there have been a total of seven cases of the virus in the county, all linked to travel, and announced a public health emergency to ensure that aid from the state and other counties may be obtained if needed. Tests so far have not indicated that the virus is spreading in the community, officials said. County officials have discussed the possibility of banning spectators from attending sporting events in Southern California, but so far, the L.A. Marathon is scheduled to proceed as planned. The Paris Half Marathon was canceled Saturday as cases mounted in Europe. The Seoul Marathon, originally scheduled for later this month, also has been indefinitely postponed. Other marathon organizers have asked only elite runners to participate in their races in order to reduce crowds. L.A. County’s health officer, Dr. Muntu Davis, said officials have been discussing precautionary measures with marathon organizers to make sure there are places for people to wash their hands and for medical staff to evaluate whether people are ill. “When we look at the relatively small number of cases in the U.S., the risk of exposure for those who are here to this virus is relatively low,” Davis said at a L.A. City Council meeting on Wednesday. Davis said the most important recommendation is that people stay home if they are sick, so as to not infect others. Jason Redmond, 45, plans to fly from Seattle to L.A. to run his first marathon this weekend. He and a childhood friend agreed to jog the course together. He said that he had been monitoring updates from the L.A. Marathon to see if he needed to cancel his trip. The virus is most dangerous for people who are elderly or have underlying health conditions, experts say. “For someone like me, I’m not at great risk,” said Redmond, a freelance photographer. “I feel like in my situation, I’m OK doing the marathon, but I worry about other people.” At the L.A. City Council meeting, Councilman Mike Bonin raised concerns about people traveling to L.A. for the marathon from other parts of the world. Major coronavirus outbreaks have been reported in China, Italy and South Korea. Davis said that travelers will be screened at the airport. People flying in from countries such as China and Italy “probably would not, based on their risk assessment at the airport, be able to participate,” he said. Other large events and conferences have been canceled by organizers who did not want to worry about having to mitigate the risk of spread of the virus, Davis said. In rare circumstances, health departments have shut down events because of a known risk, he said. “Given what we’ve seen based on the screening that’s happening, based on the numbers that we understand, based on areas of community transmission in the U.S. ... the risk to the general public is still deemed as low in the U.S.,” Davis said. “I wish I had a crystal ball.” Redmond, who used to live in Echo Park, said his goal is just to finish the marathon, and he’s looking forward to it. “It’s just one of those things I’ve been excited to do, but I’m also nervous,” he said. Times staff writer Colleen Shalby and Kevin Baxter contributed to this report. 
Mar 4, 2020	The battle against the coronavirus was reaching a critical moment in the United States, with the number of deaths rising Tuesday as public health leaders said there was a limited window to contain the virus. It was a day of grim milestones, with more deaths tied to a nursing home in Washington state, a new quarantine in the suburbs of New York City and warning that many more cases were coming. "I want them to be prepared for the reality that ... there are going to be more cases in the community," said Robert Redfield, director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. "But I want them to continue their daily lives. I want them to be mindful of the opportunity again to prepare themselves and their families."  The World Health Organization announced Tuesday the global mortality rate from coronavirus was 3.4%. The death rate so far -- which includes more than 3,000 deaths -- is many times higher than the mortality rate of the seasonal flu, which is 0.1%. WHO Director-General Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus said that is at least partly because COVID-19 is a new disease, and no one has built up an immunity to it. Still, he and other health officials said there was still time to slow the spread of the virus. Officials say they have learned the coronavirus is less transmissible than the flu, which is often spread by people who are infected yet don't have symptoms. That doesn't seem to be the case for COVID-19, he said. "There are not yet any vaccines or therapeutics ... which is why we must do everything we can to contain it," Tedros said. Earlier reports have pointed to a mortality rate of about 2% for COVID-19. Experts say they suspect all analyses so far have overestimated the disease's fatality rate because milder cases are largely not being diagnosed. In 80% of people, the disease causes only mild illness, experts say. Mike Ryan, who runs WHO's emergencies program, pushed back against officials who wanted to "wave the white flag" and surrender to the disease's hold. China took drastic steps to fight the virus, he said, and case numbers are now on the decline there. Countries such as China and South Korea "implemented very, very strong measures that have affected their own economies and their own societies," Ryan said. "It's really a duty of others to use the time that has been bought. "That is not a reverse you can achieve with influenza. If that is a failure, we'll have slowed down the virus," he said. There can be a big benefit in slowing the virus' arrival in a country for a few months, Ryan said. Many countries, including the U.S., are in the middle of flu season, so large numbers of coronavirus cases would overwhelm the health system. In Italy, COVID-19 patients and flu patients are already stretching hospitals and healthcare facilities, he said. Tedros said he's concerned by shortages of masks, gowns and other equipment needed by healthcare workers to stop the spread of disease "caused by rising demands and hoarding and misuse." "We can't stop COVID-19 without protecting our health workers," said Tedros, noting that prices of surgical masks have increased sixfold. Current information suggests that most COVID-19 cases are mild, said Dr. Nancy Messonnier, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention's director of the National Center for Immunization and Respiratory Diseases. According to a report from China, the most serious illnesses occur in 16% of cases, she said, and older people and those with underlying health conditions are twice as likely to develop serious outcomes. Speaking during a media briefing Tuesday, Messonnier said that cases similar to those reported abroad were now appearing in the United States. The CDC is relying on local health clinicians to determine testing needs. In addition to CDC test kits, commercial manufacturers overseen by the Food and Drug Administration are providing tests directly to states. These types of tests are typically what are on the front lines in the United States, Messonnier said. As of Monday evening, 60 cases of coronavirus had been diagnosed in the U.S. plus an additional 45 people who were passengers aboard the Diamond Princess cruise ship in Japan and were repatriated to America. That puts the total at about 105 cases, according to the CDC. The West Coast continues to bear the brunt of the illnesses in the U.S., with the focus on Northern California and Washington state. Public health officials confirmed a nursing home patient in Washington state was admitted to Harborview Medical Center in Seattle on Feb. 24 and died two days later. The patient, a 54-year-old man who had underlying medical conditions, was transported from Life Care Center of Kirkland and died days before several other patients at the nursing home were linked to the coronavirus, hospital spokeswoman Susan Gregg said. The Seattle and King County Public Health Department on Tuesday reported two additional deaths from COVID-19, bringing the King County total to eight. The other person who died was from Snohomish County, health officials said. A North Carolina resident who visited the Kirkland facility has since tested positive for the virus, becoming that state's first case of COVID-19, Gov. Roy Cooper announced Tuesday. Health department officials in North Carolina are working to identify anyone else who may have come in contact with the individual. "I know that people are worried about this virus and I want to assure North Carolinians our state is prepared," Cooper said in a statement, noting that the person represents an isolated case. More than 50 people in California have the virus, with new cases reported in Santa Clara County, Berkeley and two presumptive cases in Orange County. There is some debate about how the coronavirus outbreak will play out and its place in history. The 1918 Spanish flu -- the worst pandemic of the 20th century -- is estimated to have killed at least 50 million people worldwide over the course of three years. That includes 675,000 in the U.S. Among those who were infected, the death rate is estimated to be greater than 2.5%. The most recent pandemic flu -- caused by the H1N1 virus that emerged from pigs in 2009 -- caused 152,000 to 575,000 deaths around the world. An estimated 12,500 of those fatalities occurred in the U.S. during the first year of the outbreak; an estimated 60.8 million nationwide were infected. The new coronavirus could wind up somewhere in between, said Dr. Otto Yang, an infectious disease expert at UCLA. Based on what's known right now, his best guess is that it might resemble the pandemic flu of 1968, which killed about 1 million people globally, including 100,000 in the U.S. That time, the fatality rate for those infected was about 0.03%. Since 2010, the death toll of a single flu season has ranged from 12,000 to 61,000 in the U.S., according to the CDC. The current flu season, which began in October, has seen about 18,000 deaths so far. Though the flurry of positive test results in recent days does signal that the virus is circulating within the U.S., experts advised the public to avoid reading too much into those numbers. Until late last week, federal officials were not allowing widespread testing for the virus, so many people who were already sick are only now being diagnosed, Harvard epidemiology professor Marc Lipsitch said. "Some of the numbers are changing because new things are happening, but a lot of the numbers are changing because we're discovering things that have already happened," Lipsitch said in a forum Monday hosted by Harvard's public health school. "It's really important to distinguish 'Oh, goodness, there's a new cluster' from 'Oh, goodness, we just discovered that there's a cluster that's been there for some time.' " Times staff writers Noah Bierman and Noam N. Levey in Washington, Andrew J, Campa, Hannah Fry and Anh Do in Los Angeles and Phil Willon in Sacramento contributed to this report. Read reported from Seattle. Caption: PHOTO: TYLER GOODWIN cleans a bus from the King County fleet in Seattle. Even with the rise in coronavirus deaths in the U.S. -- all in Washington state -- health officials say there's still time to slow the spread of virus. PHOTOGRAPHER:Karen Ducey Getty Images 
Mar 4, 2020	The novel coronavirus has closed movie theaters, theme parks and film shoots in China. It has shuttered the Louvre Museum in Paris and La Scala opera house in Milan, and not far away in Venice, Italy, it cut short Carnival. Travel bans meant to curb person-to-person spread of a virus have trimmed attendance at film and gaming conferences, and some music festivals and concerts have been postponed indefinitely. Now the virus' recent detection on the West Coast has spurred arts institutions here to go on high alert in the event the disease spreads greatly beyond the 40-plus cases that have been reported in California. The common line among museums and theaters is that they are monitoring the situation and planning to operate as usual, unless told otherwise by county or state health departments, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention or the World Health Organization. Even though more than 3,000 have died from COVID-19 worldwide, health officials have not recommended closure of venues or the cancellation of public events in California because the immediate risk of transmission remains low.  The Getty Trust, whose operations include the Getty Center in Brentwood and the Getty Villa in Pacific Palisades, said it formed a coronavirus task force "to assure that we are keeping our employees, volunteers and visitors safe and closely informed." Employee travel to Italy, China and South Korea -- all coronavirus hot spots -- has been canceled. The Museum of Contemporary Art has a coronavirus task force that is meeting daily, and a spokeswoman said, "we are communicating closely with our colleagues at other institutions in Los Angeles." Eye on sanitizing With the phrase "hands-on exhibits" taking on new meaning to a germ-phobic public, the Natural History Museum of Los Angeles County and its sister sites, the La Brea Tar Pits and the William S. Hart Museum, have added more hand sanitizers. The Cayton Children's Museum, which opened last year in Santa Monica, stressed that its daily sanitizing procedures cover not just exhibits and bathrooms but also door handles and handrails. The Music Center -- which operates venues for Los Angeles Philharmonic, Los Angeles Opera, the L.A. Master Chorale and Center Theatre Group -- said it has increased disinfection practices at Walt Disney Concert Hall, Dorothy Chandler Pavilion, Ahmanson Theatre and Mark Taper Forum. The Music Center has set up additional hand sanitizer stations across the downtown L.A. campus and implemented more flexible ticket exchange policies. All of the region's more established theaters reached by The Times, including the Geffen Playhouse, the Odyssey and South Coast Repertory, said they will carry on with programming plans, at least for now. Most have added hand sanitizers or cleansing wipes. Theaters reported receiving few audience inquiries about contingency plans. Nevertheless, some, including American Conservatory Theatre in San Francisco, are sending an email of reassurance to patrons. "We just want to let our audiences and supporters know we care about them, we're actively aware of the latest information and we're working to ensure that they are healthy and safe," said Jennifer Bielstein, ACT's executive director. "Their safety is always the most important thing." The 24th Street Theatre in L.A. is opening its backstage bathrooms for audience members before and after performances, so more sinks are available for washing hands. The theater also installed signs advising proper hand-washing practices and paused the use of theatrical masks during student workshops. 'Focus on the facts' Many houses around town like the Fountain Theatre and Echo Theater Company are discussing how to brace for the effect the coronavirus might have on audience retention. "That may seem premature, but to me, it isn't," said Stephen Sachs, co-founder and co-artistic director of the Fountain. "This is such an extraordinary and rapidly changing situation. It's not a matter of waiting for the virus to get here. It has arrived. It's something we're gonna have to deal with -- to what extent, we don't know. The best thing we can all do is start talking about it and not be in denial about it so we can deal with it clearly and responsibly." Actors' Equity, the union representing theater actors and stage managers, issued a statement that said "the best way to remain safe in the workplace is to focus on the facts and not fear." "We have shared guidance with staff, posted resources for members and are having the appropriate internal conversations about maintaining business continuity if an outbreak becomes more severe," wrote Brandon Lorenz, Equity's national director of communications. "We have also initiated conversations with major Equity employers and other labor leaders around maintaining a safe and healthy workplace." -- Times staff writer Jessica Gelt contributed to this report. Caption: PHOTO: DAILY sanitizing procedures at Santa Monica's Cayton Children's Museum are comprehensive, it says. PHOTOGRAPHER:Claire Collins Los Angeles Times 
Mar 4, 2020	As the coronavirus threatens to upend the travel industry, executives of hotel, airline and cruise ship companies have been forced to confront sensitive questions of how to best protect their customers and employees. In the growing corner of the travel world occupied by Airbnb, those issues are being hashed out one home-rental host and guest at a time. On an online message board for hosts, a man in Mumbai asked what he should do when he received an inquiry from a guest coming from China. "I am unsure if I confirm or cancel the booking," he wrote.  A host from Tacoma, Wash., wrote on the same board that she's "wiping down all door knobs, handles, light switches, and anything else that may have been touched by the previous guests." In some cases, travelers of Asian descent have reported host cancellations they see as discriminatory. And in one posting, a host in Rome wrote that a guest checked out "because next door there is a family from Asia." "Two days before the trip, I got a message through the Airbnb app that said ... 'Hey, sorry we are afraid of coronavirus,' " said Kavi Pandian, a Fulbright scholar from outside Atlanta who had his reservation for a German Airbnb canceled. "I got the impression ... that I might not have gotten that message if it weren't clear from my profile that I was someone from Asian background." The outbreak began late last year in China and has now spread to almost every continent. Global economic growth could be cut sharply as factories in China and elsewhere shut down, endangering supply lines. Travel and tourism might be hit especially hard as travel restrictions kick in and conventions and other large-scale gatherings are canceled. Airbnb spokeswoman Mattie Zazueta said she did not have information on whether short-term home rental cancellations are up. But the spread of the disease comes at an inopportune moment for a company readying for an initial public offering. In a statement, Airbnb said its "focus right now is on how we can best support our stakeholders as they are impacted by this global health challenge, including hosts, guests, employees and the communities in which we operate." The company, on its website, provides links to information about travel advisories and general information about the virus and urges people "to take necessary precautions to protect yourself when traveling or hosting." Zazueta said the company has also directly contacted hosts in some countries "to help them stay prepared and follow best practices." Depending on the timing of the booking, Airbnb said it would also allow guests and hosts to cancel without penalties if their booking is in mainland China or South Korea, or if guests are coming from those two nations. Usually, the host chooses a cancellation policy that sets limitations on how guests can receive a full refund. The full-refund "extenuating circumstances" policy also applies to anyone worldwide who needs to comply with "disease control restrictions implemented by relevant governmental or health authorities," as well as people "diagnosed or suspected of being infected with COVID-19 [the virus' official name] by a medical or health authority." That doesn't cover many people who are simply wary of getting on a crowded plane and traveling to other busy tourist destinations amid what may turn out to be a pandemic. Cancellations are hitting countries that haven't seen widespread reports of the virus. Bogdana Butnar, who helps her elderly parents run an Airbnb in a Romanian mountain village, said two guests have already canceled, saying they have been warned against unnecessary travel. "My expectation is this will impact this summer's booking severely," Butnar said in an email. "My parents are obviously disappointed [because] the extra income was nice and they loved having people staying at the house." On its website laying out the cancellation policy, Airbnb also asks "that all community members be mindful of respect, inclusion, and our nondiscrimination policy when interacting with other members of our community." Zazueta said Airbnb would "investigate all reports of discrimination and take appropriate action when necessary, including up to removal of users from the platform." Pandian said Airbnb was very helpful, got him a full refund and gave him additional money to pay for a new place to enjoy a German festival. But some guests consider the refund conditions arbitrary. For example, Airbnb's offer of a full refund applies to guests traveling to mainland China who are checking in April 1 or earlier. In South Korea, it applies to guests checking in March 9 or earlier. That leaves out people such as Kevin Huynh of Corona. The 46-year-old electrical engineer booked a place in South Korea for a June family trip with his wife and two children. Concerned, they've decided to stay home. He said Airbnb initially told him he could receive only a 50% refund, but after he pushed back, the company eventually offered a 50% refund and a 50% credit to book another trip. He said he's holding out for a full refund because he doesn't want to deal with Airbnb again after fighting with their customer service representatives. Huynh's experience shows how Airbnb's business model can add complexity to resolving disputes at times like this. In one message, an Airbnb rep told Huynh the company's hands were tied because the host was still willing to accommodate him and refused to agree to a refund. "Every cancellation, especially those which blocked the host's calendar dates for a few dates, are lost business opportunities" for the host, the Airbnb employee wrote. "Therefore, your host is the best person to determine if this refund request is acceptable after taking business factors into consideration." The employee recommended that Huynh check the cancellation policy for future bookings, so "this kind of matter will be avoided in the future." Huynh replied: "Please tell me how I can avoid knowing in advance that a global virus outbreak will occur in the country that I will be traveling to. If you can I can definitely avoid this problem in the future." Zazueta, the Airbnb spokeswoman, said the company was sorry Huynh had a bad experience and noted it offered him a coupon as a "goodwill gesture." She said cut-off dates for full refunds will be "updated as needed, as the situation evolves." There could be a silver lining for some domestic hosts. John Banczak runs TurnKey Vacation Rentals, which manages full-house vacation rentals in the United States on Airbnb and other websites. He said the company saw a large jump in bookings last week, something he attributes in part to coronavirus. "They may be backing off on international plans and they are looking for alternatives," Banczak said of vacationers. Caption: PHOTO: THE GLOBAL spread of the coronavirus comes at an inopportune moment for Airbnb, because the company is preparing for an initial public offering. PHOTOGRAPHER:Smith Collection/Gado Getty Images PHOTO:A WOMAN browses Airbnb. Guests and hosts are grappling with how to respond to the coronavirus, prompting cancellations -- some of which were discriminatory, some travelers of Asian descent say. PHOTOGRAPHER:Javier Soriano AFP via Getty Images PHOTO:AMID the outbreak, Airbnb says it has discussed best practices with hosts in some countries. Above, guests in Washington, D.C. PHOTOGRAPHER:T.J. Kirkpatrick Washington Post 
Mar 3, 2020	The novel coronavirus has closed movie theaters, theme parks and film shoots in China. It has shuttered the Louvre Museum in Paris and La Scala opera house in Milan, and not far away in Venice, Italy, it cut short Carnival. Travel bans meant to curb person-to-person spread of a virus have trimmed attendance at film and gaming conferences, and some music festivals and concerts have been postponed indefinitely. Now the virus’ recent detection on the West Coast has spurred arts institutions here to go on high alert in the event the disease spreads greatly beyond the 40-plus cases that have been reported in California. The common line among museums and theaters is that they are monitoring the situation and planning to operate as usual, unless told otherwise by county or state health departments, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention or the World Health Organization. Even though more than 3,000 have died from COVID-19 worldwide, health officials have not recommended closure of venues or the cancellation of public events in California because the immediate risk of transmission remains low. The Getty Trust, whose operations include the Getty Center in Brentwood and the Getty Villa in Pacific Palisades, said it formed a coronavirus task force “to assure that we are keeping our employees, volunteers and visitors safe and closely informed.” Employee travel to Italy, China and South Korea — all coronavirus hot spots — has been canceled. The Museum of Contemporary Art has a coronavirus task force that is meeting daily, and a spokeswoman said, “we are communicating closely with our colleagues at other institutions in Los Angeles.” With the phrase “hands-on exhibits” taking on new meaning to a germ-phobic public, the Natural History Museum of Los Angeles County and its sister sites, the La Brea Tar Pits and the William S. Hart Museum, have added more hand sanitizers. The Cayton Children’s Museum, which opened last year in Santa Monica, stressed that its daily sanitizing procedures cover not just exhibits and bathrooms but also door handles and handrails. The Skirball Cultural Center already has a thorough regimen for deep cleaning and disinfecting its facilities, said Mia Cariño, vice president of communications and marketing. But added measures are being taken inside for the popular Noah’s Ark interactive children’s playland. “In an abundance of caution at this time, we have stepped up cleaning protocols for objects and surfaces inside Noah’s Ark at the Skirball given the highly interactive nature of the experience,” she said, adding that restrooms located inside the Noah’s Ark galleries make it easier for staff and visitors to wash hands. The Music Center — which operates venues for Los Angeles Philharmonic, Los Angeles Opera, the L.A. Master Chorale and Center Theatre Group — said it has increased disinfection practices at Walt Disney Concert Hall, Dorothy Chandler Pavilion, Ahmanson Theatre and Mark Taper Forum. The Music Center has set up additional hand sanitizer stations across the downtown L.A. campus and implemented more flexible ticket exchange policies. All of the region’s more established theaters reached by The Times, including the Geffen Playhouse, the Odyssey and South Coast Repertory, said they will carry on with programming plans, at least for now. Most have added hand sanitizers or cleansing wipes. Theaters reported receiving few audience inquiries about contingency plans. Nevertheless, some, including American Conservatory Theatre in San Francisco, are sending an email of reassurance to patrons. “We just want to let our audiences and supporters know we care about them, we’re actively aware of the latest information and we’re working to ensure that they are healthy and safe,” said Jennifer Bielstein, ACT’s executive director. “Their safety is always the most important thing.” The 24th Street Theatre in L.A. is opening its backstage bathrooms for audience members before and after performances, so more sinks are available for washing hands. The theater also installed signs advising proper hand-washing practices and paused the use of theatrical masks during student workshops. Many houses around town like the Fountain Theatre and Echo Theater Company are discussing how to brace for the effect the coronavirus might have on audience retention. “That may seem premature, but to me, it isn’t,” said Stephen Sachs, co-founder and co-artistic director of the Fountain. “This is such an extraordinary and rapidly changing situation. It’s not a matter of waiting for the virus to get here. It has arrived. It’s something we’re gonna have to deal with — to what extent, we don’t know. The best thing we can all do is start talking about it and not be in denial about it so we can deal with it clearly and responsibly.” Actors’ Equity, the union representing theater actors and stage managers, issued a statement that said “the best way to remain safe in the workplace is to focus on the facts and not fear.” “We have shared guidance with staff, posted resources for members and are having the appropriate internal conversations about maintaining business continuity if an outbreak becomes more severe,” wrote Brandon Lorenz, Equity’s national director of communications. “We have also initiated conversations with major Equity employers and other labor leaders around maintaining a safe and healthy workplace.” On Broadway, the show will go on — for now. The Broadway League — the 700-plus-member organization that includes theater owners and operators, producers, presenters and general managers in North American cities, as well as suppliers of goods and services to the commercial theater industry — issued a statement Monday, shortly after the first case of the virus was confirmed in New York City. “The Broadway League is closely monitoring this evolving situation on behalf of the Broadway community,” the statement read. “The safety and security of our theatergoers and employees is our highest priority. We are following the lead of our city, state and federally elected officials, as well as implementing strategies recommended by public health authorities in all of our theaters and offices. We remain vigilant, and we are prepared to make decisions based on current needs, as well as in response to changing conditions.” Beyond these immediate operational preparations, “there are medium- and longer-term consequences to consider,” noted Teresa Eyring, executive director of Theatre Communications Group, an organization promoting professional nonprofit theater. “How can theaters prepare for the economic uncertainty of a significant outbreak? What impact might an outbreak have on contributed income? What role can theaters play in supporting our communities before, during and afterward? How can we be in solidarity with Chinese, Korean and Asian American communities who are facing racist and xenophobic responses to this outbreak?” The latter question directly affects Shen Yun Performing Arts, which has productions nationwide and begins performing throughout Southern California in April. The New York-based company made a lengthy statement on its website to respond to audience questions about the troupe’s potential exposure to the virus, and whether performances would continue as scheduled. “Performers have not been to China in years, have not had recent direct contact with people from China, and in fact Shen Yun is not even allowed to perform in China ... having been blacklisted by the Chinese government,” the statement said. “Audience members can enjoy Shen Yun performances resting assured that Shen Yun and its performers have been isolated from today’s China.” Times staff writer Jessica Gelt contributed to this report. 
Mar 3, 2020	As the coronavirus threatens to upend the travel industry, executives of hotel, airline and cruise ship companies have been forced to confront sensitive questions of how to best protect their customers and employees. In the growing corner of the travel world occupied by Airbnb, those issues are being hashed out one home-sharing host and guest at a time. On an online message board for hosts, a man in Mumbai asked what he should do when he received an inquiry from a guest coming from China. “I am unsure if I confirm or cancel the booking,” he wrote. A host from Tacoma, Wash., wrote on the same board that she’s “wiping down all door knobs, handles, light switches, and anything else that may have been touched by the previous guests.” In some cases, travelers of Asian descent have reported host cancellations they see as discriminatory. And in one posting, a host in Rome wrote that they had a guest check out “because next door there is a family from Asia.” “Two days before the trip, I got a message through the Airbnb app that said ... ‘Hey, sorry we are afraid of coronavirus,’” said Kavi Pandian, a Fulbright scholar from outside Atlanta who had his reservation for a German Airbnb canceled. “I got the impression ... that I might not have gotten that message if it weren’t clear from my profile that I was someone from Asian background.” The outbreak began late last year in China and has now spread to almost every continent, killing more than 3,000 people total, including at least nine in the United States. Global economic growth could be cut sharply as factories in China and elsewhere shut down, endangering supply lines. Travel and tourism might be hit especially hard as travel restrictions kick in and conventions and other large-scale gatherings are canceled. Airbnb spokeswoman Mattie Zazueta said she did not have information on whether home-sharing cancellations are up. But the spread of the disease comes at an inopportune moment for a company readying for an initial public offering. In a statement, Airbnb said, "[O]ur focus right now is on how we can best support our stakeholders as they are impacted by this global health challenge, including hosts, guests, employees and the communities in which we operate.” The company, on its website, provides links to information about travel advisories and general information about the virus and urges people “to take necessary precautions to protect yourself when traveling or hosting.” Airbnb’s Zazueta said the company has also directly contacted hosts in some countries “to help them stay prepared and follow best practices.” Depending on the timing of the booking, Airbnb said it would also allow guests and hosts to cancel without penalties if their booking is in mainland China or South Korea, or if guests are coming from those two locations. Usually, the host chooses a cancellation policy that sets limitations on how guests can receive a full refund. The full-refund “extenuating circumstances” policy also applies to anyone, worldwide, who needs to comply with “disease control restrictions implemented by relevant governmental or health authorities,” as well as people “diagnosed or suspected of being infected with COVID-19 [the virus’ official name] by a medical or health authority.” That doesn’t cover many people who are simply wary of getting on a crowded plane and traveling to other busy tourist destinations amid what may turn out to be a pandemic. Cancellations are hitting countries that haven’t seen widespread reports of the virus. Bogdana Butnar, who helps her elderly parents run an Airbnb in a Romanian mountain village, said two guests have already canceled, saying they have been warned against unnecessary travel. “My expectation is this will impact this summer’s booking severely,” Butnar said in an email. “My parents are obviously disappointed [because] the extra income was nice and they loved having people staying at the house.” On its website laying out the cancellation policy, Airbnb also asks “that all community members be mindful of respect, inclusion, and our nondiscrimination policy when interacting with other members of our community.” Zazueta said Airbnb would “investigate all reports of discrimination and take appropriate action when necessary, including up to removal of users from the platform.” Pandian said Airbnb was very helpful, got him a full refund and gave him additional money to pay for a new place to enjoy a German festival. But some guests consider the refund conditions arbitrary. For example, Airbnb’s offer of a full refund applies to guests traveling to mainland China who are checking in April 1 or earlier. In South Korea, it applies to guests checking in March 9 or earlier. That leaves out people like Kevin Huynh of Corona. The 46-year-old electrical engineer booked a place in South Korea for a June family trip with his wife and two children. Concerned, they’ve decided to stay home. He said Airbnb initially told him he could only receive a 50% refund, but after he pushed back the company eventually offered a 50% refund and a 50% credit to book another trip. He said he’s holding out for a full refund because he doesn’t want to deal with Airbnb again after fighting with their customer service representatives. Huynh’s experience shows how Airbnb’s business model can add complexity to resolving disputes at times like this. In one message, an Airbnb rep told Huynh the company’s hands were tied because the host was still willing to accommodate him and refused to agree to a refund. “Every cancellation, especially those which blocked the host’s calendar dates for a few dates, are lost business opportunities [for the host]” the Airbnb employee wrote. “Therefore, your host is the best person to determine if this refund request is acceptable after taking business factors into consideration.” The employee recommended that Huynh check the cancellation policy for future bookings, so “this kind of matter will be avoided in the future.” Huynh replied: “Please tell me how I can avoid knowing in advance that a global virus outbreak will occur in the country that I will be traveling to. If you can I can definitely avoid this problem in the future.” Zazueta, the Airbnb spokeswoman, said the company was sorry Huynh had a bad experience and noted it offered him a coupon as a “goodwill gesture.” She said cut-off dates for full refunds will be “updated as needed, as the situation evolves.” There could be a silver lining for some domestic hosts. John Banczak runs TurnKey Vacation Rentals, which manages full-house vacation rentals in the United States on Airbnb and other websites. He said the company saw a large jump in bookings last week, something he attributes in part to coronavirus. “They may be backing off on international plans and they are looking for alternatives,” Banczak said of vacationers. 
Mar 3, 2020	As three more deaths in the United States were linked to the coronavirus Tuesday, World Health Organization officials warned the virus could be far more dangerous than the flu, with a mortality rate of 3.4%. During an off-camera news conference at the White House with the task force charged with overseeing the federal government’s response, Robert Redfield, director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, delivered a message to the American public: “I want them to be prepared for the reality that they, there are going to be more cases in the community,” he said. “But I want them to continue their daily lives. I want them to be mindful of the opportunity again to prepare themselves and their families.” Redfield said scientists do not have the data to predict the future spread. “What we do know for sure that in the right setting, it does have the potential to move quickly,” Redfield said. “When you think that just a couple of weeks ago there were less than three cases in Korea, now there’s 2,500.” Public health officials confirmed a nursing home patient in Washington state was admitted to Harborview Medical Center in Seattle on Feb. 24 and died two days later. The patient, a 54-year-old man who had underlying medical conditions, was transported from Life Care Center of Kirkland and died days before several other patients at the nursing home were linked to the coronavirus, hospital spokeswoman Susan Gregg said. The Seattle and King County Public Health Department on Tuesday reported two additional deaths from COVID-19, bringing the King County total to eight. The other person who died was from Snohomish County, health officials said. A North Carolina resident who visited the Kirkland facility has since tested positive for the virus, becoming that state’s first case of COVID-19, Gov. Roy Cooper announced Tuesday. Health department officials in North Carolina are working to identify anyone else who may have come in contact with the individual. “I know that people are worried about this virus and I want to assure North Carolinians our state is prepared,” Cooper said in a statement, noting that the person represents an isolated case. New York City confirmed its first case of “community spread” coronavirus — the second case of the virus in the state. The individual is a man in his 50s who lives in Westchester County but works at a law firm in Manhattan. The man is hospitalized and in severe condition. The global mortality rate — which includes more than 3,000 deaths — is many times higher than the mortality rate of the flu, which is less than 1%. WHO Director-General Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus said that is at least partly because COVID-19 is a new disease, and no one has built up an immunity to it. Still, Tedros reiterated the WHO’s belief that containment was still within reach. “We don’t even talk about containment for seasonal flu,” Tedros said. “It’s just not possible, but it’s possible for COVID-19.” Officials say they have learned the coronavirus is less transmissible than the flu, which is often spread by people who are infected yet don’t have symptoms. That doesn’t seem to be the case for COVID-19, he said. “There are not yet any vaccines or therapeutics, which is why we must do everything we can to contain it.” Mike Ryan, who runs the agency’s emergencies program, pushed back against officials who wanted to “wave the white flag” and surrender to the disease’s hold. China took drastic steps to fight the virus, he said, and case numbers are now on the decline there. Countries such as China and South Korea “implemented very, very strong measures that have affected their own economies and their own societies,” Ryan said. “It’s really a duty of others to use the time that has been bought. “That is not a reverse you can achieve with influenza. If that is a failure, we’ll have slowed down the virus.” There can be a big benefit in slowing the virus’ arrival in a country for a few months, Ryan said. Many countries, including the U.S, are in the middle of flu season, so large numbers of coronavirus cases would overwhelm the health system. In Italy, COVID-19 patients and flu patients are already stretching hospitals and healthcare facilities, he said. Tedros said he’s concerned by shortages of masks, gowns and other equipment needed by healthcare workers to stop the spread of disease “caused by rising demands and hoarding and misuse.” “We can’t stop COVID-19 without protecting our health workers,” said Tedros, noting that prices of surgical masks have increased sixfold. Current information suggests that most COVID-19 cases are mild, said Dr. Nancy Messonnier, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention’s director of the National Center for Immunization and Respiratory Diseases. According to a report out of China, the most serious illnesses occur in 16% of cases, she said, and older people and those with underlying health conditions are twice as likely to develop serious outcomes. Speaking during a media briefing Tuesday, Messonnier said that cases similar to those reported abroad were now appearing in the United States. The CDC is relying on local health clinicians to determine testing needs. In addition to CDC test kits, commercial manufacturers overseen by the Food and Drug Administration are providing tests directly to states. These types of tests are typically what are on the front lines in the United States, Messonnier said. Vice President Mike Pence said Tuesday that 77 cases of coronavirus have been diagnosed in the U.S. That number excludes the 45 people who were passengers aboard the Diamond Princess cruise ship in Japan and were repatriated to America, which brings the total to more than 120. Pence said that a task force will issue new guidance from the CDC to make it clear that any American can be tested for the virus and no restrictions subject to doctor’s orders. Commercial laboratories are expected to have 2,500 test kits available to provide 1.5 million tests. And the Office of Management and Budget will direct all federal government agencies to review internal travel and adhere to State Department guidance. “The threat of the coronavirus to the American pubic remains low,” Pence said.  Pence also said that chief executives of all major airlines are expected to meet at the White House Wednesday to discuss contact tracing data for the coronavirus. The West Coast continues to bear the brunt of the illnesses in the U.S., with the focus on Northern California and Washington. At least five Northern California counties reported new cases of COVID-19 on Monday. On Tuesday, the city of Berkeley reported its first case after an individual visited a country with an outbreak. That individual has remained at home in a self-imposed quarantine since returning. “While the risk of infection remains low, the expanded presence of the virus in our community is a reality we should all prepare for,” said Berkeley Health Officer Dr. Lisa Hernandez. “There are steps that all of us in the community can take now to improve basic hygiene and also prepare for a wider spread in the future.” Gov. Gavin Newsom announced Tuesday that the California Department of Public Health received approval from the CDC and the National Institute of Occupational Safety and Health to dip into its emergency planning reserves of 21 million N-95 face masks for medical workers on the front lines. Though the flurry of positive test results in recent days does signal that the virus is circulating within the U.S., experts advised the public to avoid reading too much into those numbers. Until late last week, federal officials were not allowing widespread testing for the virus, so many people who were already sick are only now being diagnosed, said Harvard epidemiology professor Marc Lipsitch. “Some of the numbers are changing because new things are happening, but a lot of the numbers are changing because we’re discovering things that have already happened,” Lipsitch said in a forum Monday hosted by Harvard’s public health school. “It’s really important to distinguish ‘Oh, goodness, there’s a new cluster’ from ‘Oh, goodness, we just discovered that there’s a cluster that’s been there for some time.’ ” As the virus spreads, officials are trying to push back against Asian American bias and misinformation surrounding the outbreak. Amid signs that some are staying away from Chinatowns and other Asian communities in the U.S., Sen. Dianne Feinstein (D-Calif.) sharply criticized the xenophobia that had been displayed toward ethnic communities. “We’ve also seen a rise in racism toward Asian Americans because the virus is associated with China,” she said. “This is unconscionable, and it’s not the American way. People of all ages, races and ethnicities are susceptible to this disease. Bigotry toward any one group for a virus they have nothing to do with makes no sense.” Several areas in California have declared local emergencies amid the outbreak. Sonoma County on Monday issued a declaration after announcing two people had been diagnosed with the virus. One infected person returned from a cruise to Mexico 10 days ago and was hospitalized, but the case “is a cause for concern,” said county health officer Dr. Celeste Philip. Declaring a state of emergency will allow the county to respond properly to the outbreak as well as “work in tandem with our cities and healthcare providers to ensure we are prepared to combat an outbreak of COVID-19 in our communities,” Philip said in a statement. Meanwhile, more COVID-19 cases were reported in Santa Clara County, bringing its total to 11 — the most of any California county. The source of infection for the latest two cases, reported Tuesday, is still under investigation. Many initial reports of COVID-19 have been among healthcare workers, who are likely to encounter sick patients. Hundreds of healthcare workers in California have already been asked to stay home due to contact with patients diagnosed with the disease over the last few weeks. On Monday, Placer County reported a confirmed case of COVID-19 in a healthcare worker at NorthBay VacaValley Hospital in Vacaville, where a COVID-19 patient had been admitted. County spokeswoman Katie Combs Prichard said the medical worker, who lives in Placer County, came into contact with that patient and was likely infected by her. Conferences in the state and elsewhere are being canceled or scaled back amid fears of the virus, but the WHO’s Ryan said decisions to cancel mass gatherings, including sporting events, should be determined by a country’s leadership, based on how severe the outbreak is in their region. Officials recently had a call with the International Olympic Committee to discuss the Summer Olympics scheduled in Tokyo and decided to continue monitoring the situation, with three months given before a decision must be made. “I have confidence in Japan that there will hopefully be progress,” Tedros said. “Deciding now could be too early.” President Trump said Tuesday during a speech to the National Assn. of Counties’ legislative conference in Washington that he expected Congress would pass a special funding bill providing $8.5 billion — far more than he requested — to fight the spread of the illness in the United States. “It just shows you what can happen — six weeks ago, eight weeks ago, you never heard of this. All of a sudden, it’s got the world aflutter,” Trump said, noting later while leaving the White House to visit the National Institutes of Health that he is looking at further international travel restrictions involving Italy, Japan and South Korea, but will not limit domestic travel. Times staff writer Noah Bierman contributed to this report from Washington, D.C. Staff writer Read reported from Kirkland, Wash. Staff writers Shalby and Karlamangla reported from Los Angeles. 
Mar 3, 2020	Paul Schuster purchased tickets in early January to fly from Los Angeles to Seoul on Korean Air this summer. As the coronavirus spreads worldwide, with South Korea particularly hard-hit, he wants to cancel the trip. Guess what? Korean Air is slapping Schuster with a $200-per-ticket cancellation fee. On top of that, he’s finding he can’t even reach anyone at the airline to deal with the matter. I tried as well. Nothing but busy signals Monday. Contact information on the carrier’s website wouldn’t even load. “What to do?” Schuster asked. Good question. And Schuster is by no means alone in scrambling to rejigger itineraries amid what some health experts say is a looming global pandemic. “I’ve heard that reservations are falling off the board, and trips are being canceled left and right,” said Henry Harteveldt, a travel industry analyst at San Francisco’s Atmosphere Research Group. “Airlines are trying to be accommodating,” he told me, “but they’re giving out refunds only on a case-by-case basis.” President Trump tweeted Sunday that new screening procedures will be put in place for people traveling from “high-risk countries.” Vice President Mike Pence, who is overseeing America’s response to the coronavirus, said over the weekend that the United States is heightening a travel advisory for certain regions of South Korea and Italy. Cases of the virus have been reported in at least 60 countries. While airlines worldwide — including American, United and Delta — have suspended or reduced service to some of the most hard-hit regions, they’ve only gradually started letting spooked travelers off the hook. American Airlines announced Sunday it will waive its $200 fee to change travel plans up to 14 days prior to a scheduled trip. However, the waiver applies only to tickets purchased between March 1 and March 16. JetBlue and Alaska Airlines have announced similar moves. Southwest doesn’t charge change fees. Delta said Monday it will waive change fees only for international flights and only for tickets issued this month. It’s unclear at this point how many airline passengers are trying to reschedule or cancel trips because of the coronavirus. Thousands of flights, mainly to China, have been called off by airlines. The Global Business Travel Assn. said last week that nearly two-thirds of member companies have reported canceling at least “a few” meetings or events. A fifth of survey respondents said they’ve skipped “many” events. The trade group estimates the coronavirus could cost the worldwide business travel industry almost $47 billion a month. “It is clear that the coronavirus is having a significant — and potentially very costly — effect on our members, their companies and on the overall business travel industry,” said Scott Solombrino, the association’s executive director. “It is fundamentally affecting the way many companies are now doing business.” Industry analysts expect more carriers to forgo change fees as the virus grows in severity. But if you want the cost of your tickets refunded, you may be out of luck. While airlines and hotels are showing some flexibility with bookings, they’ve been reluctant to hand money back, even amid a worldwide public health crisis. Travel insurance may not help. Epidemics are routinely listed among exclusions in most policies. Moreover, travel insurance typically won’t cover what the industry calls “foreseeable events” — meaning if you can see a problem on the horizon, your policy may not apply. Most travel insurers designated the coronavirus a “known and foreseeable event” as of late January, around the same time the Centers for Disease Control issued a warning about avoiding nonessential travel to China. This basically allows insurers to exclude coronavirus-related claims for cancellations from that point onward. If you purchased coverage prior to then, you still may be eligible to submit a claim. Most travel insurance plans “contain general exclusions from coverage for any loss directly or indirectly due to any loss, condition or event that was known or foreseeable when the plan was purchased, or due to an epidemic,” said Allianz Travel, a leading insurance provider. Some travel policies include a “cancel for any reason” provision, which would cover you in such circumstances, although you may not be able recover all your travel costs (most, though). But this level of coverage is generally about 40% more expensive than ordinary travel insurance, so it’s unlikely you’ll find it in your fine print unless you specifically asked for it. “Travelers should ensure that they know what their policy covers and contact the insurance company directly with questions,” advised the U.S. Travel Insurance Assn. Harteveldt, the industry analyst, said airlines know that even as they face declines in ticket sales, they’re playing with fire when it comes to passengers’ coronavirus fears. “They realize that it’s essential for them to maintain customer goodwill right now,” he said. At this point, Harteveldt said, most carriers will waive fees for people who want to reschedule a flight. Refunds are trickier, he said. “The airlines have been downplaying this as an option,” Harteveldt observed. He advised any traveler seeking a refund to politely and calmly ask to speak with a supervisor. Explain your situation and make the case in as straightforward a fashion as possible for why you should get your money back. Your chances will be better if your trip involves a destination with a relatively significant coronavirus risk, such as China or Italy. “If you’re just scared of getting on an airplane,” Harteveldt said, “you may be able to reschedule, but you probably won’t be offered a refund.” If your airline hasn’t yet announced a fee-waiver policy for rescheduling, ask about your options. More than likely, they won’t put up a fight. And don’t give up if, like Schuster, you can’t get through to a service rep. Airline call centers can be swamped on ordinary days. At the moment, they’re overwhelmed. Oh, and wash your hands. Even if you aren’t going anywhere, it’ll help. 
Mar 3, 2020	Charmin toilet paper out at Costco. Masks all gone at Walgreens. A run on bags of rice. Even reasonably priced hand sanitizer is seemingly sold out at the world’s largest online retailer, Amazon. Are Americans prudently preparing for a coronavirus pandemic by stocking up? Or is this irresponsible panic buying? There are worrying implications for the shortage on some goods. U.S. Surgeon General Jerome M. Adams tweeted Saturday, “Seriously people- STOP BUYING MASKS! They are NOT effective in preventing general public from catching #Coronavirus, but if healthcare providers can’t get them to care for sick patients, it puts them and our communities at risk!” It’s true that people should be prepared for emergencies, whether it be earthquakes in California or hurricanes in the East. The Federal Emergency Management Agency suggests having, for instance, a two-week supply of water and food and medicine, and if the coronavirus outbreak is causing some to finally get serious about an emergency supply, that may be a good thing. But some experts in infectious diseases don’t believe the U.S. is on the brink of the situation in China, where hundreds of millions have been in some form of home lockdown, residential buildings have been sealed and where families get a limited number of passes to leave their homes occasionally. Dr. James Cherry of UCLA, an infectious diseases expert since 1963, says he already has a supply of food and other essentials for an earthquake. As for the idea of stocking up even more in light of the coronavirus outbreak, “I think going out now and stocking up on all kinds of stuff, that doesn’t make any sense to me.” No one can predict the future, but Cherry, an expert in pediatric infectious diseases since 1963, said the situation in Washington state actually suggests the virus causes only mild symptoms in most people it infects. “The fact that they noted it had been circulating for six weeks in Washington state before anybody noticed it, with many, many mild cases that went unrecognized, that’s why I don’t think this will be so bad,” said Cherry, primary editor of the Textbook of Pediatric Infectious Diseases. So far worldwide, more than 90,000 people have been infected with the new coronavirus and more than 3,000 have died in less than three months. The 1918 flu was particularly devastating, with mortality high in children younger than 5, in younger adults ages 20 to 40 and in people 65 and older. Virtually all deaths were a result of secondary bacterial pneumonia, Cherry said, in an era where there were no antibiotics to treat the bacterial infections associated with the flu. Based on what we know about nearly 45,000 coronavirus patients in China whose records were studied by Chinese health authorities, none under the age of 10 has died. Those at higher risk of death have been older than 70. To be sure, people should remain vigilant, and physicians will have to see how the outbreak plays out. The U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention said anyone finding it difficult to breathe needs to seek prompt medical attention, and to call your healthcare provider before seeking care if you suspect the new coronavirus. People at higher risk for complications and death, and their families, should be especially alert to worsening symptoms. The populations at higher risk include those with underlying medical complications, like diabetes and kidney disease. “I think we should be concerned about it, because it’s an unknown. But in just my looking at this, I think it’s not that bad for the run of the mill person,” Cherry said. For “older people like me, the risk is clearly higher. But my risk is not as much as the person who is a smoker, who has other risk factors.” Cherry also said, based on what’s known right now, that while other businesses have started to cancel domestic plane trips, he thought it was fine to fly. Though he wouldn’t go to Italy, China or South Korea, countries the CDC does not recommend for nonessential travel, Cherry said he does plan to take his planned trip to Atlanta next week and Houston in May, barring any new developments. “I think people shouldn’t overreact,” Cherry said. “I think you should carry on normal schedules.” 
Mar 3, 2020	Paul Schuster purchased tickets in early January to fly from Los Angeles to Seoul on Korean Air this summer. As the coronavirus spreads worldwide, with South Korea particularly hard-hit, he wants to cancel the trip. Guess what? Korean Air is slapping Schuster with a $200-per-ticket cancellation fee.  On top of that, he's finding he can't even reach anyone at the airline to deal with the matter. I tried as well. Nothing but busy signals Monday. Contact information on the carrier's website wouldn't even load. "What to do?" Schuster asked. Good question. And Schuster is by no means alone in scrambling to rejigger itineraries amid what some health experts say is a looming global pandemic. "I've heard that reservations are falling off the board, and trips are being canceled left and right," said Henry Harteveldt, a travel industry analyst at San Francisco's Atmosphere Research Group. "Airlines are trying to be accommodating," he told me, "but they're giving out refunds only on a case-by-case basis." President Trump tweeted Sunday that new screening procedures will be put in place for people traveling from "high-risk countries." Vice President Mike Pence, who is overseeing America's response to the coronavirus, said over the weekend that the United States is heightening a travel advisory for certain regions of South Korea and Italy. Cases of the virus have been reported in at least 60 countries. While airlines worldwide -- including American, United and Delta -- have suspended or reduced service to some of the most hard-hit regions, they've only gradually started letting spooked travelers off the hook. American Airlines announced Sunday it will waive its $200 fee to change travel plans up to 14 days prior to a scheduled trip. However, the waiver applies only to tickets purchased between March 1 and March 16. JetBlue and Alaska Airlines have announced similar moves. Southwest doesn't charge change fees. Delta said Monday it will waive change fees only for international flights and only for tickets issued this month. It's unclear at this point how many airline passengers are trying to reschedule or cancel trips because of the coronavirus. Thousands of flights, mainly to China, have been called off by airlines. The Global Business Travel Assn. said last week that nearly two-thirds of member companies have reported canceling at least "a few" meetings or events. A fifth of survey respondents said they've skipped "many" events. The trade group estimates the coronavirus could cost the worldwide business travel industry almost $47 billion a month. "It is clear that the coronavirus is having a significant -- and potentially very costly -- effect on our members, their companies and on the overall business travel industry," said Scott Solombrino, the association's executive director. "It is fundamentally affecting the way many companies are now doing business." Industry analysts expect more carriers to forgo change fees as the virus grows in severity. But if you want the cost of your tickets refunded, you may be out of luck. While airlines and hotels are showing some flexibility with bookings, they've been reluctant to hand money back, even amid a worldwide public health crisis. Travel insurance may not help. Epidemics are routinely listed among exclusions in most policies. Moreover, travel insurance typically won't cover what the industry calls "foreseeable events" -- meaning if you can see a problem on the horizon, your policy may not apply. Most travel insurers designated the coronavirus a "known and foreseeable event" as of late January, around the same time the Centers for Disease Control issued a warning about avoiding nonessential travel to China. This basically allows insurers to exclude coronavirus-related claims for cancellations from that point onward. If you purchased coverage prior to then, you still may be eligible to submit a claim. Most travel insurance plans "contain general exclusions from coverage for any loss directly or indirectly due to any loss, condition or event that was known or foreseeable when the plan was purchased, or due to an epidemic," said Allianz Travel, a leading insurance provider. Some travel policies include a "cancel for any reason" provision, which would cover you in such circumstances, although you may not be able recover all your travel costs (most, though). But this level of coverage is generally about 40% more expensive than ordinary travel insurance, so it's unlikely you'll find it in your fine print unless you specifically asked for it. "Travelers should ensure that they know what their policy covers and contact the insurance company directly with questions," advised the U.S. Travel Insurance Assn. Harteveldt, the industry analyst, said airlines know that even as they face declines in ticket sales, they're playing with fire when it comes to passengers' coronavirus fears. "They realize that it's essential for them to maintain customer goodwill right now," he said. At this point, Harteveldt said, most carriers will waive fees for people who want to reschedule a flight. Refunds are trickier, he said. "The airlines have been downplaying this as an option," Harteveldt observed. He advised any traveler seeking a refund to politely and calmly ask to speak with a supervisor. Explain your situation and make the case in as straightforward a fashion as possible for why you should get your money back. Your chances will be better if your trip involves a destination with a relatively significant coronavirus risk, such as China or Italy. "If you're just scared of getting on an airplane," Harteveldt said, "you may be able to reschedule, but you probably won't be offered a refund." If your airline hasn't yet announced a fee-waiver policy for rescheduling, ask about your options. More than likely, they won't put up a fight. And don't give up if, like Schuster, you can't get through to a service rep. Airline call centers can be swamped on ordinary days. At the moment, they're overwhelmed. Oh, and wash your hands. Even if you aren't going anywhere, it'll help. -- David Lazarus' column runs Tuesdays and Fridays. He also can be seen daily on KTLA-TV Channel 5 and followed on Twitter @davidlaz. Send your tips or feedback to david.lazarus@latimes.com. Caption: PHOTO: MEMBERS of a Korean Air flight crew wear masks as they depart the international terminal last week at LAX. PHOTOGRAPHER:Mario Tama Getty Images 
Mar 3, 2020	It was only after months of Bible study classes, several exams based on those lessons and hundreds of hours spent with members of the religious community that Esau Martinez learned the name of the group that had come to dominate his daily life. "We're based in Korea; our organization is called Shincheonji," members of his small group discreetly told him over Korean barbecue in Orange County, as if letting him in on a closely guarded secret, Martinez recalled. "We're going to be passing over soon," they told him. "We're going to be signing the 'Book of Life.' " That day, Martinez, then a 19-year-old community college student, realized how methodically he had been approached, recruited and indoctrinated, starting from the moment a classmate casually invited him to play basketball.  Unbeknown to him, most of those on the court were members of the Shincheonji Church of Jesus, a South Korean doomsday Christian sect. Established in 1984, the church believes that its 88-year-old South Korean founder is a "promised pastor" foretold in the New Testament who will live on forever -- and that his followers will as well, if they convert enough people to their faith, according to former members. The group has a growing presence in L.A. and in Orange County, with 545 people graduating from its Bible study program in June 2018, according to a blog post on its official website. The fringe Christian sect -- which some call a cult -- has been on the receiving end of outrage and suspicion in recent days as authorities identified it as having been at the center of a rapid surge in coronavirus infections in the South Korean city of Daegu, where one of its major branches is located. More than 2,000 infections have been linked to the church and its members as of Sunday -- about half of all cases in South Korea so far. Authorities have pledged to find and test every one of the more than 210,000 congregants in South Korea. Even a health official tasked with combating the coronavirus in a district clinic in Daegu was revealed to be a member of the church after he came down with COVID-19. On Sunday, a 45-day-old infant child of a Shincheonji follower became the youngest patient yet confirmed to have the virus. At least two church members who contracted the virus have died, according to authorities. The Seoul Metropolitan Government on Sunday reported Lee Man-hee, the church's messianic leader, and other Shincheonji officials to prosecutors, saying they should face criminal charges for homicide and causing injury for withholding information amid the outbreak. The church said Monday that Lee had tested negative for the virus. There is no indication any members in California, where the church also operates under the name Zion Mission Center, have been infected. It remains unclear how members of the church were initially infected. Authorities on Sunday said entry and exit records showed some of those on Shincheonji's roster had traveled in January to Wuhan, the outbreak epicenter, where the church acknowledged having sent missionaries in the past. It wasn't until Jan. 28 that South Korea issued travel alerts against all nonessential travel to Wuhan and surrounding areas. The church claims to have some 19,000 believers in China, its biggest presence outside South Korea, but largely operates underground because of crackdowns against evangelism. Before Feb. 18, when the first member of the church found to have the virus was diagnosed, South Korea had 30 confirmed cases. That 61-year-old woman had attended Sunday services in the preceding weeks with several hundred others, sitting tightly packed together on the floor as is the group's custom. Health officials who began testing those in attendance found hundreds of infections, and quickly discovered Shincheonji members elsewhere in the country had also contracted the virus. Efforts to track infections have run up against the secrecy that is central to the group and its efforts to propagate its beliefs and the fact that many members hide their affiliation because of the church's notoriety in South Korea, said Tark Ji-il, a professor of theology at Busan Presbyterian University, who has long studied the church and its teachings. "They approach people hiding their affiliation because evangelism is so important," he said. "They will hide that they are Shincheonji for as long as they can." On Monday, Lee held a news conference in South Korea. Over the clamor of protesters yelling on loudspeakers calling him a con man, Lee apologized to the South Korean people for the number of infections, his voice shaky and his glasses fogging up from a face mask. He bowed down to the floor before a phalanx of cameras. The first question came from a reporter who asked if he believed he would live forever -- a church official intervened, saying Lee would only answer questions about the coronavirus situation. The church has said it is fully cooperating with authorities, immediately closing down its 1,100 facilities around South Korea and turning over a list of its 212,324 South Korean members on Feb. 25 -- a week after the first Shincheonji member was diagnosed. It said it has also turned over the names of 33,281 overseas members. "We ask everyone to acknowledge that Shincheonji members are one of the biggest victims of COVID-19, bearing the brunt of the virus spreading," a church representative said in a statement, adding that members had been subject to "groundless slandering and hatred" since the outbreak. The pleas have done little to quell blame directed at the group for the surge in infections. More than a million people signed an online petition to the South Korean president asking that the church be forcefully disbanded. Officials in Gyeonggi province raided church headquarters in Gwacheon, saying it was slow to turn over the roster of members. Authorities in Daegu enlisted 600 police investigators to track down church members who could not immediately be reached. Kwon Nam-guy, a 14-year, high-ranking church member who left in 2006, said church members are trained to approach potential recruits under tailor-made pretenses, offering up career guidance, personality tests or even tarot card readings. "We created that playbook. We would establish a strategy, each take on a role and approach people under those pretenses," said Kwon, who now operates a counseling center and support group for defectors from Shincheonji. Kwon joined the church as a 23-year-old, quitting his job and eventually rising through the ranks and marrying a fellow member. He said he decided to leave after seeing an all-too-human side of the "promised pastor" Lee. Stella Kang, who returned to her native South Korea in 2014 after finishing college in Northern California, said she was offered free Bible classes on the street. Kang, who was raised Adventist, took it as a sign from God. Two months into classes, she was told the identity of the group and instructed never to research it online, because of outside forces trying to "poison" members with slander. Recruiting others was central to its teachings, Kang said. And she was good at it; she signed up a roommate and two other friends through months of contact and conversation. "I believed I could have eternal life on this Earth," said Kang, who left after about a year, when her parents intervened. "That's how powerful that indoctrination can be.... Everyone around you believes that. "These are people that believe they're going to live eternally, and physical bodies don't matter. For them, what's the point of a mask?" she said. Martinez said at the beginning, the classes didn't seem radically different from the beliefs of the church he'd grown up in. Over the months, some of the teachings began to seem more and more unconventional -- about the South Korean man who would never die, and the 144,000 of his followers who would come to rule the world. But he was instructed not to question teachings that other interpretations of the Bible were false, and all other pastors were frauds. He was also told not to tell friends or family, that the messages he was receiving were "hidden treasure." Attendance was considered of utmost importance -- any time he would miss a class, he was hounded by his group leader or fellow church members. "You don't notice it, but you start putting your friends aside, you start putting school second," he said. In a grandiose ceremony that the church called "passing over," Martinez officially joined the church and was told his name was now in the "Book of Life." Cracks later formed in his belief, he said, when he was taught the concept of "circular reasoning" during a college philosophy class on logical fallacies. He began realizing how the church refuted any skepticism by pointing back to the lessons the church itself had encouraged him to take to heart. The breaking point came on Mother's Day, 2017. He says he messaged his group leader telling him he was going to miss a service and was told that while it was OK that time, he should really think about his priorities. He confided in a childhood friend, breaking down in tears as he recounted the past year and determined how thoroughly brainwashed he'd been. The friend immediately urged: "Get the [hell] out of there." Martinez messaged his small group saying he would never return to the church. Without waiting for a response, he deleted the app church members used to communicate and changed his phone number. That night, his father called to tell him church members had come to the home he shared with his parents looking for him. For weeks afterward, they left cards tucked in his windshield and continued to drop by the house with brownies and doughnuts, Martinez said. A few months later, a high-up church official asked to meet him at a Starbucks. The official told him his heart had been poisoned, he recalled -- and only Shincheonji could undo it, should he decide to return. "To me, you guys are just bringing people and lying to them and trying to convert them," he responded before walking away one last time, he recalled. About a year later, he received an email from the official with the subject line: "Update." "I'm not writing this email to force you to return, but more so to notify you that you have been blotted out from the Book of Life," she wrote. "I hope the best for you and thank you for the memories that we shared." Caption: PHOTO: SOLDIERS in protective suits spray disinfectant at a branch of the Shincheonji Church of Jesus in Daegu, South Korea, over the weekend. PHOTOGRAPHER:Lee Moo-tyul Newsis PHOTO:A SEOUL branch of the Shincheonji Church is shut down, one of the church's 1,100 facilities that have been closed in South Korea. PHOTOGRAPHER:Jung Yeon-je AFP/Getty Images PHOTO:HEALTH WORKERS spray disinfectant on Feb. 21 in Daegu, which saw a rapid surge in coronavirus infections last month. PHOTOGRAPHER:Jung Yeon-je AFP/Getty Images 
Mar 3, 2020	Twitter on Monday became the first major U.S. corporation to strongly encourage its employees to work from home to avoid spreading coronavirus. "Beginning today, we are strongly encouraging all employees globally to work from home if they're able," the San Francisco-based social media company wrote in a blog post. "Our goal is to lower the probability of the spread of the COVID-19 coronavirus for us -- and the world around us." Twitter had more than 4,800 employees at the start of 2020.  The announcement followed news earlier in the day that cases of the viral infection had been identified in San Mateo, Santa Clara, Sonoma and Placer counties, and that four additional people had died from COVID-19 in Washington state, bringing the total U.S. death toll to six. Twitter had announced Sunday that it was suspending all non-critical business travel and events, which was already a step further than most of its corporate peers. Large tech companies such as Google, Facebook and Apple have said that they are restricting travel to and from China. Google's restriction also includes Japan, South Korea, Iran and Italy. Amazon and Salesforce have both frozen all nonessential business travel indefinitely. Many companies with offices and retail outlets in China, such as Apple, Google, and Facebook, have either closed them temporarily or asked employees to work from home. China remains the nation most deeply affected by the viral outbreak, and to date more than 2,800 of the more than 3,000 reported deaths from the virus have been in China's Hubei province, where the outbreak began. Google also confirmed reports on Monday that, in response to a possible case of COVID-19 at the company's offices in Dublin, Ireland, the company is asking all 8,000 of its employees there to work from home on Tuesday. "We continue to take precautionary measures to protect the health and safety of our workforce," a Google spokesperson wrote in an email. "In accordance with the advice of medical experts, and as part of that effort we have asked our Dublin teams to work from home tomorrow." Here in the U.S., several large tech conferences have been canceled out of an abundance of caution, including Facebook's annual F8 event and the video game industry's major Game Developers Conference. Facebook has also started restricting social visits to its offices, according to the Verge. Both Facebook and Twitter have canceled plans to participate in the South by Southwest Interactive festival in Austin, Texas. The digital currency exchange Coinbase issued new guidance to its workforce Monday, saying, "Employees that are likely to get sick more easily or for whom getting sick would be particularly problematic should now work with their manager to move to 100% Work From Home." Twitter's decision comes as the company faces pressure from an activist investor, who has floated the idea of ousting Chief Executive Jack Dorsey. Even before the virus emerged to promote the idea of remote work, Dorsey had mentioned potential plans to spend as much as six months of this year telecommuting from Africa. Caption: PHOTO: TWITTER and other tech giants are taking precautionary steps to confront the coronavirus outbreak. PHOTOGRAPHER:Glenn Chapman AFP via Getty Images 
Mar 3, 2020	The coronavirus outbreak has spurred Delta Air Lines to new heights of cabin cleaning: spritzing the interior of flights from Asia and Italy with a mist of "a highly effective, EPA-registered disinfectant." The Atlanta-based carrier plans to expand the "fogging technique" to all inbound international flights from countries where coronavirus infections have been reported. Linen, dishes, headphones and food carts are also getting an extra round of disinfecting on those planes, the carrier said, adding that the jets' high-efficiency air filters already are capable of removing coronavirus from cabin air. Airlines and cruise lines are taking extra steps to protect passengers from COVID-19 -- and mitigate the damage that the outbreak could inflict on the world's $8.8-trillion travel industry.  Planes and ships are being cleaned more frequently and more thoroughly, using chemicals more commonly found in food-processing or healthcare settings, and travel companies are issuing frequent updates on their efforts. One way to keep passengers from canceling their travel plans is to assure them that their planes and cruise ships are as close to germ-free as possible. "I think anything the airlines can do to reassure the passengers is worthwhile and could help," said Madhu Unnikrishnan, editor of the trade publication Airline Weekly. "It can at least give customers who are flying more confidence." Despite such efforts, the outbreak that has infected more than 90,000 people and killed about 3,000 others is already expected to inflict a heavy toll on the travel industry. After a decade of rising travel demand, a trade group for the world's airlines predicted that the industry this year could suffer its first year of declining demand since the economic meltdown of 2008-09. The demand for air travel on air carriers in the Asia-Pacific region is expected to drop by at least 13% in 2020, amounting to a loss of $27.8 billion in revenue. The impact to carriers outside of the Asia-Pacific region will be limited to a loss of about $1.5 billion, assuming the drop in demand is restricted primarily to China, according to an analysis by the International Air Transport Assn. Instead of growing 4.1% in 2020, as previously predicted, the trade group now expects global air travel demand to drop 0.6%. Many airlines and cruise companies have already temporarily stopped serving mainland China -- the hardest-hit region of the globe -- and corporate travel managers have canceled hundreds of business trips abroad. That has resulted in a drop of 40.8 million seats available on airlines worldwide in the first four months of 2020 compared with the same period last year, according to OAG, a travel data consultant based in Britain. U.S. carriers such as Delta, American and United have offered to waive the fees passengers must pay to change their flight reservations not only to China but to South Korea and Italy, where new cases of coronavirus have been reported. United Airlines confirmed over the weekend that the Chicago-based carrier has postponed the start dates for training of a 23-person class of pilots, amid the flight cancellations and uncertainty over future air travel demand, according to CNBC. The Cruise Line International Assn. announced that passengers who had visited China, Hong Kong, Macao or South Korea in the 14 days before a cruise departure are prohibited from boarding any of the more than 50 cruise ship brands within its membership. The cruise industry only recently added South Korea to that list as new cases of infections were reported in that country. To keep that financial hit from growing, airlines and cruise ship operators are emphasizing the extra efforts they have taken to make sure that airline cabins and cruise ship rooms have been scrubbed and disinfected between use. How long the virus that causes COVID-19 survives on surfaces isn't known, but studies suggest that it could live for a few hours to several days, according to the World Health Organization, which recommends cleaning surfaces with simple disinfectants to kill the virus. Singapore Airlines, Korean Air and Qantas Airways helped to evacuate people from the epicenter of the outbreak in the Wuhan region of China. Since then, all three carriers have announced enhanced cleaning procedures. Korean Air announced last week that the cabins of all flights departing from Incheon Airport to Los Angeles International Airport will be disinfected using "MD-125 chemicals," a version of a cleaning solution made by New Jersey-based Microgen and used to clean hard surfaces in places as diverse as poultry processors and hospitals. "MD-125 is a sterilization product approved by the Ministry of Food and Drug Safety as well as the Ministry of Environment," Korean Air said in a statement. "It is especially known as one of the most effective products to eliminate coronavirus, as the 'human coronavirus' is specified on its sterilization list." Singapore Airlines is also using the fogging method used by Delta on all planes flying from China. Under this process, a team of two or three Singapore Airlines staffers fogs the cabins using a chemical called Calla 1452, a disinfectant that has been proven effective against avian flu, the H1N1 virus and severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS), airline representatives said. "Common surfaces such as tray tables, handsets, and inflight entertainment screens are cleaned with disinfectant wipes," the airline said in a message sent to the members of its frequent flier program. "We also remove all headsets, headrest covers, pillow covers, bedsheets, and blankets after every flight sector." Qantas Airways posted a message on its website, saying it has adopted "the highest standard in cleaning and disinfecting our cabins, seats, galleys and washrooms. This includes strict disinfection of surfaces and fixtures such as personal television screens, meal tables, baby bassinet tables, and armrests on the aircraft after every flight." The Australian-based carrier is relying on Viraclean, a hospital-grade disinfectant, effective against hepatitis B virus, herpes simplex virus and the influenza virus, according to the manufacturer of Viraclean, Whiteley Corp., which promoted its product on Twitter. United Airlines is still using an upgraded cleaning process on all international flights that was prompted by the Ebola outbreak of 2014. On all international flights, every hard surface touched by a passenger has been wiped down with a disinfecting solution, the airline said. In addition, any United flight that has carried a passenger known to have been infected by the novel coronavirus is taken out of service for a complete fumigation and sterilization that includes shampooing the carpeting and wiping down every hard surface with disinfectants, United spokesman Charles Hobart said. The world's largest cruise company, Carnival Corp., announced it is more frequently cleaning the staterooms and high-traffic common areas and "that includes the use of Virox that is said to kill coronavirus on surfaces within 30 seconds," the company said in a statement. In addition, Carnival Chief Medical Officer Grant Tarling posted a video online over the weekend, explaining the extra procedures that the company has taken to screen out would-be passengers who might be infected and to disinfect the cabins and common areas of the ships to prevent further infections. "We've learned a lot from the world's top experts and have stepped up our health protocols even more, with the goal of keeping our guests healthy and having a great time on their vacation," Tarling said. Caption: PHOTO: KOREAN AIR is using "MD-125 chemicals" to clean and disinfect hard surfaces. Above, a Korean Air flight lands at LAX in November. PHOTOGRAPHER:Mario Tama Getty Images PHOTO:DELTA uses a "fogging technique" on all inbound international flights from countries where coronavirus infections have been reported. PHOTOGRAPHER:Mario Tama Getty Images 
Mar 2, 2020	The coronavirus outbreak has spurred Delta Air Lines to new heights of cabin cleaning: spritzing the interior of flights from Asia and Italy with a mist of “a highly effective, EPA-registered disinfectant.” The Atlanta-based carrier plans to expand the “fogging technique” to all inbound international flights from countries where coronavirus infections have been reported. Linen, dishes, headphones and food carts are also getting an extra round of disinfecting on those planes, the carrier said, adding that the jets’ high-efficiency air filters already are capable of removing coronavirus from cabin air. Airlines and cruise lines are taking extra steps to protect passengers from COVID-19 — and mitigate the damage that the outbreak could inflict on the world’s $8.8-trillion travel industry. Planes and ships are being cleaned more frequently and more thoroughly, using chemicals more commonly found in food-processing or healthcare settings, and travel companies are issuing frequent updates on their efforts. One way to keep passengers from canceling their travel plans is to assure them that their planes and cruise ships are as close to germ-free as possible. “I think anything the airlines can do to reassure the passengers is worthwhile and could help,” said Madhu Unnikrishnan, editor of the trade publication Airline Weekly. “It can at least give customers who are flying more confidence.” Despite such efforts, the outbreak that has infected more than 90,000 people and killed about 3,000 others is already expected to inflict a heavy toll on the travel industry. After a decade of rising travel demand, a trade group for the world’s airlines predicted that the industry this year could suffer its first year of declining demand since the economic meltdown of 2008-09. The demand for air travel on air carriers in the Asia-Pacific region is expected to drop by at least 13% in 2020, amounting to a loss of $27.8 billion in revenue. The impact to carriers outside of the Asia-Pacific region will be limited to a loss of about $1.5 billion, assuming the drop in demand is restricted primarily to China, according to an analysis by the International Air Transport Assn. Instead of growing 4.1% in 2020, as previously predicted, the trade group now expects global air travel demand to drop 0.6%. Many airlines and cruise companies have already temporarily stopped serving mainland China — the hardest-hit region of the globe — and corporate travel managers have canceled hundreds of business trips abroad. That has resulted in a drop of 40.8 million seats available on airlines worldwide in the first four months of 2020 compared with the same period last year, according to OAG, a travel data consultant based in Britain. U.S. carriers such as Delta, American and United have offered to waive the fees passengers must pay to change their flight reservations not only to China but to South Korea and Italy, where new cases of coronavirus have been reported. United Airlines confirmed over the weekend that the Chicago-based carrier has postponed the start dates for training of a 23-person class of pilots, amid the flight cancellations and uncertainty over future air travel demand, according to CNBC. The Cruise Line International Assn. announced that passengers who had visited China, Hong Kong, Macao or South Korea in the 14 days before a cruise departure are prohibited from boarding any of the more than 50 cruise ship brands within its membership. The cruise industry only recently added South Korea to that list as new cases of infections were reported in that country. To keep that financial hit from growing, airlines and cruise ship operators are emphasizing the extra efforts they have taken to make sure that airline cabins and cruise ship rooms have been scrubbed and disinfected between use. How long the virus that causes COVID-19 survives on surfaces isn’t known, but studies suggest that it could live for a few hours to several days, according to the World Health Organization, which recommends cleaning surfaces with simple disinfectants to kill the virus. Singapore Airlines, Korean Air and Qantas Airways helped to evacuate people from the epicenter of the outbreak in the Wuhan region of China. Since then, all three carriers have announced enhanced cleaning procedures. Korean Air announced last week that the cabins of all flights departing from Incheon Airport to Los Angeles International Airport will be disinfected using “MD-125 chemicals,” a version of a cleaning solution made by New Jersey-based Microgen and used to clean hard surfaces in places as diverse as poultry processors and hospitals. “MD-125 is a sterilization product approved by the Ministry of Food and Drug Safety as well as the Ministry of Environment,” Korean Air said in a statement. “It is especially known as one of the most effective products to eliminate coronavirus, as the ‘human coronavirus’ is specified on its sterilization list.” Singapore Airlines is also using the fogging method used by Delta on all planes flying from China. Under this process, a team of two or three Singapore Airlines staffers fogs the cabins using a chemical called Calla 1452, a disinfectant that has been proven effective against avian flu, the H1N1 virus and severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS), airline representatives said. “Common surfaces such as tray tables, handsets, and inflight entertainment screens are cleaned with disinfectant wipes,” the airline said in a message sent to the members of its frequent flier program. “We also remove all headsets, headrest covers, pillow covers, bedsheets, and blankets after every flight sector.” Qantas Airways posted a message on its website, saying it has adopted “the highest standard in cleaning and disinfecting our cabins, seats, galleys and washrooms. This includes strict disinfection of surfaces and fixtures such as personal television screens, meal tables, baby bassinet tables, and armrests on the aircraft after every flight.” The Australian-based carrier is relying on Viraclean, a hospital-grade disinfectant, effective against hepatitis B virus, herpes simplex virus and the influenza virus, according to the manufacturer of Viraclean, the Whiteley Corp., which promoted its product on Twitter.  Qantas use Viraclean® Hospital Grade Disinfectant for their aircraft-cleaning & disinfection. Click on the story for more details.#infectionprevention #disinfection #surfacecleaninghttps://t.co/Zj0BlujjtG — Whiteley Corporation (@WhiteleyCorp) February 27, 2020 United Airlines is still using an upgraded cleaning process on all international flights that was prompted by the Ebola outbreak of 2014. On all international flights, every hard surface touched by a passenger has been wiped down with a disinfecting solution, the airline said. In addition, any United flight that has carried a passenger known to have been infected by the novel coronavirus is taken out of service for a complete fumigation and sterilization that includes shampooing the carpeting and wiping down every hard surface with disinfectants, United spokesman Charles Hobart said. The world’s largest cruise company, Carnival Corp., announced it is more frequently cleaning the staterooms and high-traffic common areas and “that includes the use of Virox that is said to kill coronavirus on surfaces within 30 seconds,” the company said in a statement. In addition, Carnival Chief Medical Officer Grant Tarling posted a video online over the weekend, explaining the extra procedures that the company has taken to screen out would-be passengers who might be infected and to disinfect the cabins and common areas of the ships to prevent further infections. “We’ve learned a lot from the world’s top experts and have stepped up our health protocols even more, with the goal of keeping our guests healthy and having a great time on their vacation,” Tarling said. 
Mar 2, 2020	It was only after months of Bible study classes, several exams based on those lessons and hundreds of hours spent with members of the religious community that Esau Martinez learned the name of the group that had come to dominate his daily life. “We’re based in Korea; our organization is called Shincheonji,” members of his small group discreetly told him over Korean barbecue in Orange County, as if letting him in on a closely guarded secret, Martinez recalled. “We’re going to be passing over soon,” they told him. “We’re going to be signing the ‘Book of Life.’” That day, Martinez, then a 19-year-old community college student, realized how methodically he had been approached, recruited and indoctrinated, starting from the moment a classmate casually invited him to play basketball. Unbeknown to him, most of those on the court were members of the Shincheonji Church of Jesus, a South Korean doomsday Christian sect. Established in 1984, the church believes its 88-year-old South Korean founder is a “promised pastor” foretold in the New Testament who will live on forever — and that his followers will as well, if they convert enough people to their faith, according to former members. The group has a growing presence in L.A. and in Orange County, with 545 people graduating from its Bible study program in June 2018, according to a blog post on its official website. The fringe Christian sect — which some call a cult — has been on the receiving end of outrage and suspicion in recent days as authorities identified it as having been at the center of a rapid surge in coronavirus infections in the South Korean city of Daegu, where one of its major branches is located. More than 2,000 infections have been linked to the church and its members as of Sunday — more than half of all cases in South Korea so far. Authorities have pledged to find and test every one of the more than 210,000 congregants in South Korea. Even a health official tasked with combating the coronavirus in a district clinic in Daegu was revealed to be a member of the church after he came down with COVID-19. On Sunday, a 45-day-old infant child of a Shincheonji follower became the youngest patient yet to be confirmed with the virus. At least two church members who contracted the virus have died, according to authorities. The Seoul Metropolitan Government on Sunday reported Lee Man-hee, the church’s messianic leader, and other Shincheonji officials to prosecutors, saying they should face criminal charges for homicide and causing injury for withholding information amid the outbreak. The church said Monday that Lee himself had tested negative for the virus. There is no indication any members in California, where the church also operates under the name Zion Mission Center, have been infected. It remains unclear how members of the church were initially infected. Authorities on Sunday said entry and exit records showed some of those on Shincheonji’s roster had in January traveled to Wuhan, the epicenter of the outbreak, where the church acknowledged having sent missionaries in the past. South Korea issued travel alerts against all nonessential travel to Wuhan and surrounding areas but only on Jan. 28. The church claims to have some 19,000 believers in China, its biggest presence outside South Korea, but largely operates underground because of crackdowns against evangelism. Before Feb. 18, when the first member of the church found to have the virus was diagnosed, South Korea had 30 confirmed cases. That 61-year-old woman had attended Sunday services in the preceding weeks with several hundred others, sitting tightly packed together on the floor as is the group’s custom. Health officials who began testing those in attendance found hundreds of infections, and quickly discovered Shincheonji members elsewhere in the country had also contracted the virus. Efforts to track infections have run up against the secrecy that is central to the group and its efforts to propagate its beliefs and the fact that many members hide their affiliation because of the church’s notoriety in South Korea, said Tark Ji-il, a professor of theology at Busan Presbyterian University, who has long studied the church and its teachings. “They approach people hiding their affiliation because evangelism is so important,” he said. “They will hide that they are Shincheonji for as long as they can.” A video on the official YouTube channel of Shincheonji, a fringe Christian sect, purports to show the story of the Bible as interpreted by the church in mass games performed by members in 2012. On Monday, Lee held a news conference in South Korea. Over the clamor of protesters yelling on loudspeakers calling him a con man, Lee apologized to the South Korean people for the number of infections, his voice shaky and his glasses fogging up from a face mask. He bowed down to the floor before a phalanx of cameras. The first question came from a reporter who asked if he believed he would live forever — a church official intervened, saying Lee would only answer questions about the coronavirus situation. The church has said it is fully cooperating with authorities, immediately closing down its 1,100 facilities around South Korea and turning over a list of its 212,324 South Korean members on Tuesday — a week after the first Shincheonji member was diagnosed. It said it has also turned over the names of 33,281 overseas members. “We ask everyone to acknowledge that Shincheonji members are one of the biggest victims of COVID-19, bearing the brunt of the virus spreading,” a church representative said in a statement, adding that members had been subject to “groundless slandering and hatred” since the outbreak.  Lee Man-hee, founder and leader of the Shincheonji sect, bows down before cameras and apologizes to the Korean people for the current situation. The group has been linked to a surge in infections -- more thank 2,000 of its followers have the virus. pic.twitter.com/3I5AJYwjmx — Victoria Kim (@vicjkim) March 2, 2020 The pleas have done little to quell blame directed at the group for the surge in infections. More than a million people signed an online petition to the South Korean president asking that the church be forcefully disbanded. Local officials in Gyeonggi province raided church headquarters in Gwacheon, saying it was being slow to turn over the roster of members. Authorities in Daegu enlisted 600 police investigators to track down church members who could not immediately be reached. Kwon Nam-guy, a 14-year, high-ranking church member who left in 2006, said church members are trained to approach potential recruits under tailor-made pretenses, offering up career guidance, personality tests or even tarot card readings. “We created that playbook. We would establish a strategy, each take on a role and approach people under those pretenses,” said Kwon, who now operates a counseling center and support group for defectors from Shincheonji. Kwon joined the church as a 23-year-old, quitting his job and eventually rising through the ranks and marrying a fellow member. He said he decided to leave after seeing an all too human side of the “promised pastor” Lee. Stella Kang, who returned to her native South Korea in 2014 after finishing college in Northern California, said she was offered free Bible classes on the street. Kang, who was raised Adventist, took it as a sign from God. Two months into classes, she was told the identity of the group and instructed never to research it online, because of outside forces trying to “poison” members with slander. Recruiting others was central to its teachings, Kang said. And she was good at it; she signed up a roommate and two other friends through months of contact and conversation. “I believed I could have eternal life on this Earth,” said Kang, who left after about a year, when her parents intervened. “That’s how powerful that indoctrination can be.... Everyone around you believes that.” “These are people that believe they’re going to live eternally, and physical bodies don’t matter. For them, what’s the point of a mask?” she said. Martinez said at the beginning, the classes didn’t seem radically different from the beliefs of the church he’d grown up in. Over the months, some of the teachings began to seem more and more unconventional — about the South Korean man who would never die, and the 144,000 of his followers who would come to rule the world. But he was instructed not to question teachings that other interpretations of the Bible were false, and all other pastors were frauds. He was also told not to tell friends or family, that the messages he was receiving were “hidden treasure.” Attendance was considered of utmost importance — any time he would miss a class, he was hounded by his group leader or fellow church members. “You don’t notice it, but you start putting your friends aside, you start putting school second,” he said. In a grandiose ceremony that the church called “passing over,” Martinez officially joined the church and was told his name was now in the “Book of Life.” Cracks later formed in his belief, he said, when he was taught the concept of “circular reasoning” during a college philosophy class on logical fallacies. He began realizing how the church refuted any skepticism by pointing back to the lessons the church itself had encouraged him to take to heart. The breaking point came on Mother’s Day, 2017. He says he messaged his group leader telling him he was going to miss a service and was told that while it was OK that time, he should really think about his priorities. He confided in a childhood friend, breaking down in tears as he recounted the past year and determined how thoroughly brainwashed he’d been. The friend immediately urged: “Get the [hell] out of there.” Martinez messaged his small group saying he would never return to the church. Without waiting for a response, he deleted the app church members used to communicate and changed his phone number. That night, his father called to tell him church members had come to the home he shared with his parents looking for him. For weeks afterward, they left cards tucked in his windshield and continued to drop by the house with brownies and donuts, Martinez said. A few months later, a high-up church official asked to meet him at a Starbucks. The official told him his heart had been poisoned, he recalled — and only Shincheonji could undo it, should he decide to return. “To me, you guys are just bringing people and lying to them and trying to convert them,” he responded before walking away one last time, he recalled. About a year later, he received an email from the official with the subject line: “Update.” “I’m not writing this email to force you to return, but more so to notify you that you have been blotted out from the Book of Life,” she wrote. “I hope the best for you and thank you for the memories that we shared.” 
Mar 2, 2020	Twitter on Monday became the first major U.S. corporation to strongly encourage its employees to work from home to avoid spreading coronavirus. “Beginning today, we are strongly encouraging all employees globally to work from home if they’re able,” the San Francisco-based social media company wrote in a blog post. “Our goal is to lower the probability of the spread of the COVID-19 coronavirus for us — and the world around us.” Twitter had more than 4,800 employees at the start of 2020. The announcement followed news earlier in the day that cases of the viral infection had been identified in San Mateo, Santa Clara, Sonoma and Placer counties, and that four additional people had died from COVID-19 in Washington state, bringing the total U.S. death toll to six. Twitter had announced Sunday that it was suspending all non-critical business travel and events, which was already a step farther than most of its corporate peers. Large tech companies such as Google, Facebook and Apple have said that they are restricting travel to and from China. Google’s restriction also includes Japan, South Korea, Iran and Italy. Amazon and Salesforce have both frozen all nonessential business travel indefinitely. Many companies with offices and retail outlets in China, such as Apple, Google, and Facebook, have either closed them temporarily or asked employees to work from home. China remains the nation most deeply affected by the viral outbreak, and to date 2,803 of the more than 3,000 reported deaths from the virus have been in China’s Hubei province, where the outbreak began. Google also confirmed reports on Monday that, in response to a possible case of COVID-19 at the company’s offices in Dublin, Ireland, the company is asking all 8,000 of its employees there to work from home on Tuesday. “We continue to take precautionary measures to protect the health and safety of our workforce,” a Google spokesperson wrote in an email. “In accordance with the advice of medical experts, and as part of that effort we have asked our Dublin teams to work from home tomorrow.” Here in the U.S., several large tech conferences have been canceled out of an abundance of caution, including Facebook’s annual F8 event and the video game industry’s major Game Developers Conference. Facebook has also started restricting social visits to its offices, according to the Verge. Both Facebook and Twitter have canceled plans to participate in the upcoming South by Southwest Interactive festival in Austin, Texas. The digital currency exchange Coinbase issued new guidance to its workforce Monday, saying, “Employees that are likely to get sick more easily or for whom getting sick would be particularly problematic should now work with their manager to move to 100% Work From Home.” Twitter’s decision comes as the company faces pressure to change from an activist investor, who has floated the idea of ousting Chief Executive Jack Dorsey from leadership. Even before the threat of the virus emerged to promote the idea of remote work, Dorsey had mentioned potential plans to spend as much as six months of this year telecommuting from Africa. 
Mar 2, 2020	Even as the U.S. death toll from the coronavirus rose to six and the spread continues in California, senior public health officials continued to stress that the coronavirus does not represent a serious threat to most people. “The risk is low,” said Dr. Anthony Fauci, director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases. Dr. Robert Redfield, director of the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, added that there are no advisories for travel within the U.S. Trump administration officials reported Monday evening that the number of domestic cases of the new coronavirus now tallies 43, not including the 48 people who were repatriated after contracting the disease abroad. Twenty-nine of those cases are in Washington and California, they said. Santa Clara, San Mateo, Placer and Sonoma counties all reported new cases of the coronavirus on Monday. “To prevent any illness, follow CDC guidelines including washing your hands frequently, covering your sneeze and staying home when sick,” said Dr. Scott Morrow, San Mateo County health officer. “Also, please dust off your personal emergency plans to make sure you have proper provisions at your home including water, medications and food.” Santa Clara County confirmed two new cases of the coronavirus. And 26 of the 43 domestic cases are not travel-related, but were contracted through contacts with others in the community. Vice President Mike Pence, who is leading the administration’s coronavirus response and joined President Trump at a meeting Monday with pharmaceutical executives, acknowledged that any vaccine for the disease would not be available until later this year, at the earliest. But Pence said medications to treat the disease could be available by late summer or early fall. Pence added that the administration may consider more travel advisories, adding to the warnings issued over the weekend about travel to regions of Italy and South Korea. Pence did not identify any specific additional countries, though he indicated that authorities are monitoring what is happening in the European Union, whose open borders allow relatively free travel across the continent. During Monday’s meeting with pharmaceutical executives at the White House, Trump said it’s “likely that therapies will be available before a vaccine is actually ready and we will seek to bring all effective treatments to market as soon as possible.” Health and Human Services Secretary Alex Azar said the administration’s emphasis would be on speeding the development of vaccines, therapies and fixing any supply chain challenges. “We want to know how can we not get in the way, but rather speed that development process along,” Azar said. Fauci said it would take at least a year to a year and a half to develop a vaccine. Pharmaceutical executives offered a faster timeline for therapeutic treatments, estimating that they could begin human trials in the spring. Trump said a therapeutic treatment “in my opinion, in this case, would be better,” he said, vowing to reduce red tape for treatments. Pence said he spoke with 53 governors Monday by video and telephone conference, and planned to meet soon with the cruise and airline industries as well. He said Trump would be traveling to the National Institutes of Health in nearby Maryland on Tuesday and meeting with CDC officials later in the week. 
Mar 2, 2020	The death toll from coronavirus in the United States rose to six as Washington state officials announced four new deaths. The new figure comes as health officials worked to contain the virus and officials urged people to remain calm and stressed there is still time to limit the spread in the United States. Three of the new deaths — all people in their 70s and 80s who died at the EvergreenHealth hospital — were from a nursing home in the Seattle suburb of Kirkland, Wash. Health officials said Monday that there is still time to contain the coronavirus as the death toll in America rose and the virus spread in California. “I think we have a common enemy,” said World Health Organization director Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus. “We have to stand together in unison to fight it, and these early signs are very encouraging.” WHO officials declined to declare COVID-19 a pandemic, saying 90% of the cases have been in China. Of the 3,000 deaths from the virus, 2,803 have been in China’s Hubei province, where the outbreak began. “Our message to all countries is this is not a one-way street — we can push this back,” Tedros said. “Our actions now will determine the course of this outbreak.” he added. “Containment is possible in all countries that are affected, and that should be No. 1.” In the United States, there have been about 103 confirmed cases of the virus, with Georgia’s governor announcing the state’s first two cases on Monday evening. Of the 62 countries affected by COVID-19, 55 have fewer than 100 cases. Only four countries have more than 1,000 cases, Tedros said. WHO officials said it is rare to see a respiratory pathogen such as this virus that can spread widely in the community but can also be contained. The flu cannot be as easily contained, officials said. “That offers us a glimmer, a chink of life that this virus can be suppressed and contained,” Mike Ryan, who runs the agency’s emergencies program, said in a briefing Monday. Officials in Santa Clara, San Mateo, Placer and Sonoma counties reported new cases of coronavirus Monday morning. In Santa Clara County, health officials said that two men who were “household contacts” of a previously confirmed case tested positive. Both are in isolation at their respective residences. The new cases bring the total in the county to nine. In San Mateo County, officials reported a case of the virus, pending testing confirmation from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. That person has been hospitalized and remains under isolation. The source of their exposure is currently unknown, as the person has no known exposure to the virus through travel or through contact with a confirmed case of COVID-19. This marks the second case in the county — the first was a person who had been repatriated to the U.S. In Placer County, officials said that a healthcare worker at NorthView VacaValley Hospital came into close contact with an individual who had previously tested positive for the virus after leaving the hospital. In Sonoma County, officials confirmed its second case of coronavirus, pending CDC confirmation, and declared a local health emergency. Officials said that the individual had recently traveled internationally, unrelated to the Diamond Princess cruise ship. As coronavirus cases continue to spread across California, many under quarantine for the illness at Travis Air Force Base got some good news Monday: They were being allowed to go home. Roughly 140 Americans from the Diamond Princess cruise ship who had been under a mandated quarantine at the Northern California base were being released after showing no symptoms, health officials confirmed. Scott Pauley, a CDC spokesman, did not have further information about whether anyone under quarantine remained at the base. According to the CDC, at least 45 cruise ship passengers who were taken to Travis Air Force Base and Lackland Air Force Base in Texas have tested positive for the virus. Twenty-one people had previously tested positive at Travis and were transported to hospitals. Video showed two buses taking the evacuees from the base to either San Francisco International Airport or Sacramento International Airport before heading to their respective homes. Last week, officials in Costa Mesa successfully fought a federal plan to have those at the Travis base moved to the Fairview Developmental Center. As more cases of COVID-19 were reported around the country over the weekend, the focus remained on Washington state and Northern California, where health officials say the virus has spread through community contact. Officials are continuing to search for people who came in contact with the original patients to isolate them and get them tested. Alameda County reported its first case Sunday, prompting the declaration of a local public health emergency. Still, officials urged residents to stay calm. “This news is not unexpected in the Bay Area, and we are ready for cases here,” Dr. Erica Pan, health officer for the Alameda County Public Health Department, said in a statement. “This is not the time to panic; now is the time for all of us to work together.” In Washington state, officials have reported 19 cases of coronavirus — 14 of which are from King County. Eight of those cases have been linked to Life Care of Kirkland, including four of the six deaths. The deaths include a man in his 50s with no known exposures, two women in their 80s, and a man and woman in their 70s. Of the new cases reported in Washington, two involved men in their 60s with underlying health conditions. One was in critical but stable condition at Valley Medical Center in Renton; the second was in critical condition at Virginia Mason Medical Center in Seattle. Experts warn the rising case counts in the U.S. do not necessarily reveal the virus is spreading rapidly across the country. So far, testing in the U.S. has been very low, said Harvard epidemiology professor Marc Lipsitch. “Some of the numbers are changing because new things are happening, but a lot of the numbers are changing because we’re discovering things that have already happened,” Lipsitch said in a forum Monday hosted by Harvard’s public health school. “It’s really important to distinguish ‘Oh, goodness, there’s a new cluster’ from ‘Oh, goodness, we just discovered that there’s a cluster that’s been there for some time.” In Solano County, two healthcare workers at a hospital were reported to have contracted COVID-19 after being exposed to a patient who was initially admitted there, and three more people were diagnosed with the virus in Santa Clara County, officials announced Sunday. The two healthcare workers were exposed to the virus from a patient who was being treated at NorthBay VacaValley Hospital in Vacaville, officials said. The female patient has since been transferred to UC Davis Medical Center in Sacramento and is considered the nation’s first announced case of “community spread,” meaning the source of infection is unknown. That woman was not immediately tested for the virus because she did not fit federal testing criteria at the time. Officials had already expressed concern that she could have infected others. The case led to 124 nurses and healthcare workers being asked to self-quarantine, according to the California Nurses Assn. “Our two healthcare workers who tested positive have been in isolation at home since the day we learned they had contact with the patient who had contracted the virus,” Aimee Brewer, president of NorthBay Healthcare Group, said in a statement. “We took immediate and comprehensive measures intended to stop any further spread of the virus, including working with public health officials to trace the contacts the two workers may have had.” One of the infected healthcare workers is a Solano County resident, and the other lives in Alameda County, officials said. They are both in isolation at home. Meanwhile, three more people were diagnosed with COVID-19 in Santa Clara County on Sunday, health officials said. One is a woman with chronic health conditions. An investigation into how she acquired the infection was just launched, the Santa Clara County Public Health Department said Sunday evening. The other two patients are a husband and wife who had recently traveled to Egypt. All three are hospitalized, officials said. Additional information about their condition was not immediately available. The Public Health Department was working to identify all those who had come into contact with the three patients and said it would also conduct community surveillance “to determine the extent of possible disease spread in our community.” In California, at least 40 cases have been reported. Twenty-four people who have caught the virus either were on the Diamond Princess cruise ship or in Wuhan, China, where the outbreak was first reported, and were then repatriated to the U.S. and quarantined at California military bases. An additional 16 cases have been discovered in returning travelers or, in at least five instances, people who contracted the virus in their community. Senior public health officials continued to stress that coronavirus does not represent a serious threat to most people. “The risk is low,” said Dr. Anthony Fauci, director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases. CDC director Dr. Robert Redfield added that there are no travel advisories for travel within the U.S. Vice President Mike Pence, who is leading the administration’s coronavirus response and joined Trump at a meeting with pharmaceutical executives Thursday, acknowledged that any vaccine for the disease would not be available until later this year, at the earliest. But Pence said medications to treat the disease could be available by late summer or early fall. Pence added that the administration may consider more travel advisories, adding to the warnings issued over the weekend about travel to regions of Italy and South Korea. Pence did not identify any specific additional countries, though he indicated that authorities are monitoring what is happening in the European Union, whose open borders allow relatively free travel across the continent. During a meeting with pharmaceutical executives at the White House on Monday, President Trump said it’s “likely that therapies will be available before a vaccine is actually ready and we will seek to bring all effective treatments to market as soon as possible.” Health and Human Services Secretary Alex Azar said the administration’s emphasis would be on speeding the development of vaccines, therapies and fixing any supply chain challenges. “We want to know how can we not get in the way, but rather speed that development process along,” Azar said. 
Mar 1, 2020	To shake or not to shake. That is the question bedeviling billions around the world as the coronavirus spreads nefariously from continent to continent. Whether it’s still safe to shake hands in the age of the pandemic is an especially touchy issue in Germany and across Europe, where the handshake custom is thought to have originated more than 2,000 years ago and it’s arguably more commonplace than anywhere else. Angst about the wisdom of continuing such a deeply entrenched tradition before and after essentially every meeting of friends, family and business partners is spreading across Europe as fast as the virus itself. In Germany, even its leader, Chancellor Angela Merkel, felt a need to weigh in on the issue on Friday evening with a message to all Germans — not shaking is OK now. “I’m not going to shake anyone’s hand tonight,” Merkel said bluntly at the end of a speech to about 400 local business leaders and constituents in her electoral district of Stralsund, where she would normally be expected to press the flesh with hundreds, if not quite all those in attendance. She urged Germans to stay calm and respond prudently to the pandemic that spread to Europe from Asia in recent weeks. There are now 117 confirmed cases of coronavirus in Germany — although no deaths have been reported — and the number has been rising daily. “Germany is among the countries with the best possible conditions to deal with this virus,” she said, just hours after Berlin organizers announced that the world’s biggest travel convention, the March 4-8 ITB in Berlin, was being canceled even though 160,000 people from around the world were expected. “Not every event needs to be canceled. And on top of that, every single one of us can make a contribution,” she said, before making the reference to not shaking hands. The Western custom of shaking hands is believed to date to antiquity. A funeral stone from the 5th century BC on display in Berlin’s Pergamon Museum shows two Greek soldiers shaking hands. The act was believed to be a symbol of peace — to show that that neither man was carrying a weapon in their right hand. Some historians have said the shaking gesture was added by knights in the Middle Ages as a way to probe if any knives were being concealed up the other person’s sleeve and could be shaken out. Whatever the origins of the gesture now considered a polite and almost essential way to greet someone in many Western cultures, it is the ubiquitous manner Germans of essentially all ages introduce themselves. It’s customary for Germans to shake hands when they meet someone for the first time, as is the case in many other countries. But foreigners are often bewildered by how widespread handshaking is here: Germans will also often shake hands with everyone in the room at the start and end of meetings — as well as on their birthdays with just about everyone in the office or even the entire building. Children readily learn the ins and outs of haendeschuetteln from a preschool age and every member of a soccer, basketball or volleyball team will usually shake hands with everyone else before and after every practice or game. Construction workers and tradesmen often spend the first five or 10 minutes of their shift shaking hands with everyone on sight — and repeat the practice at quitting time. There is also a strict etiquette that men have to first offer their hand to women present before shaking hands with any other men around, and that those with a higher rank in the pecking order are supposed to initiate the handshake. Also, it is generally impolite for the younger person involved to initiate the handshake. These rules occasionally lead to awkwardly comical scenes where Germans are seen thrusting but then dramatically withdrawing in embarrassment their outstretched arms when they realize either a woman or a more senior man is discovered standing nearby. To decline an invitation to shake an outstretched hand is considered a serious insult in Germany — and President’s Trump intentional or unintentional avoidance of Merkel’s hand in the White House in March 2017 continues to reverberate as the ultimate rebuke in the German media. Trump later said he did not hear photographers asking for the two leaders to shake hands. “I’ve been avoiding shaking anyone’s hand lately because of the coronavirus,” said Dagmar Rettkowski, a 72-year-old retired airline worker who used to shake scores of hands with everyone on her Berlin volleyball team — and recalled that in Communist East Germany shaking hands was even more prevalent than in reunited Germany. “Now I just smile, raise my arm and wave and say ‘hello’ to everyone. It works fine.” German companies such as Volkswagen and Lufthansa have issued warnings to their employees to refrain from shaking hands with colleagues and customers. “Do not shake other people’s hands and try to avoid contact with doorknobs as well as pens and other belongings from other people,” Lufthansa wrote in an internal medical advisory to employees in Germany. Posters reading “ Hoeflich ohne Haendedruck – Machen Sie mit ” (Being polite without shaking hands — take part) were seen at Volkswagen plants, according to Bild newspaper. The coach of German professional soccer team TSV 1860 Muenchen, Michael Koellner, said last week that he and his players would no longer shake hands with one another or opposing teams before and after games and hoped the entire Bundesliga professional league would follow suit. “I’ve stopped shaking hands with patients, and I’ve been trying to avoid shaking anyone’s hand anymore, even though it’s sometimes almost impossible to avoid,” said Martina Henrich, a general practitioner in Berlin. “People can pass along more germs shaking hands than through kissing. In times like this, I’d urge everyone to avoid unnecessary hand-shaking.” That’s a message Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu was evidently trying to spread last week when he declined to shake hands at a campaign event in Hebron. Instead, he reportedly bowed and offered the Hindu greeting “namaste” — which is made by placing the palms together, thumbs against the chest and head bowed. Handshakes are considered a Western custom in many Asian countries and so, aside from handshake-filled business meetings, the issue may not be as pressing. Bowing at a 45-degree angle is considered the polite salutation in Japan while bows or nods without physical contact are sufficient in South Korea, Taiwan and elsewhere. There is also a Chinese greeting that involves making a fist with one hand and using the other hand to cup it. “In a lot of other countries and cultures, people tend to shake hands far less than we do in Germany,” said Markus Fruehwein in an interview. The Munich physician and tropical medicine expert said he had been avoiding handshakes. “If you’re looking for ways to help prevent the spread of illnesses, skipping the handshake and offering a smile instead is a good idea. It sometimes doesn’t go down well when you pull back from shaking hands with patients, but most understand it now.” “Usually it’s completely normal to shake hands as a sign of respect and appreciation, but who would really want to endanger someone else so unnecessarily?” said Barbara Engelmann, a 56-year-old Berlin teacher. “A friendly smile and being direct about the issue works wonders. I’ve had nothing but good experience so far in turning down handshakes like that.” Along with smiles instead of handshakes, some Europeans are switching to fist bumps, elbow bumps, hat tips and simple nods. Others are hoping for the coronavirus to pass soon enough so that no one will be afraid of shaking hands anymore. “I think this is just going to be a temporary adjustment in behavior because of the coronavirus situation,” said Cem Oezdemir, a leader in the Greens party, in an interview that took place without a handshake. “I don’t think shaking hands will disappear forever from Germany. It’s part of who we are. It makes sense to refrain now. But I’m sure it’ll come back and I’m looking forward to it because shaking hands is an important part of my job.” 
Mar 1, 2020	The death of a man in Washington state from the new coronavirus marks a milestone in the country’s fight against a disease that has already killed thousands around the world and points to the increasing likelihood of a deadly national outbreak, experts said. For months, U.S. officials have watched nervously as cases of COVID-19 mounted in China, where the virus originated, and warned the illness could begin spreading here. On Saturday, officials announced the nation’s first fatality: a man who appears to have caught the virus in his community, a sign that the virus has begun spreading locally. “We are facing a historic public health challenge,” Dr. Nancy Messonnier, the director of the National Center for Immunization and Respiratory Diseases within the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, said in a call with reporters Saturday. “While we still hope for the best, we continue to prepare for this virus to become more widespread in the U.S.” In addition to 62 cases of COVID-19 in the U.S. linked to travel abroad, officials have announced that eight people, all on the West Coast, appear to have contracted the virus in their communities. An outbreak at a long-term care facility in Washington is expected to push that total higher in the coming days, officials said. Though federal officials say the risk to the American public remains low, the latest developments raise the possibility that the virus will become entrenched in the U.S. and impossible to contain. Closing schools and canceling events could become a public health necessity in communities where the virus takes hold, officials said. For most people, COVID-19 causes a mild sickness, and some who are infected do not even know they are sick. The virus has been estimated to kill two of every 100 people who contract it, though the risk is lower for younger people and higher for the elderly, experts said. The swift sweep of the virus, first in China and now in South Korea and Italy, raises alarm about how quickly infections could spread in the United States in the coming months. “I think we’re going to see many more deaths,” said Lawrence Gostin, the director of the World Health Organization Collaborating Center on National and Global Health Law. “You just have to look at the pattern of transmission in other countries and the rapid spread — going from a few cases in Korea and Iran to thousands, and then multiple thousands. There’s no reason the virus is going to behave any differently in the U.S.” Officials said Saturday that the man who died in Washington state was in his 50s and had underlying health conditions. Officials said they do not know how he became ill, though he was admitted to EvergreenHealth Medical Center outside Seattle at the same time as at least one of the other COVID-19 patients in Washington. Washington Gov. Jay Inslee announced a state of emergency Saturday to respond to the outbreak. Seattle-area officials said they would consider canceling public events if the situation worsened but asked residents meanwhile to wash their hands and stay home if they had symptoms of respiratory illness. “It is a sad day in our state as we learn that a Washingtonian has died from COVID-19,” Inslee said in a statement. “Our hearts go out to his family and friends. We will continue to work toward a day where no one dies from this virus.” In a news conference Saturday, President Trump stressed that “there is no reason to panic” and that the risk to the general public remains low. At the same time, he announced new restrictions on travelers from Iran as well as additional screenings of those coming from Italy and South Korea, where there has been a jump in infections. He discouraged people from traveling to those countries. Dr. Anthony Fauci, the director of the National Institute of Allergies and Infectious Diseases, appeared alongside Trump and agreed limiting travel was important. He sought to reassure the public that the government is marshaling all available resources to combat the spread of the virus in the U.S. “The country as a whole still remains at low risk, but this is an evolving situation,” he said. “There will be additional cases, but we should not be surprised by that. The challenge is how we deal with it.” The outbreak at Life Care Center, a long-term care facility in the Seattle suburb of Kirkland, is a major concern because of the vulnerable patients who live there, experts said. A staff member in her 40s has been hospitalized with COVID-19, as has a resident in her 70s who is in serious condition, said Seattle and King County public health officer Dr. Jeffrey Duchin. Additionally, 27 residents and 25 staffers have symptoms such as pneumonia or other respiratory problems that match up with COVID-19, Duchin said. With 108 residents and 180 staffers at the facility in total, more people will probably test positive, he said. “We are very concerned about an outbreak in a setting where there are many older people,” Duchin said in a call with reporters Saturday. Duchin said a 10-member CDC team traveling to Washington on Saturday would conduct a meticulous investigation in search of the source of the coronavirus in Kirkland. Members of the team, which may grow, will also determine who came in contact with the patients subsequently diagnosed with the illness. The team will help identify, isolate and test Life Care residents who may be at risk, Duchin said. Residents will remain at the facility unless they need hospitalization, he said, but will be segregated according to symptoms. “No mixing people who are sick with people who are not sick,” he said. Gostin, who is also a professor at Georgetown University, said the large numbers of cases in high-density settings in other countries suggested there would be outbreaks at places such as long-term care facilities. “We’ve seen it in hospitals in Korea, we’ve seen it in churches in Korea … in pilgrimage places in Iran; we’ve seen it in prisons in China, in nursing homes … all of those places you’re seeing very rapid transmission,” Gostin said. “You just have to look through the window.” The rise in patients in the U.S. diagnosed with COVID-19 in recent days is probably due in part to increased testing. Before last week, doctors were not allowed to order the tests, of which there is a limited supply, for patients who did not have a history of travel to China or close contact with someone who had traveled there. Physicians can now order tests for people who are hospitalized and very ill but have no travel history. “If we had the ability to test earlier, I’m sure we would’ve been able to identify patients earlier, particularly at hospitals,” Duchin said. Experts said the virus is most likely to start spreading in coastal hubs of international travel. San Francisco, New York and Los Angeles typically receive the most passengers flying from Wuhan, China, where the outbreak began, on a daily basis. In California, there are now three COVID-19 patients who did not recently travel outside the U.S. or come in contact with someone who did. The state’s health department recently announced eight testing labs that can handle coronavirus, in Los Angeles, Orange, Ventura, San Diego, Contra Costa, Alameda, Santa Clara and Tulare counties. Officials also announced the arrival of 1,200 testing kits from the federal government. The most recent California patient, announced Saturday, is a woman described as “a household contact” of a Santa Clara County patient who has underlying health conditions and whose diagnosis was made public Friday. The county’s health department is working to identify any people the Santa Clara County woman may have come into contact with who may be at risk, officials said. The other California patient is a woman who was hospitalized at UC Davis Medical Center in Sacramento and marked the first announced case of community spread in the country. The case led to 124 nurses and healthcare workers at the hospital being asked to self-quarantine, according to the California Nurses Assn. Officials said it’s inevitable more test results will come back positive. “Definitely we will have more cases here,” said Dr. Peter Beilenson, Sacramento County’s director of health services. “You shed virus before you are symptomatic, so it’s already out of the bag in a lot of ways. It’s going to spread, it’s just going to spread.” Karlamangla and Wigglesworth reported from Los Angeles, and Read from Seattle. 
Mar 1, 2020	China locks down tens of millions in their homes to slow the march of a deadly virus -- but furnishes scant information about the mercurial spread of a disease that has spooked the world. South Korea and Singapore opt to track patients' movements in granular detail, favoring radical transparency over privacy. In Italy and Iran, politicians trade blame over rapidly growing outbreaks that are seeping across unstable regions, making a global pandemic seemingly inevitable. Infections appear in Mexico. Then Nigeria. As the world unites in resolve to battle one deadly virus -- now known as COVID-19 -- it is doing so with as many as 195 separate playbooks, each country calibrating its emergency measures to suit domestic and international politics, local capacity, cultural norms and other considerations that have little to do with public health.  The result is a global response that can appear uneven, inchoate and at times dangerous, with neighboring countries adopting different strategies to similar threats across a closely connected planet. "Unfortunately we are only as prepared as our weakest link," said Lawrence O. Gostin, a global health professor at Georgetown Law School. "We are seeing that clusters of cases in one country can quickly move regionally and globally. No one is safe unless we are all safe." Responses to recent outbreaks have been hindered, Gostin said, by a range of factors: weak health systems, insufficient testing equipment and medical professionals, authoritarian leaders who restrict the flow of information, political instability and violence, and the limitations of the World Health Organization, which is loath to criticize the very governments it relies upon for funding. In years past, countries like the U.S. might have played a leading role in spearheading a global response. But President Trump for weeks has minimized the threat of the virus and has been focused largely on the impact on markets, even as the virus began transmitting on U.S. soil in the middle of a divisive election year. The strengths and shortcomings of governments and institutions have been on full display in recent days, as the number of coronavirus infections soared past 86,000 in more than 50 countries. Nearly 3,000 have died, the vast majority in China. New cases were reported last week in Brazil and Nigeria, increasingly signaling that the virus will reach all corners of the world and that the effort to stay ahead of it will be prolonged. The novel virus sends shudders daily across the planet, canceling concerts and sporting events, and raising questions over sealed borders, quarantines, the viability of face masks and test kits, the long-term consequences on financial markets and what happens if the disease reaches deeper into Africa. "My biggest concern is while this is being artificially held back, are countries taking advantage of this time?" said Dale Fisher, a Singapore-based physician and chairman of the WHO's Global Outbreak Alert and Response Network. "China can't stay closed forever, and this outbreak, it already has brought cities to their knees, brought countries to social and commercial standstill." From being slow to disclose the severity of the virus when it first emerged in December in the animal markets of the central city of Wuhan, China is now winning praise for locking down 100 million people in Hubei province -- an unprecedented cordon sanitaire that appears to have slowed the spread of the virus domestically. For the first time last week, the number of infections reported in a single day was greater outside China than inside. "What China has done over the past month is astonishing -- there are very few countries that could have pulled that off," said Tom Frieden, a former director of the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. A recent WHO mission to China lavished praise on the government's measures. That same organization credited Beijing's response even as the nation's leaders were not forthcoming about the extent of the disease two months ago. Questions continue to linger about China's transparency over the infections it records. Chinese officials have disclosed only limited information about infections among front-line healthcare workers, when infected people first began to show symptoms and the total number of people it has tested -- all of which could help determine how the disease spreads. "The lack of that information makes it harder for China and the world to do everything possible to limit the impact of the virus," Frieden said. There is also the question of whether the draconian measures taken by Chinese authorities can be replicated elsewhere in the world -- especially in liberal democracies. Governments in two new epicenters, Iran and Italy, were scrambling to get a handle on outbreaks that started with travelers arriving from China. Iran's theocracy at first downplayed the threat, perhaps to curry favor with China -- an important trading partner -- and to avoid startling a population already beaten down by years of fiscal mismanagement and U.S. economic sanctions. Some analysts said Iran was also trying to keep up turnout for last month's legislative elections, a quasi-democratic exercise that helps the ruling clerics maintain a veneer of legitimacy. "You have a social crisis and an economic crisis and now a public health crisis layered on top of one another, and it presents complicated trade-offs for the Iranian government," said Esfandyar Batmanghelidj, founder of Bourse & Bazaar, a publication that tracks Iran's economy. "And we are seeing a failure to judge those trade-offs wisely." Iran has now reported 593 cases -- including the infection of its deputy health minister -- and 43 deaths. The unusually high ratio of deaths to known cases has led experts to extrapolate the country may have thousands of undetected infections. Iran is believed to be the source for infections in a half-dozen regional countries, including Lebanon, Iraq and Afghanistan, a prospect that has the virus colliding with conflict zones. Italy was quick to quarantine two Chinese tourists with coronavirus in Rome in late January, and was the first European country to stop direct flights from China, but has nevertheless been hit by the biggest outbreak in Europe. Cases began rapidly multiplying in towns in northern Italy and spread to other parts of the country, infecting more than 1,120 and killing 29 as of Saturday, slipping across open borders to other European nations. The surge of infections began with one man who spent two days at a hospital before his case was detected, infecting patients and doctors. Authorities have been swift to point the blame elsewhere; Italian Prime Minister Giuseppe Conte claimed the hospital didn't follow protocol, but the local health chief for the region of Lombardy said the European Union could have been at fault. "I believe if Europe had established a quarantine immediately for all people coming from China, Europe would not be having these problems now," Giulio Gallera, the health chief, said. In South Korea and Japan, allegations were mounting that the governments had put geopolitics ahead of the population's safety early in their responses, in the interest of preserving relations with China. Japan's handling of the Diamond Princess cruise ship docked off its shore proved an early example of a bungled response. Critics charged that the government allowed the virus to fester on board with inadequate measures to prevent infections. Some questioned whether the government made the decision to keep some 3,700 passengers and crew on board to keep the cases from being counted among its infections in the lead-up to the Summer Olympics in Tokyo. After more than 600 infections and two deaths, Japan allowed passengers to disembark and disperse via public transit when there was still danger of transmission. The loss in faith in the government's response is particularly keen because Prime Minister Shinzo Abe came into office promising competence after the nuclear disaster of 2011, said Kenneth Mori McElwain, a political science professor at the University of Tokyo. "Some people believe the Abe government more or less caved to Chinese pressure, and that dealt a blow to the perception of competence," he said. In South Korea, more than 1.3 million signed a petition calling for the impeachment of President Moon Jae-in, criticizing the government's reluctance to impose swift travel restrictions from China and on Chinese nationals. "The more we observe his handling of this situation, it feels like we're watching the president of China, not of the Republic of Korea," the petition read. The upheaval was in spite of aggressive and proactive measures taken by the government to track down every contact with an infected person, test them for the virus and publicize that information. South Korea nonetheless saw the ranks of the infected skyrocket to more than 3,500 last week, by far the largest cluster outside China. Elsewhere in Asia, governments are facing questions over a lack of infections. Cambodia and Indonesia have reported one and zero infections respectively, despite having received large numbers of travelers from China in January. Indonesia had daily direct flights from Wuhan, the epicenter, until authorities suspended the flights Jan. 24. To experts, the low figures suggest that the virus is spreading undetected. "Indonesia is a textbook example of a country that is likely to have a spread that is unrecognized," Frieden said. The risk of the disease taking off across Southeast Asia is high, experts said, due to inadequate health facilities and people packed closely together in crowded cities. It's also not clear that officials are taking the threat seriously: Cambodian Prime Minister Hun Sen greeted untested passengers disembarking from a cruise ship from Hong Kong with handshakes and hugs, while Indonesia's health minister said the country's lack of infections was "because of our prayers." Faith does not seem to be slowing the virus. Nigeria's first case Friday marked COVID-19's arrival in sub-Saharan Africa, where health systems already struggle to cope with malaria and yellow fever. The WHO is rushing test kits to the continent's hospitals, some of which developed experience testing for infectious diseases during the Ebola outbreak. But the coronavirus presents a more difficult challenge, experts said, because it can be transmitted even by people who fail to show symptoms. "If COVID-19 reaches sub-Saharan Africa" in large numbers, Gostin said, "it would be our worst nightmare." -- Bengali reported from Singapore and Kim from Seoul. Special correspondent Tom Kington in Rome contributed to this report. Caption: PHOTO: PEOPLE WEAR masks in Tokyo, where Prime Minister Shinzo Abe has come under fire for Japan's handling of an infected cruise ship. PHOTOGRAPHER:Tomohiro Ohsumi Getty Images 
Mar 1, 2020	The death of a man in Washington state from the new coronavirus marks a milestone in the country's fight against a disease that has already killed nearly 3,000 people around the world, and points to the increasing likelihood of a deadly national outbreak, experts said. For months, U.S. officials have watched nervously as cases of COVID-19 mounted in China, where the virus originated, and warned that the illness could begin spreading here. On Saturday, officials announced the nation's first fatality: a man who appeared to have caught the virus in his community, a sign that the virus has begun spreading locally. "We are facing a historic public health challenge," Dr. Nancy Messonnier, the director of the National Center for Immunization and Respiratory Diseases within the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, said in a call with reporters Saturday. "While we still hope for the best, we continue to prepare for this virus to become more widespread in the U.S."  In addition to 62 cases of COVID-19 in the U.S. linked to travel abroad, officials have announced that eight people, all on the West Coast, appear to have contracted the virus in their communities. An outbreak at a long-term care facility in Washington is expected to push that total higher in the coming days, officials said. Though federal officials say the risk to the U.S. public remains low, the latest developments raise the possibility that the virus will become entrenched and impossible to contain. Closing schools and canceling events could become a public health necessity where the virus takes hold, officials said. For most people, COVID- 19 is a mild sickness, and some who are infected do not even know they are ill. The virus has been estimated to kill two of every 100 people who contract it, though the risk is lower for younger people and higher for the elderly, experts said. The swift sweep of the virus, first in China and now in South Korea and Italy, raises concern about how quickly infections could spread in the United States in the coming months. "I think we're going to see many more deaths," said Lawrence Gostin, director of the World Health Organization Collaborating Center on National and Global Health Law. "You just have to look at the pattern of transmission in other countries and the rapid spread -- going from a few cases in Korea and Iran to thousands, and then multiple thousands. There's no reason the virus is going to behave any differently in the U.S." Officials said Saturday that the man who died in Washington was in his 50s with underlying health conditions. Officials said they do not know how he contracted the virus, though he was admitted to EvergreenHealth Medical Center outside Seattle at the same time as at least one other COVID- 19 patient. Washington Gov. Jay Inslee declared a state of emergency Saturday to respond to the outbreak. Seattle-area officials said they would consider canceling public events if the situation worsened but asked residents meanwhile to wash their hands and stay home if they had symptoms of respiratory illness. "It is a sad day in our state as we learn that a Washingtonian has died from COVID-19," Inslee said in a statement. "Our hearts go out to his family and friends. We will continue to work toward a day where no one dies from this virus." In a news conference Saturday, President Trump stressed that "there is no reason to panic" and that the risk to the general public remains low. At the same time, he announced new restrictions on travelers from Iran as well as additional screenings of those coming from Italy and South Korea, where there has been a jump in infections. He discouraged people from traveling to those countries. Dr. Anthony Fauci, director of the National Institute of Allergies and Infectious Diseases, appeared alongside Trump and agreed that limiting travel was important. He sought to reassure the public that the government was marshaling all available resources to combat the spread of the virus in the U.S. "The country as a whole still remains at low risk, but this is an evolving situation," he said. "There will be additional cases, but we should not be surprised by that. The challenge is how we deal with it." The outbreak at Life Care Center, a long-term care facility in the Seattle suburb of Kirkland, is a major concern because of the vulnerable patients who live there, experts said. A staff member in her 40s has been hospitalized with COVID-19, as has a resident in her 70s who is in serious condition, said Seattle and King County public health officer Dr. Jeffrey Duchin. Additionally, 27 residents and 25 staffers have symptoms such as pneumonia or other respiratory problems that match up with COVID-19, Duchin said. With 108 residents and 180 staffers at the facility in total, more people will probably test positive, he said. "We are very concerned about an outbreak in a setting where there are many older people," Duchin said in a call with reporters Saturday. Duchin said a 10-member CDC team traveling to Washington on Saturday would conduct a meticulous investigation in search of the source of the coronavirus in Kirkland. Members of the team, which could grow, will also determine who came in contact with the patients subsequently diagnosed with the illness. The team will help identify, isolate and test Life Care residents who may be at risk, Duchin said. Residents will remain at the facility unless they need hospitalization, he said, but will be segregated according to symptoms. "No mixing people who are sick with people who are not sick," he said. Gostin, who is also a professor at Georgetown University, said the large numbers of cases in high-density settings in other countries suggested there would be outbreaks at places such as long-term care facilities. "We've seen it in hospitals in Korea, we've seen it in churches in Korea ... in pilgrimage places in Iran; we've seen it in prisons in China, in nursing homes. ... All of those places, you're seeing very rapid transmission," Gostin said. The rise in patients in the U.S. diagnosed with COVID-19 in recent days is probably due in part to increased testing. Before last week, doctors were not allowed to order the tests, of which there is a limited supply, for patients who did not have a history of travel to China or close contact with someone who had traveled there. Physicians can now order tests for people who are hospitalized and very ill but have no travel history. "If we had the ability to test earlier, I'm sure we would've been able to identify patients earlier, particularly at hospitals," Duchin said. Experts said the virus is most likely to start spreading in coastal hubs of international travel. San Francisco, New York and Los Angeles typically receive the most passengers flying from Wuhan, China, where the outbreak began, on a daily basis. In California, there are now three COVID-19 patients who did not recently travel outside the U.S. or come in contact with someone who did. The state's health department recently announced eight testing labs that can handle coronavirus, in Los Angeles, Orange, Ventura, San Diego, Contra Costa, Alameda, Santa Clara and Tulare counties. Officials also announced the arrival of 1,200 testing kits from the federal government. The most recent California patient, announced Saturday, is a woman described as "a household contact" of a Santa Clara County patient who has underlying health conditions and whose diagnosis was made public Friday. The other California patient is a woman who was hospitalized at UC Davis Medical Center in Sacramento. Hers was the first announced case of community spread in the United States and led to 124 nurses and healthcare workers at the hospital being asked to self-quarantine, according to the California Nurses Assn. Officials said it's inevitable that more test results will come back positive. "Definitely we will have more cases here," said Dr. Peter Beilenson, Sacramento County's director of health services. "You shed virus before you are symptomatic, so it's already out of the bag in a lot of ways. It's going to spread, it's just going to spread." -- Karlamangla and Wigglesworth reported from Los Angeles, and Read from Seattle. Caption: PHOTO: DR. NANCY MESSONNIER, respiratory diseases director at the CDC, said the new coronavirus is expected to become more widespread in the U.S. "We are facing a historic public health challenge," she said Saturday. PHOTOGRAPHER:Shawn Thew EPA/Shutterstock 
Mar 1, 2020	Big banks around the world are rushing to ensure they can keep Wall Street humming in the event of a coronavirus pandemic. The travel curbs have begun -- the next steps will upend daily life on trading desks. Firms are prepping plans that include: * Activating backup sites and splitting up teams, so if an outbreak hits one office, colleagues can continue elsewhere.  * Sanitizing every surface hourly -- from traders' desks to elevator buttons. *Shutting company gyms and maybe cafeterias. * Designating rooms to send sickened staff until an ambulance arrives. It's a snapshot of what life might look like on Wall Street and across the industry as global markets brace for the prospect the virus will run rampant. The plans were described by Regina Phelps, a four-decade veteran of continuity planning and the founder of Emergency Management & Safety Solutions. She said she's urging clients -- which have included the World Bank, and the three largest U.S. credit card networks -- to hone their plans now for a situation that could develop quickly. "If you get the first case in your office, you need to know exactly what you're going to do," Phelps said. "The health department will shut you down for 14 days. Then what?" JPMorgan Chase & Co., the world's biggest trading house, restricted all nonessential travel globally last week. It told employees in a memo to start testing their ability to work remotely. Other major banks have curbed travel to affected regions. Phelps and other consultants predict Wall Street will place personnel farther apart along notoriously crowded desks. Some can work from home, but that isn't possible for everyone. Many roles rely on access to closely guarded internal systems and third-party trading venues. For banks, it's also easier to monitor traders for compliance and risk management when they're in the office. Some financial firms don't have companywide systems for tracking absences in real time. Instead, employees who aren't feeling well notify their managers, who make adjustments on the team. That must change, Phelps said, so that senior executives can detect potential outbreaks faster. In the U.S., the Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council has been requiring banks to create plans for a potential pandemic for more than a decade. That includes programs to prevent an outbreak from spreading inside a firm, but also steps to continue communicating with customers. But big banks have been publicly tight-lipped about what specific steps they may take to bolster their domestic operations. Privately, some senior executives acknowledge that they're still trying to decide. So life on Wall Street still looks relatively normal, even as U.S. authorities shift their tone to say the question is no longer if, but when, the virus may arrive. Still, measures prescribed by consultants can be seen abroad. As outbreaks erupted in South Korea, banks including UBS Group and Citigroup Inc. began splitting workers among different locations to ensure business can continue. Some locations in Europe may follow suit as the virus spreads there. "As you can imagine, it's a bit tense," said Zoeb Sachee, head of European government bond trading at Citigroup.  Credit: Surane writes for Bloomberg. 
Mar 1, 2020	Correction: Olympic Games: In the March 1 Sports section, an article about coronavirus being a potential threat to the Summer Olympics said the 1944 Games scheduled for Tokyo had been canceled. Tokyo was to have hosted the 1940 Games, which were canceled. The 1944 Games, scheduled for London, also were canceled. The way Yoshiro Mori sees it, the fate of the Summer Olympics is in the lap of the Shinto gods. "I hope [the coronavirus] will vanish," the Tokyo Olympics and Paralympics organizing committee chief said recently during an event here to unveil Japan's official Summer Games apparel. "I pray to the gods every day." The status of the Games is in some question, with health experts worried about holding such a large public event this summer and others insisting it is too early to make any decisions. In Japan, these concerns are amplified tenfold.  The number of confirmed coronavirus cases in Japan stood at 241 on Saturday. This is a far cry from the more than 3,500 cases reported in South Korea and nearly 80,000 in mainland China, where the virus originated. Those two countries account for over 98% of the global total and 97.2% of all fatalities (more than 2,900 as of March 1). Five people are known to have died from the virus in Japan, compared with more than 2,800 in China. The effect of the virus is already being felt in Japan's sports world. The Nippon Professional Baseball league announced last week that its remaining 72 preseason games would be played in empty stadiums, and the body governing J. League soccer has nixed 96 games scheduled through March 15. The Japan Sumo Assn. said Friday it would be "impossible" to hold any "regular" iteration of its spring tournament, slated to open in Osaka on March 8. Japan's two professional boxing organizations have canceled all bouts in March. Some local municipalities are also taking action. In Izu City, the location for track and mountain bike events during the Olympics, many sporting and other events have been scrapped or postponed, according to Masaki Suzuki, head of the city's Summer Games planning division. However, the city has yet to hear any word of the Olympic events being affected, he added. "This is a popular tourist destination and the Olympics is a kind of promotion for the city," Suzuki said. "If it was canceled it would mean losing what would be a huge legacy for us." Olympic Games were canceled in 1916, 1940 and 1944 during world wars. (The 1944 Games also had been scheduled for Tokyo.) However, public health concerns threatened the Olympics as recently as the 2016 Summer Games in Rio de Janeiro because of the Zika virus and the 2010 Winter Games in Vancouver, Canada, because of swine flu. In February, during a meeting with members of the International Olympic Committee, committee chief Mori had eschewed talk of divine intervention, stating that despite growing concerns over the spread of COVID-19, the cancellation or postponement of the Games was "not under consideration." But about a week later, he was in a defiant mood, forgoing the ubiquitous surgical mask -- the object of scuffles among normally nonconfrontational Japanese because of their short supply -- and imploring athletes to steer clear of the virus. "I will do my best not to wear a mask, right till the bitter end," the gaffe-prone Mori said, an intended rib-tickler that went down like a lead balloon with the 130 members of the media in attendance, all of whom were obligated to wear masks and disinfect their hands before entering the conference room. The comment quickly drew criticism among Japan's Twitterati, who bemoaned a lack of tact in "yet another uncalled-for remark" by the former prime minister. Others saw it as bureaucratic jive. "That was just show," said Tokyo businessman Keizo Yamaga, adding he believed holding the Games as planned in July and August would be "extremely difficult" because of the global spread of COVID-19. The domestic response to the virus has come under fire too. Tokyo Gov. Yuriko Koike was among those bemoaning Prime Minister Shinzo Abe's belated recommendation Friday that schools nationwide should close. Like Mori, the Tokyo chief remains adamant the Olympics will go ahead, her office issuing a statement to the The Times insisting, "We have never discussed canceling the Games. Preparations for the Games are continuing as planned." That stance was placed in some doubt Monday, when IOC member Dick Pound told the Associated Press the IOC would make a decision on the fate of the Games in late May, but that he believed a cancellation was more likely than a postponement or relocation. Japan's Olympics minister, Seiko Hashimoto, quickly dismissed the comment, telling a parliamentary session Wednesday she had received assurances from the IOC that it did not represent the official view. According to the Tokyo 2020 Organizing Committee, everything is being done to ensure the Games proceed as scheduled, starting with the establishment of a countermeasures task force to supplement the state's own Novel Coronavirus Response HQ. However, the committee did not respond to requests for details about those countermeasures or any strategy relating to the Japanese leg of the first Summer Games event, the torch relay, which begins March 26. The start point of the 121-day relay is Fukushima, and Takahiro Sato of the prefecture's Olympic promotion office said that although no specific directives have been received from Tokyo, he fully expects measures ensuring the safety and security of the many supporters anticipated for the "grand start" of the relay to be a "top priority." "We will work closely with the organizing committee and the state to implement appropriate infectious disease control measures for the relay as well as the baseball and softball games we are scheduled to host," Sato said. Local assemblyman Keiji Hiramoto is less optimistic, and believes Japan should think seriously about postponing the Games. "If the virus continues to spread, we may face not only reduced participation [from athletes], but a significant loss of visitors from overseas," said Hiramoto, a legislator for Namie Town, which was one of the Fukushima municipalities most severely affected by the 2011 tsunami and nuclear disaster. "The virus has caused widespread panic and postponing now will allow time for everyone to calm down and regroup, and to properly prepare and take full advantage of this once in a lifetime event."  Credit: Gilhooly is a freelance journalist based in Japan. 
Feb 29, 2020	The way Yoshiro Mori sees it, the fate of the Summer Olympics is in the lap of the Shinto gods. “I hope [the coronavirus] will vanish,” the Tokyo Olympics and Paralympics organizing committee chief said recently during an event here to unveil Japan’s official Summer Games apparel. “I pray to the gods every day.” The status of the Games is in some question, with health experts worried about holding such a large public event this summer and others insisting it is too early to make any decisions. In Japan, these concerns are amplified ten-fold. The number of confirmed coronavirus cases in Japan stood at 241 on Saturday. This is a far cry from the more than 3,100 cases reported in South Korea and nearly 80,000 in mainland China, where the virus originated. Those two countries account for over 98% of the global total and 97.2% of all fatalities (2,976 as of March 1). Five people are known to have died from the virus in Japan, compared with more than 2,800 in China. The effect of the virus is already being felt in Japan’s sports world. The Nippon Professional Baseball league announced last week that its remaining 72 preseason games would be played in empty stadiums, and the body governing J. League soccer has nixed 96 games scheduled through March 15. The Japan Sumo Assn. said Friday it would be “impossible” to hold any “regular” iteration of its spring tournament, slated to open in Osaka on March 8. Japan’s two professional boxing organizations have canceled all bouts in March. Some local municipalities are also taking action. In Izu City, the location for track and mountain bike events during the Olympics, many sporting and other events have been scrapped or postponed, according to Masaki Suzuki, head of the city’s Summer Games planning division. However, the city has yet to hear any word of the Olympic events being affected, he added. “This is a popular tourist destination and the Olympics is a kind of promotion for the city,” Suzuki said. “If it was canceled it would mean losing what would be a huge legacy for us.” Olympic Games were canceled in 1916, 1940 and 1944 during world wars. (The 1944 Games also had been scheduled for Tokyo.) However, public health concerns threatened the Olympics as recently as the 2016 Summer Games in Rio de Janeiro because of the Zika virus and the 2010 Winter Games in Vancouver, Canada, because of swine flu. In February, during a meeting with members of the International Olympic Committee, committee chief Mori had eschewed talk of divine intervention, stating that despite growing concerns over the spread of COVID-19 , the cancellation or postponement of the Games was “not under consideration.” But about a week later, he was in a defiant mood, forgoing the ubiquitous surgical mask — the object of scuffles among normally nonconfrontational Japanese because of their short supply — and imploring athletes to steer clear of the virus. “I will do my best not to wear a mask, right ‘til the bitter end,” the gaffe-prone Mori said, an intended rib-tickler that went down like a lead balloon with the 130 members of the media in attendance, all of whom were obligated to wear masks and disinfect their hands before entering the conference room. The comment quickly drew criticism among Japan’s Twitterati, who bemoaned a lack of tact in “yet another uncalled-for remark” by the former prime minister. Others saw it as bureaucratic jive. “That was just show,” said Tokyo businessman Keizo Yamaga, adding he believed holding the Games as planned in July and August will be “extremely difficult” because of the global spread of COVID-19. The domestic response to the virus has come under fire too. Tokyo governor Yuriko Koike was among those bemoaning Prime Minister Shinzo Abe’s belated recommendation Feb. 28 that schools nationwide should close. Like Mori, the Tokyo chief remains adamant the Olympics will go ahead, her office issuing a statement to the The Times insisting, “We have never discussed canceling the Games. Preparations for the Games are continuing as planned.” That stance was placed in some doubt Feb. 24, when IOC member Dick Pound told the Associated Press the IOC would make a decision on the fate of the Games in late May, but that he believed a cancellation was more likely than a postponement or relocation. Japan’s Olympics minister, Seiko Hashimoto, quickly dismissed the comment, telling a parliamentary session Wednesday she had received assurances from the IOC that it did not represent the official view. According to the Tokyo 2020 Organizing Committee, everything is being done to ensure the Games proceed as scheduled, starting with the establishment of a countermeasures task force to supplement the state’s own Novel Coronavirus Response HQ. However, the committee did not respond to requests for details about those countermeasures or any strategy relating to the Japanese leg of the first Summer Games event, the torch relay, which kicks off March 26. The start point of the 121-day relay is Fukushima, and Takahiro Sato of the prefecture’s Olympic promotion office said that although no specific directives have been received from Tokyo, he fully expects measures ensuring the safety and security of the many supporters anticipated for the “grand start” of the relay to be a “top priority.” “We will work closely with the organizing committee and the state to implement appropriate infectious disease control measures for the relay as well as the baseball and softball games we are scheduled to host,” Sato said. Local assemblyman Keiji Hiramoto is less optimistic, and believes Japan should think seriously about postponing the Games. “If the virus continues to spread, we may face not only reduced participation [from athletes], but a significant loss of visitors from overseas,” said Hiramoto, a legislator for Namie Town, which was one of the Fukushima municipalities most severely affected by the 2011 tsunami and nuclear disaster. “The virus has caused widespread panic and postponing now will allow time for everyone to calm down and regroup, and to properly prepare and take full advantage of this once in a lifetime event.” Gilhooly is a freelance journalist based in Japan. 
Feb 29, 2020	California recorded a new case of the coronavirus Friday in Santa Clara County, heightening concerns that the disease is spreading in the United States. Health officials in Santa Clara County said the new patient had no known exposure to the virus through travel or close contact with a known infected person. For the record: 10:27 PM, Feb. 28, 2020 A previous version of this post misspelled the last name of the director of health services in Sacramento County. His name is Peter Beilenson, not Beilson. The individual is an older adult, a woman with chronic health conditions who was hospitalized for a respiratory illness, officials said at a news conference Friday. Her physician contacted the public health department this week to discuss the case and request testing for the novel coronavirus. The department is working to identify contacts and understand the extent of exposure. “This new case indicates that there is evidence of community transmission but the extent is still not clear,” said Dr. Sara Cody, health officer for Santa Clara County and director of the Santa Clara County Public Health Department. “I understand this may be concerning to hear, but this is what we have been preparing for. Now we need to start taking additional actions to slow down the spread of the disease.” Friday night, Washington state health officials announced two new coronavirus cases Friday night, a woman who had recently traveled to South Korea and a high school student whose school will be closed and sanitized. The new cases comes as officials in Northern California are searching for people who might have come in contact with a Solano County woman who is believed to be the country’s first novel coronavirus patient who did not recently travel outside the U.S. or come in contact with someone who did. Authorities said her case might indicate that the virus is already spreading within the local community, a significant leap, making it essential that they quickly find anyone who might have been exposed to her. The woman was hospitalized more than a week ago but was not tested for several days because she did not fit screening criteria set by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, which include both symptoms of the virus and either a recent history of travel to China or close contact with another coronavirus patient. “It is important to recognize that we have moved from containment to mitigation,” Dr. Bela Matyas, the county’s health officer, said in a statement. “We are investigating potential exposures and ensuring that proper evaluation and care are provided if they become sick.” Before she was transferred to UC Davis, the woman was hospitalized for three days at NorthBay VacaValley Hospital in Vacaville, Aimee Brewer, president of NorthBay Healthcare Group, said in a statement. She was taken by ambulance to the UC Davis facility in Sacramento once her condition worsened, Brewer said. “As for the patient’s care in NorthBay VacaValley Hospital, at no time did the patient fit the existing CDC criteria for COVID-19, and therefore a test was not immediately administered,” she said. After learning of the diagnosis, the hospital “launched a meticulous tracing” of anyone who might have been in contact with her, Brewer said. The hospital remains open and is operating normally. UC Davis officials said the woman arrived on Feb. 19 but was not tested until Sunday. The hospital said that precautions had been put in place because of caregivers’ concerns about her condition and that a “small number” of employees had been asked to stay home and monitor their temperature. Sacramento County Director of Health Services Peter Beilenson said the woman had been transferred to the hospital under virus containment protocols, but additional measures, such as isolation in a negative pressure room, which prevents air from escaping, were now in place. Beilenson said he did not expect additional cases of the virus based on those in contact with the patient in Sacramento, where she is receiving treatment, but did expect more cases in Solano County, where she is from. The woman was “in her community” for a number of days before accessing care, California Health and Human Services Secretary Dr. Mark Ghaly said. Investigators are now working to identify and locate anyone who may have come in contact with the woman. The CDC has sent 10 staffers to help trace her contacts, officials said. “Contact tracing is super important because it can help reduce transmission,” said Dr. Brandon Brown, an associate professor at the UC Riverside School of Medicine’s Center for Healthy Communities. “The worst-case scenario is that outside of close contacts — family, friends and coworkers — there were other people exposed to the virus in places where this person visited.” The tracing will likely start with the infected patient’s family and coworkers, who would be isolated and tested, and then move out to those who might have come in casual contact with her in places she’s visited within the past two weeks, which is believed to be the incubation period of the virus. In order to identify individuals who came into contact with the woman at the hospital, Northbay VacaValley officials sifted through medical records to see which clinicians entered her room. Additionally, three days’ worth of security footage from 8 p.m. Feb. 15 to mid-morning Feb. 19 were scoured to ensure that all visitors and non-clinicians – like workers who brought in food trays or refilled bathroom supplies – were tallied. Sacramento County health officials said that dozens of people might be quarantined at home based on having contact with the woman. UC Davis spokesman Steve Telliano disputed that the number could be higher than 70 but refused to say if more or fewer people were quarantined. Steve Huddleston, vice president of public affairs of NorthBay Healthcare, said that the quarantine affected dozens connected to the hospital. Huddleston said that the hospital staff is comprised of about a couple hundred. Those employees who have been home, due to quarantine or unrelated matters, have been backfilled. On Friday afternoon, Makayla Lara, 20, sipped iced green tea on the porch of a Starbucks that’s a short walk from Northbay VacaValley Hospital, the first medical facility to care for the first community-based case of the coronavirus in the United States. (The woman is now under treatment at UC Davis Medical Center in Sacramento.) “I don’t think people are super freaked out,” said Lara, a nursing student at Solano Community College. “I don’t think it’s anything to be afraid of. Just take like the necessary precautions that you do with any virus. If you are sick, don’t go out. Wash your hands, you know.” At the Lowe’s homes improvement store in Vacaville, the shelves have been stripped of protective masks and hand sanitizer for weeks. Employees said customers have been buying them by the case and they fly off the shelves as soon as new supplies arrive. The employees did not have authority to speak on behalf of the store and asked to remain unnamed. Customer Teresa Del Rio, 48, said she’s not worried about the spread of the virus at this point because she’s a nurse and knows how to avoid risks of transmission. But she’s worried about the healthcare providers who cared for the patient at a local hospital who was later confirmed to have the virus. “The only anxiety is that I don’t think people are being proactive enough knowing that the patient exposed a bunch of nurses who probably went out into the community,” said Del Rio, who works at a different medical facility. “I think they needed to be more proactive with their testing.” From Northbay VacaValley Hospital, it’s easy to spot planes landing to the south at Travis Air Force Base, the federal facility that accepted some of the first Americans evacuated from Wuhan, China — the epicenter of the outbreak. According to the Washington Post, a whistleblower reported that the Department of Health and Human Services sent a crew of workers to the base without the adequate protective gear or proper training on viral outbreaks. Beilenson, Sacramento County‘s director of health services, said “definitely we will have more cases here.” “You shed virus before you are symptomatic so it’s already out of the bag in a lot of ways,” Beilenson said. “It’s going to spread; it’s just going to spread.” Beilenson said most people that contract the virus – more than 80% – will have mild or no symptoms, but still be able to pass COVID-19 to others. On Thursday night, the CDC revised its testing guidelines to allow for more people to be tested for the coronavirus. Previously, only people with flu-like symptoms and a travel history to China or close contact with someone who traveled to China. Now, doctors can order coronavirus tests for anyone with flu-like symptoms who has recently traveled to China, Iran, Italy, Japan and South Korea. In an even bigger change, Patients hospitalized with fever and pneumonia and no travel history could be tested by doctors. The change is widely interpreted to be a response to the UC Davis patient, who had no travel history. It took several days for the CDC to allow testing of the patient, who was severely ill. Beilenson said new community cases were more likely in Solano than Sacramento, “predominately because the UC Davis case came ensconced (in protective measures). If it would happen anywhere it would happen in Solano County,” he said. Three UC Davis students are under 14-day isolation as one awaits test results after showing mild coronavirus symptoms, officials said. The students are roommates at Kearney Hall, UC Davis Chancellor Gary S. May said. One student has been off campus since Tuesday and has been tested for COVID-19. The student is in isolation at their home, UC Davis spokeswoman Melissa Lutz Blouin said Friday. The other two have not shown any symptoms and have therefore not been tested, but they have been isolated since Wednesday night as a precaution. They were moved to a vacant on-campus apartment and are in self-isolation for 14 days, the time symptoms would appear if they had a virus. Yolo County Health Officer Dr. Ron Chapman said officials know the source of the possible exposure for the student who might have the virus, but could not disclose that information because of privacy rules. When the university first learned about the exposure, officials alerted all students, faculty and staff. Housing and dining services personnel also have increased cleaning rounds at those campus facilities, disinfecting doorknobs, tables and other areas with lots of student contact. UC Davis is following the direction of the Yolo County Public Health Department in its response to the incident. Just outside the Kearney Hall dorm at the university, freshman Dominic Alvarez sat on a concrete bench casually texting friends on Friday. He was unfazed about reports of the students who were reportedly exposed to the coronavirus. “Me and friends, we’re not gullible,” said Alvarez, a mechanical engineering student from Los Angeles. “We’re keeping up with the medical news. For young healthy adults with healthy immune systems, it’s just like the flu. Older people have to worry, and younger kids, though.” Another student parking his bike outside the dorm was more concerned. The student, who asked only to be identified by his nickname “Vac,” was wearing a protective mask over his mouth and nose and black medical gloves on his hands. “I’m super worried,” said Vac, 21, an environmental engineering student. “We’re in classes every day with other students who may have been exposed.” Vac is from northern China and has been in constant contact with his family. He says they are fine but that he, along with many other foreign students from all over Asia, are concerned for their loved ones. “They’re hearing from families and friends who say it’s scary out there, because that’s exactly how it’s been in China and Japan for the past month,” he said. There will now be eight public health labs capable of coronavirus testing in California in the counties of Los Angeles, Orange, Ventura, San Diego, Contra Costa, Alameda, Santa Clara and Tulare, said Charity Dean, deputy director of the California Department of Public Health. On Friday night, Solano County formally announced two cases — but both patients appear to have contracted the virus through foreign travel. They had previously been counted as coronavirus patients. One patient had been on the Diamond Princess cruise ship when an outbreak occurred and had been housed at Travis Air Force Base, according to the county. A second resident — who was also housed at Travis — was tested positive by Japanese officials. Times staff writer Soumya Karlamangla contributed to this report, as did AP. 
Feb 29, 2020	Northern California has become a focus of efforts to slow the spread of the coronavirus in the U.S. as officials urgently tried to locate people who came in contact with patients in two communities. Dozens of public health officials have been working in Solano County and nearby Davis, in Yolo County, to find people who crossed paths with a woman believed to be the country’s first novel coronavirus patient who did not recently travel outside the U.S. or come in contact with someone who did. For the record: 8:04 AM, Feb. 29, 2020 An earlier version of this article mistakenly placed the city of Davis in Sacramento County. It is in Yolo County. Then on Friday afternoon, Santa Clara County authorities announced a new coronavirus case, that county’s third, also believed to have been spread through community contact. The woman in that case also had no known exposure to the virus through travel or close contact with a known infected person. “This new case indicates that there is evidence of community transmission but the extent is still not clear,” said Dr. Sara Cody, health officer for Santa Clara County and director of the Santa Clara County Public Health Department. “Now we need to start taking additional actions to slow down the spread of the disease.” Later Friday, the states of Oregon and Washington also announced new coronavirus cases in people who hadn’t recently traveled overseas or been exposed to other confirmed cases. In Oregon, an employee of a Washington County elementary school was diagnosed after first experiencing symptoms Feb. 19 and may have exposed others at the school to the virus, officials said. In Washington, a Snohomish County high school student tested positive after seeking care at Seattle Children’s North Clinic on Feb. 24, officials said. Washington also announced that a King County woman in her 50s who had traveled to South Korea had contracted coronavirus. Both those patients and the woman in Santa Clara County tested positive for the virus in laboratories in their respective states. They are considered presumptive positive cases until the results are confirmed by CDC testing. The ongoing efforts in the Davis area had already led to the voluntary quarantining of dozens of people, including workers at the two hospitals where the first woman was treated as well as UC Davis and other college campuses. While no new cases were reported there Friday, health officials said the spread was inevitable. “Definitely we will have more cases here,” Peter Beilenson, Sacramento County’s director of health services, said. “You shed virus before you are symptomatic so it’s already out of the bag in a lot of ways. It’s going to spread, it’s just going to spread.” Beilenson said most people who contract the virus — more than 80% — will have mild or no symptoms, but still be able to pass COVID-19 to others. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention has sent 10 staffers to work with local and state experts to help trace her contacts, officials said. “Contact tracing is super important because it can help reduce transmission,” said Dr. Brandon Brown, an associate professor at the UC Riverside School of Medicine’s Center for Healthy Communities. “The worst-case scenario is that outside of close contacts — family, friends and co-workers — there were other people exposed to the virus in places where this person visited.” Tracing efforts would probably start with the infected patient’s family and co-workers, who would be isolated and tested, and then expand to those who might have come in casual contact with the patient in places the woman visited within the prior two weeks, the timespan believed to be the incubation period of the virus. Those more casual contacts would likely be watched for signs of illness, then isolated and tested if they develop symptoms. “It’s a means of surveillance, which is the foundation of modern public health,” Brown said of contact tracing. Because public health officials don’t know how the woman contracted the virus, it’s also likely they’ll perform contact tracing in an attempt to figure out where she got it from, he said. The woman was hospitalized for three days at NorthBay VacaValley Hospital in Vacaville before being moved to UC Davis Medical Center. She was not immediately tested for several days because she did not fit screening criteria set by the CDC at the time, which include both symptoms of the virus and either a recent history of travel to China or close contact with another coronavirus patient. This gap concerns officials because it could have allowed her to infect others who came in contact with her. To identify individuals who came into contact with the woman at the hospital, NorthBay officials sifted through medical records to see which clinicians entered her room. Additionally, three days worth of security footage from 8 p.m. Feb. 15 to mid-morning Feb. 19 were scoured to ensure that all visitors and non-clinicians — such as workers who brought in food trays or refilled bathroom supplies — were tallied. Sacramento County health officials said dozens of people might be quarantined at home based on having contact with the woman. UC Davis spokesman Steve Telliano disputed information that the number could be higher than 70 but refused to say if more or fewer people were quarantined. Steve Huddleston, vice president of public affairs of NorthBay Healthcare, said the hospital has a staff of about a couple of hundred and that the quarantine affected dozens connected to the hospital. Those employees who have been home, due to quarantine or unrelated matters, have been backfilled. Three UC Davis students are under 14-day isolation as one awaits test results after showing mild coronavirus symptoms, officials said Thursday. The students are roommates at Kearney Hall, UC Davis Chancellor Gary S. May said. One student has been off campus since Tuesday and has been tested for COVID-19. The student is in isolation at home, UC Davis spokeswoman Melissa Lutz Blouin said Friday. Just outside the Kearney Hall dorm at UC Davis on Friday, freshman Dominic Alvarez sat on a concrete bench texting friends. He was unfazed about reports of the students potentially exposed to the coronavirus. Alvarez said some students on campus are panicking unnecessarily, not realizing that the risk of getting seriously ill from the virus is very low. “Me and friends, we’re not gullible,” said Alvarez, a mechanical engineering student from Los Angeles. “We’re keeping up with the medical news. For young healthy adults with healthy immune systems, it’s just like the flu. Older people have to worry, and younger kids, though.” Another student parking his bike outside the dorm was more concerned. The student, who asked to be identified only by his nickname “Vac,” was wearing a protective mask over his mouth and nose and black medical gloves on his hands. “I’m super worried,” said Vac, 21, an environmental engineering student. “We’re in classes every day with other students who may have been exposed.” Vac is from northern China and has been in constant contact with his family. He says they are fine but that he, along with many other students from all over Asia, are concerned for their loved ones. “They’re hearing from families and friends who say it’s scary out there, because that’s exactly how it’s been in China and Japan for the past month,” he said. He’s seen plenty of vitriolic racism against Asians on the internet since the outbreak of the virus, but Vac said he’s not experienced any sort of discrimination at UC Davis. “We have a pretty strong Asian community on campus,” he said. On Friday afternoon, Makayla Lara, 20, sipped iced green ice on the porch of a Starbucks that’s a short walk from NorthBay VacaValley Hospital. “I don’t think people are super freaked out,” said Lara, a nursing student at Solano Community College. “I don’t think it’s anything to be afraid of. Just take like the necessary precautions that you do with any virus. If you are sick, don’t go out. Wash your hands, you know.” Willon reported from Davis, Chabria from Sacramento, Shalby and Wigglesworth from Los Angeles. Times staff writer Rong-Gong Lin II in San Francisco contributed to this report. 
Feb 29, 2020	A Washington state man has become the first person in the U.S. to die from the coronavirus, state and federal public health officials confirmed Saturday. He was not one of the two coronavirus patients the state had previously announced. Public health officials in California on Saturday announced another coronavirus patient, a woman described as “a household contact” of a Santa Clara County woman whose diagnosis was made public Friday. There are at least 30 coronavirus patients in California, many of them from repatriation flights, with the number changing often. The King County patient who died was in his 50s and had underlying health conditions, and he is believed to have contracted the virus from “community spread,” not travel, officials said. He died at EvergreenHealth Medical Center in the Seattle suburb of Kirkland. “It is a sad day in our state as we learn that a Washingtonian has died from COVID-19,” Gov. Jay Inslee said in a statement. “Our hearts go out to his family and friends. We will continue to work toward a day where no one dies from this virus.” Washington officials also announced two new coronavirus patients associated with a skilled nursing facility in the same community, Life Care Center of Kirkland. One of the patients is a woman in her 70s who lives at the facility; she was in serious condition at EvergreenHealth Medical Center. The other is a woman in her 40s who works at the facility and is in satisfactory condition at Overlake Medical Center in Bellevue. About 27 of the 108 residents at the facility and 25 of the 180 staffers have symptoms of the virus, Dr. Jeffrey Duchin, health officer for Public Health Seattle and King County, said Saturday in a telebriefing with the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. “We are very concerned about an outbreak in a setting where there are many older people,” he said. A CDC team was slated to arrive Saturday night to help assess all of the possible patients. Residents will remain at the facility unless they need hospitalization, Duchin said, but will be segregated according to symptoms. “No mixing people who are sick with people who are not sick,” he said. Officials have so far found no link between the man who died and the nursing facility, but they are continuing to investigate, Duchin said. The governor declared a state of emergency to respond to the outbreak. “Our priority now is to slow the spread of this virus,” Inslee said. “Our healthcare professionals say the easiest way to do that is to practice good hygiene — wash your hands often, sanitize frequently touched surfaces and stay home when you’re sick. Preventing future cases will require the work of all of us.” Speaking at a news conference Saturday, President Trump described the man who died as “a medically high-risk patient.” He emphasized that “there is no reason to panic” and that the risk to the general public remains low. At the same time, he announced new restrictions on travelers from Iran as well as additional screenings of people coming from Italy and South Korea, where there has been a jump in infections. He discouraged people from traveling to those countries. Dr. Anthony Fauci, the director of the National Institute of Allergies and Infectious Diseases, appeared alongside Trump and said it was important for people to limit travel to the most affected countries. He sought to reassure the public that the government is marshaling all available resources to combat the spread of the virus in the U.S. “The country as a whole still remains at low risk, but this is an evolving situation,” Fauci said. “There will be additional cases, but we should not be surprised by that. The challenge is how we deal with it.” The newest diagnoses bring the total number of U.S. coronavirus cases to 70, with 47 of them among travelers who were either evacuated from the Diamond Princess cruise ship off Japan or on government-chartered flights from Wuhan, China, the epicenter of the outbreak. With new coronavirus cases reported in California, Washington and Oregon, officials are trying to accelerate testing to stem what experts and officials believe is an inevitable spread of the virus into communities. “We are still early in the investigations in California, Oregon and Washington; however, this preliminary information raises our level of concern about the immediate threat of COVID-19 for certain communities in the United States,” Dr. Nancy Messonnier, director of the National Center for Immunization and Respiratory Diseases at the CDC, said Saturday. Still, officials said that most people who contract COVID-19 experience only mild illness and that the virus is usually severe only in people who are older or have underlying health problems, such as cardiac or respiratory conditions or diabetes. The California Department of Public Health announced eight testing labs that can handle coronavirus cases, in Los Angeles, Orange, Ventura, San Diego, Contra Costa, Alameda, Santa Clara and Tulare counties. Officials also announced the arrival of 1,200 testing kits from the federal government. “The availability to test at California’s public health laboratories is a significant step forward in our ability to respond rapidly to this evolving situation,” Dr. Sonia Angell, director of the California Department of Public Health and state health officer, said in a statement. “As we face the likelihood of community transmission here in California, having this resource where we need it is essential to better inform public health response and protect our communities.” The Food and Drug Administration also announced new policies aimed at helping hospitals speed up testing of potential virus patients. The move comes amid complaints about the slow pace of processing tests. In Seattle, Duchin said public health officials learned that the man who died had been diagnosed with the coronavirus after he was reported as a presumptive positive by Washington’s Public Health Laboratories. The laboratories only recently acquired coronavirus test kits, and the man did not become eligible for testing until the CDC updated its guidelines to include those who had no recent history of overseas travel or exposure to another coronavirus patient, he said. “If we had the ability to test earlier, I’m sure we would have identified patients earlier in the community,” Duchin said. Dr. Frank Riedo, EvergreenHealth medical director of infection control, said that the diagnosis of the man who died there occurred after the CDC changed its guidelines Tuesday. On Thursday, he said, “we opted to look at our most critically ill patients.” The man had contracted the illness before being admitted to the hospital with serious respiratory symptoms, he said. Riedo said it’s likely that there are more coronavirus cases in the Seattle area. “What we’re seeing is the tip of the iceberg,” he said. “In all likelihood, there is ongoing low-level transmission.” California now has three coronavirus patients, all women, who did not recently travel outside the U.S. or come in contact with someone who did. That raised concerns that the virus was spreading in communities and prompted health officials to find and quarantine anyone who came in contact with them. The patient announced Saturday, who officials said is not ill and is isolated at home, is “a household contact” of a Santa Clara County woman with chronic health conditions whose physicians requested coronavirus testing after she was hospitalized for a respiratory illness. Officials said more California cases are inevitable. “Definitely we will have more cases here,” Dr. Peter Beilenson, Sacramento County’s director of health services, said. “You shed virus before you are symptomatic, so it’s already out of the bag in a lot of ways. It’s going to spread, it’s just going to spread.” The ongoing efforts in Northern California had already led to the voluntary quarantining of dozens of people, including students at UC Davis and other college campuses, and workers at the two hospitals where the country’s first patient without any known links to foreign travel was treated. The patient, a Solano County woman, was hospitalized for three days at NorthBay VacaValley Hospital in Vacaville before being moved to UC Davis Medical Center in Sacramento. She was not tested for several days because she did not fit CDC screening criteria at the time. This time gap concerns officials because it could have allowed her to infect others she came in contact with. To identify such individuals at the hospital, NorthBay officials reviewed the woman’s medical records and three days of security camera footage to identify all the clinicians, visitors and hospital workers who entered her room. Sacramento County health officials said dozens of people might be quarantined at home as a result. UC Davis Health spokesman Steve Telliano disputed reports that the number could be higher than 70 but refused to say whether more or fewer people were quarantined. Steve Huddleston, vice president of public affairs of NorthBay Healthcare, said that the hospital has a staff of about 200 and that the quarantine affected dozens of people connected to the hospital. Other employees are filling in for co-workers who have been sent home, he said. Three UC Davis students were under 14-day isolation as one awaited test results after showing mild coronavirus symptoms, officials said on Thursday. On Saturday, it was determined that the student did not have the virus. Two students at Palo Alto Unified School District, which is in Santa Clara County, were sent home after officials learned that one of their parents may have been exposed to the coronavirus, the school district announced Friday. One is a student at Palo Alto High School; the other attends Jane Lathrop Stanford Middle School, officials said. In Oregon, an employee of a Washington County elementary school was diagnosed with the coronavirus Friday after first experiencing symptoms Feb. 19 and may have exposed others at the school, officials said. In Washington, in addition to the patient who died, a Snohomish County high school student tested positive after seeking care at Seattle Children’s North Clinic on Monday, officials said. Officials also announced that another King County woman in her 50s who had traveled to South Korea had contracted the virus. Neither the Oregon patient nor the Washington high school student had a recent history of international travel or contact with another coronavirus patient, officials said. They and the Santa Clara County women tested positive for the virus in laboratories in their respective states. They are considered presumptive positive cases until the results are confirmed by CDC testing. “We are facing a historic public health challenge,” Messonnier said. “We will continue to respond to COVID-19 in an aggressive way to contain and blunt the threat of this virus. While we still hope for the best, we continue to prepare for this virus to become widespread in the United States.” Wigglesworth, Shalby and Chabria reported from Los Angeles, and Read from Seattle, Washington. 
Feb 29, 2020	Mexican authorities on Friday confirmed the country's first case of the new coronavirus -- a 35-year-old man who recently traveled to Italy and has displayed "minor" symptoms, officials said. The man, who was not identified, was being held in isolation at the National Institute of Respiratory Diseases in Mexico City after tests confirmed that he had contracted the virus, health authorities said. Another potential patient in Mexico, a 41-year-old man who also recently traveled to Italy, was in isolation at a hotel in the northwest state of Sinaloa, officials said. But one additional test was pending to confirm the diagnosis, federal authorities said. Quirino Ordaz, the governor of Sinaloa state, said on Twitter that the man had been confirmed as having the virus, but there was no immediate public confirmation from Mexico's federal health secretariat.  Officials emphasized that the matter was under control and urged Mexicans not to panic. "We are prepared to confront this situation of coronavirus," President Andres Manuel Lopez Obrador said Friday at his regular morning news conference. "We have the doctors, the specialists, the hospitals, the capacity to face this." The announcement comes two days after the first confirmed case of the new coronavirus, known as COVID-19, in Latin America -- a 61-year-old man in Brazil who had also recently returned from a trip to Italy. Italy is experiencing a major outbreak of the virus, which has quickly spread to more than 50 nations. In Mexico, five people who had contact with the man confirmed to be infected were "under analysis," Dr. Hugo Lopez-Gatell, the country's subsecretary of health, told reporters. Members of the man's family were being kept in isolation, the official said. The infected man, a resident of Mexico City, traveled to Italy between Feb. 14 and Feb. 22, authorities said. Officials here vowed regular updates, and Lopez Obrador called on the media not to create "a collective psychosis of fear." -- Special correspondent Cecilia Sanchez contributed to this report. Caption: PHOTO: MEXICO CONFIRMS COVID-19 CASE | Passengers from South Korea wear protective masks at Mexico City's airport. Mexico's first coronavirus patient had recently traveled to Italy and was displaying "minor" symptoms. WORLD, A4 PHOTOGRAPHER:Alfredo Estrella AFP/Getty Images 
Feb 28, 2020	The four-day delay in testing a Northern California patient who appears to be the first in the United States to contract the coronavirus from community contact highlights growing questions about the federal government’s testing policies and protocols as the virus continues to spread. A growing number of experts have said problems with the test process — including ineffective test kits and restrictive rules on who gets tested — could be fueling the undetected spread of the virus. “When you miss cases, you can’t isolate them, test their families or get a hold on this before it keeps spreading,” said Jennifer Nuzzo, an epidemiology expert at the Johns Hopkins Center for Health Security. Until Thursday, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention restricted coronavirus testing to patients with clear symptoms of infection who have either traveled to China recently or who have been in contact with someone who has tested positive for the virus. As the virus outpaced detection efforts around the world, that gateway to testing proved far too narrow. As early as last week, doctors at the UC Davis Medical Center suspected a coronavirus case and immediately requested testing from the CDC. But it was another four days before the test was done. During that time, others in the area could have been exposed to the virus. On Thursday, the CDC expanded the criteria for who qualified for testing to include sick patients who had traveled to Iran, Italy, Japan and South Korea. They will also test severely ill patients with acute lower respiratory sickness who are hospitalized, even those who have no known link to the coronavirus outbreak. The CDC faces growing political backlash. California Sen. Dianne Feinstein on Thursday called on the White House to start rapid testing of all suspected cases, saying the identification of coronavirus patients quickly is essential to limiting the spread. Gov. Gavin Newsom said California is in desperate need of test kits. The state has 200 kits for both diagnostic and surveillance purposes, but federal officials say more will arrive in the coming days, he said. “We are currently in deep partnership with the CDC on one overriding protocol that drives our principal focus right now, and that’s testing,” Newsom said, calling expanded testing “our top priority, not just in the state of California but, I imagine, across the United States.” Such an expansion includes both broadening the criteria that a person must meet to be tested for COVID-19, as well as getting more coronavirus test kits sent to California, he said. The kits have come under growing scrutiny. The CDC distributed the test kits to partner laboratories across the country, but many of those campuses ran into problems with one of the ingredients, leading to inconclusive test results. Most public health officials needed to send specimens to the CDC’s central laboratories in Atlanta for testing, a process that can take up to 48 hours, creating a bottleneck. “We’ve only had a handful of labs that can test with it. The rest have been on pause,” said Scott Becker, the executive director of the Assn. of Public Health Laboratories. “When you’re waiting 48 hours to get a response from the CDC, you’re burning through equipment caring for a patient, just waiting to see the results.” The problem grew so troublesome that state and local laboratories began seeking permission from the Food and Drug Administration to bypass standard regulations and design and launch their own tests, rather than rely on the federal one. On Thursday morning, Health and Human Services Secretary Alex Azar told members of Congress that the problem had been resolved. The FDA approved a modified protocol that circumvents the issue. Forty local and state public health labs, as well as some labs run by the Pentagon, are already authorized to begin using the modified test, and more than 50 others will be doing the same by next week, he added. Delays and missteps in coronavirus testing have caused major issues across the country, where public health officials on the front lines are stretched thin. Epidemic preparedness is already “a victim of roller coaster funding,” Becker said, and the baseline shortages of equipment and personnel are exacerbated. In addition to preparedness duties — developing local guidance, tracing patients’ contacts, working with schools and churches to the community — officials are having to do more for people quarantined at home. Health workers are delivering groceries to keep them at home, said Adriane Casalotti, the chief of government and public affairs at the National Assn. of County and City Health Officials. Above all, the burden on individual families is heaviest. “In most jobs in this country, you can’t work from a laptop on your couch. When there are delays in diagnostics, we’re out there asking real people to choose between the public’s health and their own financial well-being — them keeping their jobs. For individual families, this is complicated and messy,” Casalotti said. Critics said the slow testing process could mean coronavirus is already spreading in U.S. communities. But because the virus’ symptoms are frequently mild, people might be spreading it unknowingly. A Japanese couple visiting Waikiki Beach in Hawaii tested positive for the virus after returning to Asia, but Nuzzo and other epidemiologists say the virus’ incubation period hints that they could have contracted it on U.S. soil. Hawaiian authorities were so alarmed by the limited testing capabilities in the U.S. that they requested permission from CDC authorities to use a tool from Japan. On Thursday, the focus around coronavirus in the U.S. centered on Solano County. UC Davis officials said the coronavirus patient arrived at its medical center from another hospital Feb. 19 but was not tested until Sunday. There is no evidence the woman had traveled from a coronavirus hotspot or was in contact with someone who had. The hospital said that precautions had been put in place because of healthcare workers’ concerns about the patient’s condition. It asked a “small number” of employees to stay home and monitor their temperature. The woman was “in her community” for a number of days before accessing care, California Health and Human Services Agency Secretary Dr. Mark Ghaly said Thursday. Investigators are now working to find and contact any people who may have come in contact with the woman. The CDC has sent 10 staffers to help trace her contacts, Newsom said. Healthcare workers, including some students from UC Davis and other colleges, are under self-quarantine because they might have been exposed to the virus. Solano County is also home to Travis Air Force Base, where several hundred people were quarantined after returning on repatriation flights from Wuhan, China, and the Diamond Princess cruise ship in Japan. A whistleblower complaint on Thursday alleged that federal health workers were not provided adequate training and protective gear when dealing with quarantined people at Travis and a second California base. A total of 33 people have been diagnosed with coronavirus in California, and five have since left the state, Newsom said. Of the confirmed cases, 24 were either evacuated from the Diamond Princess cruise ship or returned on repatriation flights from Wuhan, the epicenter of the coronavirus outbreak. Newsom said more than 8,400 people are being monitored in 49 local jurisdictions. COVID-19 has infected more than 80,000 people in about three dozen countries since it was discovered in late December. More than 2,700 have died, most of them in mainland China. There are currently 60 confirmed cases in the United States. 
Feb 28, 2020	California recorded a new case of the coronavirus Friday in Santa Clara County, heightening concerns that the disease is spreading in the United States. Health officials in Santa Clara County said the new patient had no known exposure to the virus through travel or close contact with a known infected person. The individual is an older adult, a woman with chronic health conditions who was hospitalized for a respiratory illness, officials said at a news conference Friday. Her physician contacted the public health department this week to discuss the case and request testing for the novel coronavirus. The department is working to identify contacts and understand the extent of exposure. “This new case indicates that there is evidence of community transmission but the extent is still not clear,” said Dr. Sara Cody, health officer for Santa Clara County and director of the Santa Clara County Public Health Department. “I understand this may be concerning to hear, but this is what we have been preparing for. Now we need to start taking additional actions to slow down the spread of the disease.” The new case comes as officials in Northern California are searching for people who might have come in contact with a Solano County woman who is believed to be the country’s first novel coronavirus patient who did not recently travel outside the U.S. or come in contact with someone who did. Authorities said her case might indicate that the virus is already spreading within the local community, a significant leap, making it essential that they quickly find anyone who might have been exposed to her. The woman was hospitalized more than a week ago but was not tested for several days because she did not fit screening criteria set by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, which include both symptoms of the virus and either a recent history of travel to China or close contact with another coronavirus patient. “It is important to recognize that we have moved from containment to mitigation,” Dr. Bela Matyas, the county’s health officer, said in a statement. “We are investigating potential exposures and ensuring that proper evaluation and care are provided if they become sick.” Before she was transferred to UC Davis, the woman was hospitalized for three days at NorthBay VacaValley Hospital in Vacaville, Aimee Brewer, president of NorthBay Healthcare Group, said in a statement. She was taken by ambulance to the UC Davis facility in Sacramento once her condition worsened, Brewer said. “As for the patient’s care in NorthBay VacaValley Hospital, at no time did the patient fit the existing CDC criteria for COVID-19, and therefore a test was not immediately administered,” she said. After learning of the diagnosis, the hospital “launched a meticulous tracing” of anyone who might have been in contact with her, Brewer said. The hospital remains open and is operating normally. UC Davis officials said the woman arrived on Feb. 19 but was not tested until Sunday. The hospital said that precautions had been put in place because of caregivers’ concerns about her condition and that a “small number” of employees had been asked to stay home and monitor their temperature. Sacramento County Director of Health Services Peter Beilenson said the woman had been transferred to the hospital under virus containment protocols, but additional measures, such as isolation in a negative pressure room, which prevents air from escaping, were now in place. Beilenson said he did not expect additional cases of the virus based on those in contact with the patient in Sacramento, where she is receiving treatment, but did expect more cases in Solano County, where she is from. The woman was “in her community” for a number of days before accessing care, California Health and Human Services Secretary Dr. Mark Ghaly said. Investigators are now working to identify and locate anyone who may have come in contact with the woman. The CDC has sent 10 staffers to help trace her contacts, officials said. “Contact tracing is super important because it can help reduce transmission,” said Dr. Brandon Brown, an associate professor at the UC Riverside School of Medicine’s Center for Healthy Communities. “The worst-case scenario is that outside of close contacts — family, friends and coworkers — there were other people exposed to the virus in places where this person visited.” The tracing will likely start with the infected patient’s family and coworkers, who would be isolated and tested, and then move out to those who might have come in casual contact with her in places she’s visited within the past two weeks, which is believed to be the incubation period of the virus. In order to identify individuals who came into contact with the woman at the hospital, Northbay VacaValley officials sifted through medical records to see which clinicians entered her room. Additionally, three days’ worth of security footage from 8 p.m. Feb. 15 to mid-morning Feb. 19 were scoured to ensure that all visitors and non-clinicians – like workers who brought in food trays or refilled bathroom supplies – were tallied. Sacramento County health officials said that dozens of people might be quarantined at home based on having contact with the woman. UC Davis spokesman Steve Telliano disputed that the number could be higher than 70 but refused to say if more or fewer people were quarantined. Steve Huddleston, vice president of public affairs of NorthBay Healthcare, said that the quarantine affected dozens connected to the hospital. Huddleston said that the hospital staff is comprised of about a couple hundred. Those employees who have been home, due to quarantine or unrelated matters, have been backfilled. On Friday afternoon, Makayla Lara, 20, sipped iced green tea on the porch of a Starbucks that’s a short walk from Northbay VacaValley Hospital, the first medical facility to care for the first community-based case of the coronavirus in the United States. (The woman is now under treatment at UC Davis Medical Center in Sacramento.) “I don’t think people are super freaked out,” said Lara, a nursing student at Solano Community College. “I don’t think it’s anything to be afraid of. Just take like the necessary precautions that you do with any virus. If you are sick, don’t go out. Wash your hands, you know.” At the Lowe’s homes improvement store in Vacaville, the shelves have been stripped of protective masks and hand sanitizer for weeks. Employees said customers have been buying them by the case and they fly off the shelves as soon as new supplies arrive. The employees did not have authority to speak on behalf of the store and asked to remain unnamed. Customer Teresa Del Rio, 48, said she’s not worried about the spread of the virus at this point because she’s a nurse and knows how to avoid risks of transmission. But she’s worried about the healthcare providers who cared for the patient at a local hospital who was later confirmed to have the virus. “The only anxiety is that I don’t think people are being proactive enough knowing that the patient exposed a bunch of nurses who probably went out into the community,” said Del Rio, who works at a different medical facility. “I think they needed to be more proactive with their testing.” From Northbay VacaValley Hospital, it’s easy to spot planes landing to the south at Travis Air Force Base, the federal facility that accepted some of the first Americans evacuated from Wuhan, China — the epicenter of the outbreak. According to the Washington Post, a whistleblower reported that the Department of Health and Human Services sent a crew of workers to the base without the adequate protective gear or proper training on viral outbreaks. Beilenson, Sacramento County‘s director of health services, said “definitely we will have more cases here.” “You shed virus before you are symptomatic so it’s already out of the bag in a lot of ways,” Beilenson said. “It’s going to spread; it’s just going to spread.” Beilenson said most people that contract the virus – more than 80% – will have mild or no symptoms, but still be able to pass COVID-19 to others. On Thursday night, the CDC revised its testing guidelines to allow for more people to be tested for the coronavirus. Previously, only people with flu-like symptoms and a travel history to China or close contact with someone who traveled to China. Now, doctors can order coronavirus tests for anyone with flu-like symptoms who has recently traveled to China, Iran, Italy, Japan and South Korea. In an even bigger change, Patients hospitalized with fever and pneumonia and no travel history could be tested by doctors. The change is widely interpreted to be a response to the UC Davis patient, who had no travel history. It took several days for the CDC to allow testing of the patient, who was severely ill. Beilenson said new community cases were more likely in Solano than Sacramento, “predominately because the UC Davis case came ensconced (in protective measures). If it would happen anywhere it would happen in Solano County,” he said. Three UC Davis students are under 14-day isolation as one awaits test results after showing mild coronavirus symptoms, officials said. The students are roommates at Kearney Hall, UC Davis Chancellor Gary S. May said. One student has been off campus since Tuesday and has been tested for COVID-19. The student is in isolation at their home, UC Davis spokeswoman Melissa Lutz Blouin said Friday. The other two have not shown any symptoms and have therefore not been tested, but they have been isolated since Wednesday night as a precaution. They were moved to a vacant on-campus apartment and are in self-isolation for 14 days, the time symptoms would appear if they had a virus. Yolo County Health Officer Dr. Ron Chapman said officials know the source of the possible exposure for the student who might have the virus, but could not disclose that information because of privacy rules. When the university first learned about the exposure, officials alerted all students, faculty and staff. Housing and dining services personnel also have increased cleaning rounds at those campus facilities, disinfecting doorknobs, tables and other areas with lots of student contact. UC Davis is following the direction of the Yolo County Public Health Department in its response to the incident. Just outside the Kearney Hall dorm at the university, freshman Dominic Alvarez sat on a concrete bench casually texting friends on Friday. He was unfazed about reports of the students who were reportedly exposed to the coronavirus. “Me and friends, we’re not gullible,” said Alvarez, a mechanical engineering student from Los Angeles. “We’re keeping up with the medical news. For young healthy adults with healthy immune systems, it’s just like the flu. Older people have to worry, and younger kids, though.” Another student parking his bike outside the dorm was more concerned. The student, who asked only to be identified by his nickname “Vac,” was wearing a protective mask over his mouth and nose and black medical gloves on his hands. “I’m super worried,” said Vac, 21, an environmental engineering student. “We’re in classes every day with other students who may have been exposed.” Vac is from northern China and has been in constant contact with his family. He says they are fine but that he, along with many other foreign students from all over Asia, are concerned for their loved ones. “They’re hearing from families and friends who say it’s scary out there, because that’s exactly how it’s been in China and Japan for the past month,” he said. There will now be eight public health labs capable of coronavirus testing in California in the counties of Richmond, Alameda, Santa Clara, Tulare, Ventura, Los Angeles, Orange and San Diego, said Charity Dean, deputy director of the California Department of Public Health. On Friday night, Solano County formally announced two cases — but both patients appear to have contracted the virus through foreign travel. They had previously been counted as coronavirus patients. One patient had been on the Diamond Princess cruise ship when an outbreak occurred and had been housed at Travis Air Force Base, according to the county. A second resident — who was also housed at Travis — was tested positive by Japanese officials. Times staff writer Soumya Karlamangla contributed to this report. 
Feb 28, 2020	Green Day and BTS have joined the list of music acts postponing or axing shows around the world due to coronavirus concerns. “We have unfortunately made the difficult decision to postpone our upcoming shows in Asia due to the health + travel concerns with coronavirus,” the “American Idiot” rockers tweeted Thursday. “We know it sucks, as we were looking forward to seeing you all, but hold on to your tickets we’ll be announcing the new dates very soon.” Green Day was to have played a total of nine dates in March in Singapore, Thailand, the Philippines, Taiwan, Hong Kong, South Korea and Japan.  We have unfortunately made the difficult decision to postpone our upcoming shows in Asia due to the health + travel concerns with coronavirus. We know it sucks, as we were looking forward to seeing you all, but hold on to your tickets we’ll be announcing the new dates very soon. — Green Day (@GreenDay) February 28, 2020 K-pop stars BTS on Thursday canceled four hometown shows set for April 11, 12, 18 and 19 in Seoul, South Korea, due to coronavirus concerns. British rapper Stormzy has, per his website, canceled a March 28 date in Hong Kong and a March 29 show in Seoul, and New Order put off shows with Pet Shop Boys on March 3-4 in Tokyo and March 6 in Osaka, Japan. “With the ongoing Coronavirus outbreak, we are concerned about the potential quarantine we may face affecting further shows and appearances,” New Order tweeted Wednesday. “We would also hate to risk our fan’s health or the of risk spreading the virus on our return. We promise we will be back as soon as we can.”  We always love our time in Japan, however we are going to put our upcoming shows in Tokyo and Osaka on hold for the time being. With the ongoing Coronavirus outbreak, we are concerned about the potential quarantine we may face affecting further shows and appearances. 1/2 pic.twitter.com/7vLkKTyTOH — New Order (@neworder) February 26, 2020 R&B singer Khalid made the decision earlier than most, two weeks ago, when he postponed the entire Asian leg of his tour, which was to have hit Bangkok, Singapore, Jakarta, Manila, Kuala Lumpur, Tokyo, Seoul, Mumbai and Bangalore between March 24 and April 14. Meanwhile, in Italy, which as of Sunday had the largest coronavirus outbreak outside of Asia, the thrash-metal band Testament canceled a Milan show set for earlier this week. Lead singer Chuck Billy addressed fans on Tuesday via Instagram, saying, “You there in Milan, stay safe, stay healthy, and hopefully we get through all this together.” The band was to have played with Exodus and Death Angel.  Milan Italy, we’re very sorry we had to cancel tonight’s show. Please see our Facebook page for the full statement from the Italian government. We will be looking forward to rescheduling and seeing you guys soon! In the meantime stay safe, and stay healthy. #testament #thebaystrikesback #italy A post shared by Testament Legions (@testamentofficial) onFeb 25, 2020 at 9:58am PST  Back in Los Angeles, the 18th Korea Times Music Festival at the Hollywood Bowl, which boasts a lineup full of South Korean artists, was postponed earlier this week due to coronavirus-related travel restrictions in Asia. It had been set for April 25. 
Feb 28, 2020	China locks down tens of millions in their homes to slow the march of a deadly virus — but furnishes scant information about the mercurial spread of a disease that has spooked the world. South Korea and Singapore opt to track patients’ movements in granular detail, favoring radical transparency over privacy. In Italy and Iran, politicians trade blame over rapidly growing outbreaks that are seeping across unstable regions, making a global pandemic seemingly inevitable. Infections appear in Mexico. Then Nigeria. As the world unites in resolve to battle one deadly virus — now known as COVID-19 — it is doing so with as many as 195 separate playbooks, each country calibrating its emergency measures to suit domestic and international politics, local capacity, cultural norms and other considerations that have little to do with public health. The result is a global response that can appear uneven, inchoate and at times dangerous, with neighboring countries adopting different strategies to similar threats across a closely connected planet. “Unfortunately we are only as prepared as our weakest link,” said Lawrence O. Gostin, a global health professor at Georgetown Law School. “We are seeing that clusters of cases in one country can quickly move regionally and globally. No one is safe unless we are all safe.” Responses to recent outbreaks have been hindered, Gostin said, by a range of factors: weak health systems, insufficient testing equipment and medical professionals, authoritarian leaders who restrict the flow of information, political instability and violence, and the limitations of the World Health Organization, which is loath to criticize the very governments it relies upon for funding. In years past, countries like the U.S. might have played a leading role in spearheading a global response. But President Trump for weeks has minimized the threat of the virus and has been focused largely on the impact on markets, even as the virus began transmitting on U.S. soil in the middle of a divisive election year. The strengths and shortcomings of governments and institutions have been on full display in recent days, as the number of coronavirus infections soared past 80,000 in more than 50 countries. Nearly 3,000 have died, the vast majority in China. New cases were reported this week in Brazil and Nigeria, increasingly signaling that the virus will reach all corners of the world and that the effort to stay ahead of it will be prolonged, with no end in sight. The novel virus sends shudders daily across the planet, canceling concerts and sporting events, and raising questions over sealed borders, quarantines, the viability of face masks and test kits, the long-term consequences on financial markets and what happens if the disease reaches deeper into Africa. “My biggest concern is while this is being artificially held back, are countries taking advantage of this time?” said Dale Fisher, a Singapore-based physician and chairman of the WHO’s Global Outbreak Alert and Response Network. “China can’t stay closed forever, and this outbreak, it already has brought cities to their knees, brought countries to social and commercial standstill.” From being slow to disclose the severity of the virus when it first emerged in December in the animal markets of the central city of Wuhan, China is now winning praise for locking down 100 million people in Hubei province — an unprecedented cordon sanitaire that appears to have slowed the spread of the virus domestically. For the first time last week, the number of infections reported in a single day was greater outside China than inside. “What China has done over the past month is astonishing — there are very few countries that could have pulled that off,” said Tom Frieden, a former director of the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. A WHO mission to China last week lavished praise on the government’s measures. That same organization credited Beijing’s response even as the nation’s leaders were not forthcoming about the extent of the disease two months ago. Questions continue to linger about China’s transparency over the infections it records. Chinese officials have disclosed only limited information about infections among front-line healthcare workers, when infected people first began to show symptoms and the total number of people it has tested — all of which could help determine how the disease spreads. “The lack of that information makes it harder for China and the world to do everything possible to limit the impact of the virus,” Frieden said. There is also the question of whether the draconian measures taken by Chinese authorities can be replicated elsewhere in the world — especially in liberal democracies. Governments in two new epicenters, Iran and Italy, were scrambling to get a handle on outbreaks that started with travelers arriving from China. Iran’s theocracy at first downplayed the threat, perhaps to curry favor with China — an important trading partner — and to avoid startling a population already beaten down by years of fiscal mismanagement and U.S. economic sanctions. Some analysts said Iran was also trying to keep up turnout for last week’s legislative elections, a quasi-democratic exercise that helps the ruling clerics maintain a veneer of legitimacy. “You have a social crisis and an economic crisis and now a public health crisis layered on top of one another, and it presents complicated tradeoffs for the Iranian government,” said Esfandyar Batmanghelidj, founder of Bourse & Bazaar, a publication that tracks Iran’s economy. “And we are seeing a failure to judge those tradeoffs wisely.” Iran has now reported 245 cases — including the infection of its deputy health minister — and 26 deaths. The unusually high ratio of deaths to known cases has led experts to extrapolate the country may have thousands of undetected infections. Iran is believed to be the source for infections in a half-dozen regional countries, including Lebanon, Iraq and Afghanistan, a prospect that has the virus colliding with conflict zones. Italy was quick to quarantine two Chinese tourists with coronavirus in Rome last month, and was the first European country to stop direct flights from China, but has nevertheless been hit by the biggest outbreak in Europe. Cases began rapidly multiplying in towns in northern Italy and spread to other parts of the country, infecting more than 650 and killing 17 as of Thursday, slipping across open borders to other European nations. The surge of infections began with one man who spent two days at a hospital before his case was detected, infecting patients and doctors. Authorities have been swift to point the blame elsewhere; Italian Prime Minister Giuseppe Conte claimed the hospital didn’t follow protocol, but the local health chief for the region of Lombardy said the European Union could have been at fault. “I believe if Europe had established a quarantine immediately for all people coming from China, Europe would not be having these problems now,” Giulio Gallera, the health chief, said. In South Korea and Japan, allegations were mounting that the governments had put geopolitics ahead of the population’s safety early in their responses, in the interest of preserving relations with China. Japan’s handling of the Diamond Princess cruise ship docked off its shore proved an early example of a bungled response. Critics charged that the government allowed the virus to fester on board with inadequate measures to prevent infections. Some questioned whether the government made the ultimately fatal decision to keep some 3,700 passengers and crew on board to keep the cases from being counted among its infections in the lead-up to the Summer Olympics in Tokyo. After more than 600 infections and two deaths, Japan allowed passengers to disembark and disperse via public transit when there was still danger of transmission. The loss in faith in the government’s response is particularly keen because Prime Minister Shinzo Abe came into office promising competence after the nuclear disaster of 2011, said Kenneth Mori McElwain, a political science professor at the University of Tokyo. “Some people believe the Abe government more or less caved to Chinese pressure, and that dealt a blow to the perception of competence,” he said. In South Korea, more than 1.3 million signed a petition calling for the impeachment of President Moon Jae-in, criticizing the government’s reluctance to impose swift travel restrictions from China and on Chinese nationals. “The more we observe his handling of this situation, it feels like we’re watching the president of China, not of the Republic of Korea,” the petition read. The upheaval was in spite of aggressive and proactive measures taken by the government to track downevery contact with an infected person, test them for the virus and publicize that information. South Korea nonetheless saw the ranks of the infected skyrocket to more than 2,000 this week, by far the largest cluster outside China. Elsewhere in Asia, governments are facing questions over a lack of infections. Cambodia and Indonesia have reported one and zero cases infections respectively, despite having received large numbers of travelers from China in January. Indonesia had daily direct flights from Wuhan, the epicenter, until authorities suspended the flights Jan. 24. To experts, the low figures suggest that the virus is spreading undetected. “Indonesia is a textbook example of a country that is likely to have a spread that is unrecognized,” Frieden said. The risk of the disease taking off across Southeast Asia is high, experts said, due to inadequate health facilities and people packed closely together in crowded cities. It’s also not clear that officials are taking the threat seriously: Cambodian Prime Minister Hun Sen greeted untested passengers disembarking from a cruise ship from Hong Kong with handshakes and hugs, while Indonesia’s health minister said the country’s lack of infections was “because of our prayers.” Faith does not seem to be slowing the virus’ advance. Nigeria’s first case Friday marked COVID-19’s arrival in sub-Saharan Africa, where health systems already struggle to cope with existing diseases like malaria and yellow fever. The WHO is rushing test kits to the continent’s hospitals, some of which developed experience testing for infectious diseases during the Ebola outbreak. But the coronavirus presents a more difficult challenge, experts said, because it can be transmitted even by people who fail to show symptoms. “If COVID-19 reaches sub-Saharan Africa” in large numbers, Gostin said, “it would be our worst nightmare.” Kim reported from Seoul. Special correspondent Tom Kington in Rome contributed to this report. 
Feb 28, 2020	For weeks, federal health officials told states that only the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and a few other public labs could test patients for the new coronavirus. That was because test kits that the CDC had sent to state and local labs across the country to do their own screening had a flaw that caused inaccurate results. “It was a malfunctioning chemical,” said Kelly Wroblewski, director of infectious disease programs at the Assn. of Public Health Laboratories. Now, officials say they have made changes so that California labs and three dozen other public labs across the country will be able to start testing for the virus. The lack of tests for the coronavirus was made clear this week when a patient was diagnosed with the virus who had not traveled or been in contact with anyone infected. Doctors who treated the woman at UC Davis Medical Center said they had asked the CDC to test the woman but then waited days for that to happen. The CDC’s flawed test kits stalled the surveillance testing that federal officials had said Feb. 14 would begin in Los Angeles, San Francisco and three other cities. CDC officials said then that the surveillance tests were aimed at finding patients in the community who had been unknowingly infected with the virus. But by Thursday, fewer than 500 tests had been performed in the U.S., according to the CDC. In comparison, South Korea says it has been testing thousands of people a day. “If you test less than 500 people, you can’t say at all what is going on,” said Michael Osterholm, director of the Center for Infectious Disease Research and Policy at the University of Minnesota. Osterholm said the delay in testing could mean that many cases have gone undetected. “The absence of evidence is not the evidence of absence,” he said. “I expect a sizable jump in cases in the next few weeks.” Said Wroblewski, “It’s unfortunate there was a delay with testing. Earlier is always better, but we were waiting for a quality test.” Some state and local labs wanted to use their own tests they had developed in-house, Wroblewski said. But that was not possible after the federal government declared the coronavirus, known as COVID-19, a public health emergency at the end of January. After the emergency declaration, any test had to receive authorization from the federal Food and Drug Administration to ensure its accuracy. After an appeal from the public labs association, federal officials said Thursday they were making changes so that 40 state and local labs would be able to test for the virus. Wroblewski explained that the original test had three parts. The problematic third part, aimed at testing more broadly for coronaviruses and not just for COVID-19, gave off false readings. She said some labs will now be able to use the test without using the third part. At the same time, the CDC has modified the test and is manufacturing new kits that it will soon be sending to public labs. She said she does not believe the test is less accurate when just two of the three parts are used. Officials hope the 40 labs will be able to test for the virus by early next week — which would allow an estimated 4,000 tests a day, Wroblewski said. “We’re in a position to start the surveillance testing, I hope.” Wroblewski said the association’s goal is to have 100 public labs performing the tests, which would allow 10,000 patients to be tested each day. State officials said late Friday they expected to get a shipment of test kits to initially cover 1,200 people. Some commercial labs are also working to develop tests for COVID-19, said Julie Khani, president of the American Clinical Laboratory Assn. But only the CDC and other public labs are authorized to test for the virus in the U.S. “At this time, commercial laboratories are not collecting, processing or transporting specimens from patients suspected of having, or confirmed to have, COVID-19,” Khani said. 
Feb 28, 2020	The four-day delay in testing a Northern California patient who appears to be the first in the United States to contract the coronavirus from community contact highlights growing questions about the federal government's testing policies and protocols as the virus continues to spread. A growing number of experts have said problems with the test process -- including ineffective test kits and restrictive rules on who gets tested -- could fuel the undetected spread of the virus. "When you miss cases, you can't isolate them, test their families or get a hold on this before it keeps spreading," said Jennifer Nuzzo, an epidemiology expert at the Johns Hopkins Center for Health Security.  Until Thursday, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention restricted coronavirus testing to patients with clear symptoms of infection who had either traveled to China recently or been in contact with someone who had tested positive for the virus. As the virus outpaced detection efforts around the world, that gateway to testing proved far too narrow. As early as last week, doctors at UC Davis Medical Center had suspected coronavirus in the patient's case and immediately requested testing from the CDC. But it was another four days before the test was done. During that time, others in the area could have been exposed to the virus. On Thursday, the CDC expanded the criteria for who qualifies for testing to include sick patients who had traveled to Iran, Italy, Japan and South Korea. Severely ill patients with acute lower respiratory sickness who are hospitalized will now also be tested, even if they have no known link to the coronavirus outbreak. The CDC faces growing political backlash. California Sen. Dianne Feinstein on Thursday called on the White House to start rapid testing of all suspected cases, saying the identification of coronavirus patients quickly is essential to limiting the spread. Gov. Gavin Newsom said California is in desperate need of test kits. The state has just 200 kits for diagnostic and surveillance purposes, but federal officials have promised more will arrive in the coming days, he said. "We are currently in deep partnership with the CDC on one overriding protocol that drives our principal focus right now, and that's testing," Newsom said, calling expanded testing "our top priority, not just in the state of California but, I imagine, across the United States." Such an expansion includes both broadening the criteria that a person must meet to be tested for COVID-19, as well as getting more coronavirus test kits sent to California, he said. The kits themselves have come under growing scrutiny. The CDC distributed test kits to partner laboratories across the country, but many of those campuses ran into problems with one of the ingredients, leading to inconclusive test results. Most public health officials needed to send specimens to the CDC's central laboratories in Atlanta for testing, a process that can take up to 48 hours, creating a bottleneck. "We've only had a handful of labs that can test with it. The rest have been on pause," said Scott Becker, the executive director of the Assn. of Public Health Laboratories. "When you're waiting 48 hours to get a response from the CDC, you're burning through equipment caring for a patient, just waiting to see the results." The problem grew so troublesome that state and local laboratories began seeking permission from the Food and Drug Administration to bypass standard regulations and design and launch their own tests rather than rely on the federal one. On Thursday morning, Health and Human Services Secretary Alex Azar told members of Congress the problem had been resolved. The FDA approved a modified protocol that circumvents the issue. Forty local and state public health labs, as well as some run by the Pentagon, are already authorized to begin using the modified test, and more than 50 others will be doing the same by next week, he added. Delays and missteps in coronavirus testing have caused major issues across the country, where public health officials on the front lines are stretched thin. Epidemic preparedness is already "a victim of roller coaster funding," Becker said, and the baseline shortages of equipment and personnel are exacerbated. In addition to preparedness duties -- developing local guidance, tracing patients' contacts, working with schools and churches to the community -- officials are having to do more for people quarantined at home. Health workers are delivering groceries to keep them at home, said Adriane Casalotti, chief of government and public affairs at the National Assn. of County and City Health Officials. Above all, the burden on individual families is heaviest. "In most jobs in this country, you can't work from a laptop on your couch. When there are delays in diagnostics, we're out there asking real people to choose between the public's health and their own financial well-being -- them keeping their jobs. For individual families, this is complicated and messy," Casalotti said. Critics said the slow testing process could mean coronavirus is already spreading in U.S. communities. But because the virus' symptoms are frequently mild, people might be spreading it unknowingly. A Japanese couple visiting Waikiki Beach in Hawaii tested positive for the virus after returning to Asia, but Nuzzo and other epidemiologists say the virus' incubation period suggests that they could have contracted it on U.S. soil. Hawaiian authorities were so alarmed by the limited testing capabilities in the U.S. that they requested permission from CDC authorities to use a tool from Japan. On Thursday, the focus on coronavirus in the U.S. centered on Solano County. UC Davis officials said the coronavirus patient arrived at its medical center from another hospital Feb. 19 but was not tested until Sunday. There is no evidence the woman had traveled from a coronavirus hotspot or was in contact with someone who had. The hospital said precautions had been put in place because of healthcare workers' concerns about the patient's condition. It asked a "small number" of employees to stay home and monitor their temperature. The woman was "in her community" for a number of days before accessing care, California Health and Human Services Agency Secretary Dr. Mark Ghaly said Thursday. Investigators are now working to find and contact any people who may have come in contact with the woman. The CDC has sent 10 staffers to help trace her contacts, Newsom said. Healthcare workers, including some students from UC Davis and other colleges, are under self-quarantine because they might have been exposed to the virus. Solano County is home to Travis Air Force Base, where several hundred people were quarantined after returning on repatriation flights from Wuhan, China, and the Diamond Princess cruise ship in Japan. A whistleblower complaint on Thursday alleged that federal health workers were not provided adequate training and protective gear when dealing with quarantined people at Travis and a second California base. A total of 33 people have been diagnosed with coronavirus in California, and five have since left the state, Newsom said. Of the confirmed cases, 24 were evacuated from the Diamond Princess cruise ship or traveled on repatriation flights from Wuhan, the epicenter of the coronavirus outbreak. Newsom said more than 8,400 people are being monitored in 49 local jurisdictions. COVID-19 has infected more than 83,000 people in about three dozen countries since it was discovered in late December. More than 2,800 have died, most of them in mainland China. There are currently 60 confirmed cases in the United States. Caption: PHOTO: GOV. GAVIN NEWSOM says California is working with the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention to override protocol and get more coronavirus test kits. PHOTOGRAPHER:Randall Benton Associated Press 
Feb 27, 2020	In the weeks before she was diagnosed with the novel coronavirus, South Korea’s Patient No. 31 busily went about her daily life. The 61-year-old resident of Daegu traveled to Seoul’s bustling Gangnam district to visit her company headquarters. She commuted to her work selling mobile gift certificates, ate her fill at a hotel buffet and went to a traditional medicine clinic after getting into a minor car accident. Twice, she attended Sunday services at the Daegu branch of the Shincheonji Church of Jesus, where she prayed shoulder to shoulder with hundreds of other followers. Within hours of her positive COVID-19 test on Feb. 18, South Korean authorities released a detailed accounting of her whereabouts and addresses of each location she’d visited. “Patient No. 31 movements” shot up as a trending search topic on South Korean web portals. Authorities then set out identifying, locating and testing the hundreds of people who’d crossed paths with her — and when they found those she’d infected, the thousands more who’d crossed paths with them. Patient No. 31 is not alone in having her comings and goings mapped. Through smartphone push alerts, blog posts and regular briefings streamed live on YouTube, authorities here are publicizing the whereabouts and movements of the more than 1,000 confirmed COVID-19 patients. It’s a contrast to governments elsewhere that have been wary of disclosing too much identifying information out of privacy concerns and for fear of stoking panic. Governments around the world are scrambling to slow down, if not stop, the spread of the virus that’s ravaged China and has sprung up in 40 countries and counting. With scientists and public health officials still learning about how and when the virus spreads and just how dangerous it is, South Korea is proving an early — if invasive — experiment in how to deal with a fast-evolving epidemic. Largely informed by public criticism of how it withheld information during a local outbreak of the Middle East respiratory syndrome in 2015, South Korea is erring on the side of radical transparency: aggressively and almost instantaneously pushing information out to the public about each active case. The efficacy of South Korea’s approach remains to be seen. Containment still appeared far off as South Korea’s Centers for Disease Control said Wednesday that it had confirmed 12 fatalities and 1,261 cases, nearly 600 of which were associated with the cluster relating to the Shincheonji church. A U.S. soldier stationed at a base near Daegu has also tested positive for the virus, becoming the first service member to be infected, the U.S. military said Wednesday. South Korea accounts for the largest number of patients outside of China, yet may not be alone — public health experts suspect other countries may have hundreds or thousands of undetected infections because they’ve been less aggressive than South Korea in contact tracing and publicizing instances of potential exposure. Other nations may also lack the testing capacity. South Korea has run about 30,000 tests, many of them over the last week. The zealous effort to identify all potential cases has meant a granular level of detail. Based on interviews, credit card statements and CCTV footage, officials are retracing the steps of each infected patient and asking the public to get tested if they may have been exposed and were experiencing symptoms. Emergency push alerts accompanied by screeching alarms asked: Were you at the hot springs in the city of Yeongju at 5:30 p.m. on Feb. 17, or at a particular yoga class in Andong after 2 p.m. on Feb. 18? Were you at a singing class in Busan on Feb. 22, or in Gimhae on bus 128-1 between 8:36 a.m. and 8:52 a.m. on Feb. 17? “It’s very good from a public health perspective, having that kind of contact tracing,” said Michael Mina, assistant professor of epidemiology at Harvard’s T. H. Chan School of Public Health, who said the detailed data will be crucial to experts around the world studying how quickly and through what routes the virus transmits. At the same time, he said authorities should be sensitive to the varying degrees public tolerance in releasing potentially identifying details. “That can be very cultural. The U.S. has a really strict culture of wanting very, very limited information shared,” he said. “Whether to make the information truly public or to people who need to know, that balance needs to be struck.” Dale Fisher, a Singapore-based physician and chair of the World Health Organization’s Global Outbreak Alert and Response Network, said the best way to curb the spread of the epidemic might be different in each country. “It’s all contextual. In Korea it might be acceptable, in California that might cause an outrage,” he said. “Community engagement is so critical in this response, the community needs to be part of the solution when you’ve got a community spread epidemic like this.” In South Korea, the woman known as “Patient No. 31,” suspected of being a super-spreader behind a massive surge in cases in the southeast of South Korea, has become a point of intense public interest, scrutiny and criticism. She was vilified online after reports that she had refused to be tested despite showing symptoms. Many questioned whether she could be criminally prosecuted. Fake photos, identifying details and rumors about the woman rapidly circulated on social media. “No. 31 on her own wiped out Daegu,” one exasperated user wrote on Twitter. “Daegu is going down because of that No. 31 patient,” another said. The woman has given interviews to several local news outlets saying that although she wasn’t given detailed instructions, she sought out testing for the virus. “We don’t want to put a stigma on these people,” said Ian Mackay, a virologist and associate professor at Australia’s University of Queensland. “People won’t come forward if they think they’re going to be held to blame for an infection they didn’t intend to get or want to get.” Much of the public outrage over the sharp increase in cases has been centered around the Shincheonji church that Patient No. 31 attended. A religious sect with 12 branches around the country, the church has been described as a “cult” for its messianic leader. It has been criticized for reportedly infiltrating other churches and its domineering hold on its members. Even a public health official in charge of infection prevention in Seo-gu in Daegu was revealed to be a member of the church after he was diagnosed with the virus. Many members hide their affiliation with the controversial church. More than 750,000 signed a petition to the South Korean president urging that the church be disbanded. Authorities in Gyeonggi province raided the group’s headquarters in the city of Gwacheon, alleging that the church had been slow to turn over its list of members. South Korean officials said they would track down and test all 245,000 members of the church. Katherine Gibney, an infectious diseases specialist and epidemiologist at Austin Hospital near Melbourne, Australia, said as the virus continues to spread globally, each government will determine how best to prepare its citizens for a potential outbreak without infringing on individual rights or heightening panic. “It’s really important to get risk communication right. That’s a challenge with every outbreak, especially with a novel virus,” she said. “It’s important to balance when it’s potentially useful for someone to know, versus when it might just cause panic and without much actual risk of contracting it.” 
Feb 27, 2020	Catch a spring training game? That won’t be possible in two top Asian leagues, as authorities around the world respond to the spread of the coronavirus. In Japan, exhibition games will no longer be open to fans, and teams will play in empty ballparks. In South Korea, exhibition games have been called off entirely. Neither the Japanese nor the South Korean league has committed to start its regular season on time — March 20 in Japan, March 28 in South Korea. Major League Baseball is closely monitoring the coronavirus situation, consulting with the national Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and the Dept. of Health and Human Services and providing recommendations from the CDC to players and teams. It is unclear if the league has made contingency plans in the event the coronavirus develops into a public health emergency in the United States and forces the postponement of games. After the terrorist attacks of Sept. 11, 2001, the league halted play until Sept. 17 and made up the postponed games after the scheduled end of the regular season. The coronavirus has infected more than 80,000 people in about three dozen countries since it was discovered in December. More than 2,700 have died, most of them in mainland China. California Gov. Gavin Newsom said Thursday that 33 people have been diagnosed with the virus in the state, with more than 8,000 additional people under observation. 
Feb 27, 2020	As the coronavirus outbreak enters a potentially dangerous new phase, with cases widening in Europe and expected to spread in the United States, economists have begun to raise their estimates for the risk of a global recession and fallout to the American economy. Economists say the stock market sell-off in recent days reflects a reassessment of the likely magnitude of the hit to corporate earnings in the virus' wake, suggesting the economic pain could last longer and the recovery may not be as swift as initially thought. "Businesses of all kinds, in a lot of places, being impaired really [made] me skeptical that this is something that would fade quickly and from which we would recover quickly," said Carl Tannenbaum, chief economist at Northern Trust in Chicago. "And that realization is now cascading through, both to investors and to policymakers, that this is a situation that is more serious than initially thought."  Many American companies rely on overseas sales and production in China for a significant share of their revenue and profits. And a growing number of firms, including Apple, Starbucks and chipmaker Qualcomm, have lowered their earnings guidance in recent days. Tannenbaum now sees the Federal Reserve cutting interest rates by a quarter of a point in April. Just a few weeks ago, he and many other analysts expected the central bank would stand pat on rates for the rest of the year. Fed officials aren't sounding alarm bells yet, but say they're closely monitoring the situation. And while they don't want to react to volatile swings in financial markets, deepening losses in stocks could undercut consumer confidence, which in turn could cause a retrenchment in spending and push the economy into recession. Oil prices, Treasury yields and stock indexes all have sunk this week. The Dow lost ground for a fifth straight session Wednesday and is now down more than 8% from a week ago. "The equity market is central to the U.S. economy," said Mark Zandi, chief economist at Moody's Analytics, noting that the large baby boom population is particularly susceptible to a market downturn because they have much of their nest egg in it. Zandi considered the rapid spread of the virus in Italy a major turning point, and after Tuesday's warning from the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention that infections were bound to increase in the United States, he raised the odds of a global recession to 50%, up from just 20% last week. "If it goes to a pandemic, then I think the economy is in recession," he said. The World Health Organization hasn't yet classified the outbreak as a pandemic. As of late Wednesday, its daily tracking reported more than 81,000 confirmed cases in more than 36 countries, with the death toll exceeding 2,750, the vast majority in China. The rate of increase in cases is now fastest outside of China. In fact, China, where the COVID-19 virus was first detected in December, has seen a steady decline in reports of new infections in recent days. And key parts of the Chinese economy, which had been in virtual lockdown, have picked up notably as many operations have resumed. But even as things look better in China, a surge of new cases in South Korea, Italy and Iran has sparked fears that the economic impact will only widen as other countries, and the companies that operate there, adopt similarly stringent responses to keep the virus in check, such as travel restrictions and temporary closures of factories and businesses. In the face of heightened uncertainties, some companies are taking more extreme measures. Nestle this week told all of its 291,000 employees worldwide to hold off on business travel until the middle of next month. Even before the virus outbreak, the global economy was smarting from President Trump's trade wars, uncertainties about Brexit and rising tensions in South America and the Middle East. Now it looks like several major economies -- Japan, Germany, Italy, South Korea -- could slide into a technical recession, defined as two consecutive quarters of negative growth. Fed officials seemed unruffled by the stock market declines, or that the yield on the benchmark 10-year Treasury note fell to an all-time low Tuesday as investors fled riskier assets for the safety of U.S. government bonds. Fed Vice Chair Richard H. Clarida, speaking at an economic conference in Washington on Tuesday afternoon, said that "it is still too soon to even speculate about either the size or the persistence of these effects, or whether they will lead to a material change in the outlook." Clarida added that the U.S. economy and the central bank's current monetary policy were both in a "good place," essentially repeating public comments made by Fed Chairman Jerome H. Powell two weeks ago. Trump's chief economic advisor, Larry Kudlow, has insisted that even if the rest of the world tumbled into recession, the U.S. could remain an island of prosperity. "Right here we're doing awfully well now," he said on CNBC on Tuesday as stocks were rapidly falling. "We have contained this," he said. "I won't say airtight, but it's pretty close to airtight." As of Wednesday there were at least 60 confirmed cases in the U.S., with no deaths. Trump, who returned Wednesday from a trip to India, appeared frustrated by the increased concern at home and sought to reassure Americans in an evening news conference. In a tweet earlier Wednesday, he praised his administration's response to the virus, and lashed out at the news media for making the coronavirus "look as bad as possible, including panicking markets." Trump has frequently touted the stock market gains under his watch, something that he sees as a validation of his stewardship of the economy ahead of the November election. U.S. job growth, in particular, has held up very well. And the Fed's low interest rates have given a boost to the housing market and are helping household balance sheets. At the same time, corporate debts are high, manufacturing remains in recession and business investment is sluggish. Analysts say it's possible the U.S. could skirt a recession in a global downturn, but it'll be close. Research firm Oxford Economics this week also revised its outlook, writing that "the economic impact to the U.S. and global economy was believed to be mostly contained last week, but rising volatility, plunging stock prices, and a strengthening dollar will likely exacerbate the economic shock on the U.S. economy." Even if the world avoids a coronavirus pandemic, Oxford Economics said the U.S. economy will barely be able to stay above water in the first quarter and that growth for the year as a whole was likely to come in at a subpar rate of 1.5%. One of the biggest threats is interruptions in global supply chains, the network of manufacturers, vendors, distributors and transporters needed to get goods from factories to customers. Despite Kudlow's assertion that "there's no supply disruptions out there yet," many companies and analysts in various industries can attest otherwise. IPC, an electronics industry trade group, said this week that manufacturers were already hurting, and surveys indicate they are expecting, on average, product shipment delays of at least five weeks. Said John Mitchell, IPC's president and chief executive: "The delays will likely have ripple effects for the rest of the year." Caption: PHOTO: COMPANIES are temporarily closing facilities and instituting travel restrictions to stem the spread of the coronavirus. Above, commuters at L.A.'s Union Station. PHOTOGRAPHER:Irfan Khan Los Angeles Times 
Feb 27, 2020	In the weeks before she was diagnosed with the novel coronavirus, South Korea's Patient No. 31 busily went about her daily life. The 61-year-old resident of Daegu traveled to Seoul's bustling Gangnam district to visit her company headquarters. She commuted to her work selling mobile gift certificates, ate her fill at a hotel buffet and went to a traditional medicine clinic after getting into a minor car accident. Twice, she attended Sunday services at the Daegu branch of the Shincheonji Church of Jesus, where she prayed shoulder to shoulder with hundreds of other followers.  Within hours of her positive COVID-19 test on Feb. 18, South Korean authorities released a detailed accounting of her whereabouts and addresses of each location she'd visited. "Patient No. 31 movements" shot up as a trending search topic on South Korean web portals. Authorities then set out identifying, locating and testing the hundreds of people who'd crossed paths with her -- and when they found those she'd infected, the thousands more who'd crossed paths with them. Patient No. 31 is not alone in having her comings and goings mapped. Through smartphone push alerts, blog posts and regular briefings streamed live on YouTube, authorities here are publicizing the whereabouts and movements of the more than 1,000 confirmed COVID-19 patients. It's a contrast to governments elsewhere that have been wary of disclosing too much identifying information out of privacy concerns and for fear of stoking panic. Governments around the world are scrambling to slow down, if not stop, the spread of the virus that's ravaged China and has sprung up in 40 countries and counting. With scientists and public health officials still learning about how and when the virus spreads and just how dangerous it is, South Korea is proving an early -- if invasive -- experiment in how to deal with a fast-evolving epidemic. Largely informed by public criticism of how it withheld information during a local outbreak of the Middle East respiratory syndrome in 2015, South Korea is erring on the side of radical transparency: aggressively and almost instantaneously pushing information out to the public about each active case. The efficacy of South Korea's approach remains to be seen. Containment still appeared far off as South Korea's Centers for Disease Control said Wednesday that it had confirmed 12 fatalities and 1,261 cases, nearly 600 of which were associated with the cluster relating to the Shincheonji church. A U.S. soldier stationed at a base near Daegu has also tested positive for the virus, becoming the first service member to be infected, the U.S. military said Wednesday. South Korea accounts for the largest number of patients outside China, yet may not be alone -- public health experts suspect other countries may have hundreds or thousands of undetected infections because they've been less aggressive than South Korea in contact tracing and publicizing instances of potential exposure. Other nations may also lack the testing capacity. South Korea has run about 30,000 tests, many of them over the last week. The zealous effort to identify all potential cases has meant a granular level of detail. Based on interviews, credit card statements and CCTV footage, officials are retracing the steps of each infected patient and asking members of the public to get tested if they may have been exposed and were experiencing symptoms. Emergency push alerts accompanied by screeching alarms asked: Were you at the hot springs in the city of Yeongju at 5:30 p.m. on Feb. 17, or at a particular yoga class in Andong after 2 p.m. on Feb. 18? Were you at a singing class in Busan on Feb. 22, or in Gimhae on Bus 128-1 between 8:36 a.m. and 8:52 a.m. on Feb. 17? "It's very good from a public health perspective, having that kind of contact tracing," said Michael Mina, assistant professor of epidemiology at Harvard's T. H. Chan School of Public Health, who said the detailed data will be crucial to experts around the world studying how quickly and through what routes the virus transmits. At the same time, he said authorities should be sensitive to the varying degrees of public tolerance in releasing potentially identifying details. "That can be very cultural. The U.S. has a really strict culture of wanting very, very limited information shared," he said. "Whether to make the information truly public or to people who need to know, that balance needs to be struck." Dale Fisher, a Singapore-based physician and chair of the World Health Organization's Global Outbreak Alert and Response Network, said the best way to curb the spread of the epidemic might be different in each country. "It's all contextual. In Korea it might be acceptable, in California that might cause an outrage," he said. "Community engagement is so critical in this response, the community needs to be part of the solution when you've got a community-spread epidemic like this." In South Korea, the woman known as Patient No. 31, suspected of being a super-spreader behind a massive surge in cases in the country's southeast, has become a point of intense public interest, scrutiny and criticism. She was vilified online after reports that she had refused to be tested despite showing symptoms. Many questioned whether she could be criminally prosecuted. Fake photos, identifying details and rumors about the woman rapidly circulated on social media. "No. 31 on her own wiped out Daegu," one exasperated user wrote on Twitter. "Daegu is going down because of that No. 31 patient," another said. The woman has given interviews to several local news outlets saying that although she wasn't given detailed instructions, she sought out testing for the virus. "We don't want to put a stigma on these people," said Ian Mackay, a virologist and associate professor at Australia's University of Queensland. "People won't come forward if they think they're going to be held to blame for an infection they didn't intend to get or want to get." Much of the public outrage over the sharp increase in cases has been centered on the Shincheonji church that Patient No. 31 attended. A religious sect with 12 branches around the country, the church has been described as a "cult" for its messianic leader. It has been criticized for reportedly infiltrating other churches and its domineering hold on its members. Even a public health official in charge of infection prevention in Seo-gu in Daegu was revealed to be a member of the church after he was diagnosed with the virus. Many members hide their affiliation with the controversial church. More than 750,000 signed a petition to the South Korean president urging that the church be disbanded. Authorities in Gyeonggi province raided the group's headquarters in the city of Gwacheon, alleging that the church had been slow to turn over its list of members. South Korean officials said they would track down and test all 245,000 members of the church. Katherine Gibney, an infectious diseases specialist and epidemiologist at Austin Hospital near Melbourne, Australia, said as the virus continues to spread globally, each government will determine how best to prepare its citizens for a potential outbreak without infringing on individual rights or heightening panic. "It's really important to get risk communication right. That's a challenge with every outbreak, especially with a novel virus," she said. "It's important to balance when it's potentially useful for someone to know, versus when it might just cause panic and without much actual risk of contracting it." Caption: PHOTO: WORKERS spray disinfectant at the Daegu branch of the Shincheonji Church of Jesus in South Korea. PHOTOGRAPHER:Jung Yeon-je AFP/Getty Images PHOTO:A MEDICAL worker rests outside a hospital in Daegu. South Korea accounts for the largest number of COVID-19 patients outside China. PHOTOGRAPHER:Im Hwa-young Yonhap 
Feb 27, 2020	Desperate to stanch anxieties on Wall Street and public fears that the White House is unprepared for a major coronavirus outbreak, President Trump on Wednesday named Vice President Mike Pence to coordinate the administration's response while asserting that "the risk to the American people remains very low." Public health officials who flanked Trump at a rare news conference in the White House briefing room were noticeably less upbeat, repeatedly warning of the risk that the deadly COVID-19 virus -- which has infected 60 Americans, including a newly confirmed case Wednesday in California -- could still spread quickly in the United States. "The trajectory we're looking at in coming weeks and months is very uncertain," said Dr. Anne Schuchat, principal deputy director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.  "We can expect to see more cases in the United States," said Alex Azar, the secretary of Health and Human Services. Minutes after Trump spoke, the CDC confirmed a new case of the virus in California in a person who reported no travel to an affected country or exposure to another known patient. The CDC did not say where the person lived, but said the case could be the first so-called community transmission of the disease in the United States. Officials urged Americans to take basic precautions, such as washing hands and staying home if sick. And Trump acknowledged that the administration has plans for "large scale" quarantines should they be needed. "Whatever happens, we're totally prepared," he said, but later suggested schools, hospitals and other facilities needed to take their own precautions. "I think schools should be preparing just in case" of a major outbreak, he said. "Every aspect of our society should be prepared," he added. "I don't think it's going to come to that." Trump, who has downplayed the coronavirus threat for weeks, sought to reassure Americans and to calm stock markets, which have plunged more than 6.5% in the last three days on fears of the disease. "I think the stock market will recover," Trump said, although he later conceded that the disease "will have an impact" on the nation's gross domestic product. Trump did not rule out possibly barring visitors from South Korea, Italy and other countries with confirmed outbreaks. The U.S. already has stopped accepting visitors from China, where the epidemic has spread widely. All told, more than 80,000 people in some three dozen countries are known to be infected. More than 2,700 have died. Trump blamed Democrats and the media for stoking public fear, accusing House Speaker Nancy Pelosi of "trying to create a panic," even as his administration faces bipartisan concern over its disjointed response. The fast-spreading COVID-19 virus appears on track to test the competency of an administration that has proposed large budget cuts to the CDC, shut down an office assigned to track deadly diseases around the world and is rocked by constant turnover in top positions responsible for handling emergencies and potential emergencies. Trump, who has claimed credit for the rising stock market of the last three years, has been preoccupied with its abrupt drop, complaining to business leaders during his trip to India this week that the stomach-churning fall-off was beyond his control. CDC officials warned Tuesday that it's virtually certain the coronavirus outbreak will spread to pockets in the U.S. and that Americans should brace for major disruptions to everyday life, possibly including restricted travel, closed schools and work slowdowns. Allies counseled Trump to put his political and economic frustrations aside to focus on the public health threat, arguing that ancillary problems will fix themselves once the public is convinced the administration is prepared for what may prove a significant crisis. "This is not a garden-variety routine event," said Ari Fleischer, former press secretary for President George W. Bush, who saw his popularity plummet after a botched response to Hurricane Katrina in 2005. "This can grow into people being legitimately scared into wondering what to do to protect their health, to protect their family's health." Fleischer was among many experts and former officials jarred by the administration's sluggish reaction so far and conflicting messages from the White House, which says the situation is under control, and federal health officials, who have issued increasingly dire warnings. "A situation like this is extremely volatile and dynamic," said Dr. Irwin Redlener, who heads the National Center for Disaster Preparedness at Columbia University. "And to have all these mixed messages from the administration is mind-boggling. It seems they are so muddled at the White House about the political and economic consequences of this that they've resorted to just making stuff up." He warned that until the government issues clear guidance, state and local health officials are unable to make plans for a potential public health emergency. Tom Ridge, who served as the nation's first Homeland Security secretary under Bush and co-chairs a bipartisan commission on biodefense, faulted Trump for his breezy response to the threat and Democrats for what he called their "sky is falling" complaints. "I just don't recall when public health issues have ever been politicized like they are now," Ridge said. "It is a real crisis" worldwide. Underscoring the political risks for the president, new polling shows substantial public anxiety about the risk of an epidemic. More than half of Americans expressed concern that there will be a widespread U.S. outbreak of coronavirus, according to a survey by the nonprofit Kaiser Family Foundation, which was conducted Feb. 13-18, before the recent stock market declines. More than 4 in 10 said they were concerned they or someone in their family will get sick from the virus. "People don't do well with the unknown," said Craig Fugate, who led emergency response efforts for President Obama. "Tell them what you know. Tell them what you don't know," he advised. In November, a task force at the nonpartisan Center for Strategic and International Studies, which included five current and former GOP senators and House members, warned of gaping holes in the country's defenses against a major health crisis. "The American people are far from safe," the report concluded. "To the contrary, the United States remains woefully ill-prepared to respond to global health security threats." It recommended the reinstatement of a National Security Council official to coordinate pandemic response, and renewed funding and attention to global health problems Earlier Wednesday, Azar testified on Capitol Hill for the second day and defended the administration's response so far, saying he was overseeing "the smoothest interagency process I've experienced in my 20 years of dealing with public health emergencies." But other officials told Congress that they lack basic supplies such as respiratory masks and functioning testing kits. Only about a dozen state and local laboratories can run tests outside of the CDC in Atlanta because the kits it sent out nationwide this month included a faulty component. Democrats warned that the administration's response is insufficient -- citing prior cuts to the CDC -- and that its request to Congress for $2.5 billion in special funding doesn't address the scope of the problem. Sen. Kamala Harris (D-Calif.) said Trump has "not done nearly enough" and said California communities are responding to the virus "despite poor coordination and vague guidance from the federal government." Republicans suggested that Democrats were too eager to criticize the administration. No sooner did the White House release the funding request "than some politicians were on the air criticizing you for not asking for enough," said Rep. Greg Walden (R-Ore.). -- Times staff writer Eli Stokols contributed to this report. Caption: PHOTO: PRESIDENT TRUMP suggested schools and hospitals take their own precautions against the virus. PHOTOGRAPHER:Evan Vucci Associated Press 
Feb 26, 2020	A South Korean flight attendant who has been diagnosed with the novel coronavirus may have serviced trips between Seoul and Los Angeles last week, according to several South Korean media outlets. South Korea’s Center for Disease Control said Wednesday local time that a female flight attendant who serviced a flight Feb. 15 from Tel Aviv to Seoul had tested positive for the virus. On board the flight was a church group returning from a pilgrimage to Israel; 30 other infections have been connected to the group so far, according to local authorities. The South Korean media outlets reported that the same flight attendant had serviced flights KE017 and KE012 on Feb. 19 and 20 to and from Los Angeles International. Neither Korean Air nor local officials immediately confirmed the reports — Korean Air announced it was closing its operations center at Incheon Airport to disinfect the premises. South Korea has reported more than 1,100 confirmed cases of the coronavirus so far, the largest outbreak outside of China, as infections have sprung up in at least 40 countries across the globe. Times staff writer Jaclyn Cosgrove in Los Angeles contributed to this report. 
Feb 26, 2020	As the coronavirus outbreak enters a potentially dangerous new phase, with cases widening in Europe and expected to spread in the United States, economists have begun to raise their estimates for the risk of a global recession and fallout to the American economy. Economists say the stock market sell-off in recent days reflects a reassessment of the likely magnitude of the hit to corporate earnings in the virus’ wake, suggesting the economic pain could last longer and the recovery may not be as swift as initially thought. “Businesses of all kinds, in a lot of places, being impaired really [made] me skeptical that this is something that would fade quickly and from which we would recover quickly,” said Carl Tannenbaum, chief economist at Northern Trust in Chicago. “And that realization is now cascading through, both to investors and to policymakers, that this is a situation that is more serious than initially thought.” Many American companies rely on overseas sales and production in China for a significant share of their revenue and profits. And a growing number of firms, including Apple, Starbucks and the chipmaker Qualcomm, have lowered their earnings guidance in recent days. Tannenbaum now sees the Federal Reserve cutting interest rates by a quarter of a point in April. Just a few weeks ago, he and many other analysts expected the central bank would stand pat on rates for the rest of the year. Fed officials aren’t sounding alarm bells yet, but say they’re closely monitoring the situation. And while they don’t want to react to volatile swings in financial markets, deepening losses in stocks could undercut consumer confidence, which in turn could cause a retrenchment in spending and push the economy into recession. Oil prices, Treasury yields and stock indexes all have sunk this week. The Dow lost ground for a fifth straight session Wednesday and is now down more than 8% from a week ago. “The equity market is central to the U.S. economy,” said Mark Zandi, chief economist at Moody’s Analytics, noting that the large baby boom population is particularly susceptible to a market downturn because they have much of their nest egg in it. Zandi considered the rapid spread of the virus in Italy a major turning point, and after Tuesday’s warning from the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention that infections were bound to increase in the United States, he raised the odds of a global recession to 50%, up from just 20% last week. “If it goes to a pandemic, then I think the economy is in recession,” he said. The World Health Organization hasn’t yet classified the outbreak as a pandemic. As of late Wednesday, its daily tracking reported more than 81,000 confirmed cases in more than 36 countries, with the death toll exceeding 2,750, the vast majority in China. The rate of increase in cases is now fastest outside of China. In fact, China, where the COVID-19 virus was first detected in December, has seen a steady decline in reports of new infections in recent days. And key parts of the Chinese economy, which had been in virtual lockdown, have picked up notably as many operations have resumed. But even as things look better in China, a surge of new cases in South Korea, Italy and Iran has sparked fears that the economic impact will only widen as other countries, and the companies that operate there, adopt similarly stringent responses to keep the virus in check, such as travel restrictions and temporary closures of factories and businesses. In the face of heightened uncertainties, some companies are taking more extreme measures. Nestle this week told all of its 291,000 employees worldwide to hold off on business travel until the middle of next month. Even before the virus outbreak, the global economy was smarting from President Trump’s trade wars, uncertainties about Brexit and rising tensions in South America and the Middle East. Now it looks like several major economies — Japan, Germany, Italy, South Korea — could slide into a technical recession, defined as two consecutive quarters of negative output. Fed officials seemed unruffled by the stock market declines, or that the yield on the benchmark 10-year Treasury note fell to an all-time low Tuesday as investors fled riskier assets for the safety of U.S. government bonds. Fed Vice Chair Richard H. Clarida, speaking at an economic conference in Washington on Tuesday afternoon, said that “it is still too soon to even speculate about either the size or the persistence of these effects, or whether they will lead to a material change in the outlook.” Clarida added that the U.S. economy and the central bank’s current monetary policy were both in a “good place,” essentially repeating public comments made by Fed Chair Jerome H. Powell two weeks ago. Trump’s chief economic advisor, Larry Kudlow, has insisted that even if the rest of the world tumbled into recession, the U.S. could remain an island of prosperity. “Right here we’re doing awfully well now,” he said on CNBC on Tuesday as stocks were rapidly falling. “We have contained this,” he said. “I won’t say airtight, but it’s pretty close to airtight.” As of Wednesday there were at least 60 confirmed cases in the U.S., with no deaths. Trump, who returned Wednesday from a trip to India, appeared frustrated by the increased concern at home and sought to reassure Americans in an evening news conference. In a tweet earlier Wednesday, he praised his administration’s response to the virus, and lashed out at the news media for making the coronavirus “look as bad as possible, including panicking markets.” Trump has frequently touted the stock market gains under his watch, something that he sees as a validation of his successful stewardship of the economy ahead of the November election. U.S. job growth, in particular, has held up very well. And the Fed’s low interest rates have given a boost to the housing market and are helping household balance sheets. At the same time, corporate debts are high, manufacturing remains in recession and business investment is sluggish. Analysts say it’s possible the U.S. could skirt a recession in a global downturn, but it’ll be close. Research firm Oxford Economics this week also revised its outlook, writing that “the economic impact to the U.S. and global economy was believed to be mostly contained last week, but rising volatility, plunging stock prices, and a strengthening dollar will likely exacerbate the economic shock on the U.S. economy.” Even if the world avoids a coronavirus pandemic, Oxford Economics said the U.S. economy will barely be able to stay above water in the first quarter and that growth for the year as a whole was likely to come in at a subpar rate of 1.5%. One of the biggest threats is interruptions in global supply chains, the network of manufacturers, vendors, distributors and transporters needed to get goods from factories to customers. Despite Kudlow’s assertion that “there’s no supply disruptions out there yet,” many companies and analysts in various industries can attest otherwise. IPC, an electronics industry trade group, said this week that manufacturers were already hurting, and surveys indicate they are expecting, on average, product shipment delays of at least five weeks. Said John Mitchell, IPC’s president and chief executive: “The delays will likely have ripple effects for the rest of the year.” 
Feb 26, 2020	Desperate to stanch anxieties on Wall Street and public fears that the White House is unprepared for a major coronavirus outbreak, President Trump on Wednesday named Vice President Mike Pence to coordinate the administration’s response while asserting that “the risk to the American people remains very low.” Public health officials who flanked Trump at a rare news conference in the White House briefing room were noticeably less upbeat, repeatedly warning of the risk that the deadly COVID-19 virus — which has infected 60 Americans, including a newly confirmed case Wednesday in California — could still spread quickly in the United States. “The trajectory we’re looking at in coming weeks and months is very uncertain,” said Dr. Anne Schuchat, principal deputy director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. “We can expect to see more cases in the United States,” said Alex Azar, the secretary of Health and Human Services. Minutes after Trump spoke, the CDC confirmed a new case of the virus in California in a person who reported no travel to an affected country or exposure to another known patient. The CDC did not say where the person lived, but said the case could be the first so-called community transmission of the disease in the United States. Officials urged Americans to take basic precautions, such as washing hands and staying home if sick. And Trump acknowledged that the administration has plans for “large scale” quarantines should they be needed. “Whatever happens, we’re totally prepared,” he said, but later suggested schools, hospitals and other facilities needed to take their own precautions. “I think schools should be preparing just in case” of a major outbreak, he said. “Every aspect of our society should be prepared,” he added. “I don’t think it’s going to come to that.” Trump, who has downplayed the threat of the coronavirus for weeks, sought to reassure Americans and to calm stock markets, which have plunged more than 6.5% in the last three days on fears of the disease. “I think the stock market will recover,” Trump said, although he later conceded that the disease “will have an impact” on the nation’s gross domestic product. Trump did not rule out possibly barring visitors from South Korea, Italy and other countries with confirmed outbreaks. The U.S. already has stopped accepting visitors from China, where the epidemic has spread widely. All told, more than 80,000 people in about three dozen countries are known to be infected. More than 2,700 have died. Trump blamed Democrats and the media for stoking public fear, accusing House Speaker Nancy Pelosi of “trying to create a panic,” even as his administration faces increased bipartisan concern over its disjointed response. The fast-spreading COVID-19 virus appears on track to test the competency of an administration that has proposed large budget cuts to the CDC, shut down an office assigned to track deadly diseases around the world and is rocked by constant turnover in top positions responsible for handling emergencies and potential emergencies. Trump, who has claimed credit for the rising stock market of the last three years, has been preoccupied with its abrupt drop, complaining to business leaders during his trip to India this week that the stomach-churning fall-off was beyond his control. CDC officials warned Tuesday that it’s virtually certain the coronavirus outbreak will spread to pockets in the U.S. and that Americans should brace for major disruptions to everyday life, possibly including restricted travel, closed schools and work slowdowns. Allies counseled Trump to put his political and economic frustrations aside to focus on the public health threat, arguing that ancillary problems will fix themselves once the public is convinced the administration is prepared for what may prove a significant crisis. “This is not a garden-variety routine event,” said Ari Fleischer, former press secretary for President George W. Bush, who saw his popularity plummet after a botched response to Hurricane Katrina’s battering of New Orleans in 2005. “This can grow into people being legitimately scared into wondering what to do to protect their health, to protect their family’s health.” Fleischer was among many experts and former officials jarred by the administration’s sluggish reaction so far and the conflicting messages from the White House, which insists the situation is under control, and federal health officials, who have issued increasingly dire warnings. “A situation like this is extremely volatile and dynamic,” said Dr. Irwin Redlener, who heads the National Center for Disaster Preparedness at Columbia University. “And to have all these mixed messages from the administration is mind-boggling. It seems they are so muddled at the White House about the political and economic consequences of this that they’ve resorted to just making stuff up.” He warned that until the federal government issues clear guidance, state and local health officials are unable to make plans for a potential public health emergency. Tom Ridge, who served as the nation’s first Homeland Security secretary under Bush and co-chairs a bipartisan commission on biodefense, faulted Trump for his breezy response to the threat and Democrats for what he called their “sky is falling” complaints. “I just don’t recall when public health issues have ever been politicized like they are now,” Ridge said. “It is a real crisis” worldwide. Underscoring the political risks for the president, new polling shows substantial public anxiety about the risk of an epidemic. More than half of Americans expressed concern that there will be a widespread U.S. outbreak of coronavirus, according to a survey by the nonprofit Kaiser Family Foundation, which was conducted Feb. 13-18, before the recent stock market declines. More than 4 in 10 said they were concerned that they or someone in their family will get sick from the virus. “People don’t do well with the unknown,” said Craig Fugate, who led emergency response efforts for President Obama. “Tell them what you know. Tell them what you don’t know,” he advised. In November, a task force at the nonpartisan Center for Strategic and International Studies, which included five current and former Republican senators and House members, warned of gaping holes in the country’s defenses against a major health crisis. “The American people are far from safe,” the report concluded. “To the contrary, the United States remains woefully ill-prepared to respond to global health security threats.” It recommended the reinstatement of a National Security Council official to coordinate pandemic response, and renewed funding and attention to global health problems Earlier Wednesday, Azar testified on Capitol Hill for the second day and defended the administration’s response so far, saying he was overseeing “the smoothest interagency process I’ve experienced in my 20 years of dealing with public health emergencies.” But other officials told Congress that they lack basic supplies such as respiratory masks and functioning testing kits. Only about a dozen state and local laboratories can run tests outside of the CDC in Atlanta because the kits it sent out nationwide this month included a faulty component. While Trump tried to ease concerns over coronavirus, he fanned public panic over Ebola in 2014, claiming at the time that the Obama administration lied about the danger. He repeatedly urged officials to bar U.S. health workers and others who had contracted the virus overseas from returning home for treatment. Democrats warned that the administration’s response is insufficient — citing prior administration cuts to the CDC — and that its request to Congress for $2.5 billion in special funding doesn’t address the scope of the problem. Sen. Kamala Harris (D-Calif.) said Trump has “not done nearly enough” and said California communities are responding to the virus “despite poor coordination and vague guidance from the federal government.” “More than any other state, California has been on the front lines of the COVID-19 response,” she wrote in a letter to Trump on Wednesday. “Your administration has yet to reimburse state and local entities for costs incurred as part of the federal response to COVID-19 — or even provided written assurances of any plan to do so.” Republicans suggested that Democrats were too eager to criticize the administration. No sooner did the White House release the funding request “than some politicians were on the air criticizing you for not asking for enough,” said Rep. Greg Walden (R-Ore.). House Minority Leader Kevin McCarthy (R-Bakersfield) said he expects the funding to land at about $4 billion. He called a request for $8 billion from Senate Minority Leader Charles E. Schumer (D-N.Y.) a political ploy. Trump said Wednesday that he would take whatever Congress gives him. Michael Brown, who lost his job as emergency management director and saw his reputation savaged during Hurricane Katrina, said the lack of clear direction compounds pressure — already immense — for those trying to respond to urgent national threats and crises. Brown, now a conservative radio host in Denver, said his biggest regret after Katrina was reciting the Bush administration’s upbeat talking points rather than explaining the logistical obstacles he faced after the hurricane devastated Louisiana and other Gulf Coast states, killing an estimated 1,800 people. “I think the American public would rather hear that than a bunch of B.S. talking points,” he said. Brown said CDC officials were right to offer unvarnished warnings, even if it meant resisting or defying White House pressure. Scientists at the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration were embarrassed last September after officials there disavowed official forecasts to back a false claim by Trump about the projected path of Hurricane Dorian. “In the final analysis, who are the experts? The experts are the people at CDC,” Brown said. “You want to have confidence ... that they are going to tell you the truth.” Times staff writer Eli Stokols contributed to this report. 
Feb 26, 2020	In the six weeks since a new coronavirus emerged in China, President Trump has offered one blithely optimistic message: Don't worry -- Dr. Trump has the problem under control. "We're doing great," he said at a rally two weeks ago. "We only have 11 cases, and they're all getting better. ... It looks like by April, in theory, when it gets a little warmer, it miraculously goes away. I hope that's true." The president was upbeat again on Tuesday, even though the epidemic has spread to at least three dozen countries and more than 80,000 confirmed cases.  "I think that's a problem that's going to go away," he told reporters in India. The virus "is very well under control in our country." But the president has his facts wrong -- and his message too. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, which has confirmed 53 American cases, warned that the fast-moving virus is likely to hit the United States hard. "It's not so much of a question of if this will happen in this country anymore, but a question of when," the CDC's chief immunization officer, Dr. Nancy Messonnier, told reporters. "We are asking the American public ... to prepare for the expectation that this is going to be bad." She said she told her children: "We as a family ought to be preparing for significant disruption to our lives." If Trump treats his scientists the way he treats intelligence officials who bring him bad news, Dr. Messonnier can expect a nasty tweet -- or worse -- any day now. Trump returns from India on Wednesday to find the stock market -- the one he keeps boasting about -- unraveling, with the Dow Jones industrial average dropping more than 1,900 points in two days. That's the biggest two-day slide in history, all due to fears of the coronavirus. "Stock market starting to look very good to me!" Trump tweeted Tuesday morning, after the first day's selloff. Investors didn't buy it. The epidemic is already hurting the economy, beginning with airlines and companies with supply chains in China. Beijing may not be able to meet its promise to buy $77 billion in U.S. goods this year under an interim trade deal. The pain could get a lot worse if Americans are afraid to travel, eat out, attend public events or even go to work. All of which means the coronavirus could affect the presidential election too. Trump's main selling point is that he's presided over an economic boom with low unemployment and growing wages. There's no sign of a recession, but growth is already slowing -- and if it decelerates further, the president's sales pitch could ring hollow. And the epidemic could pose a bigger challenge for Trump: It's a high-visibility test of his competence. Voters often judge an incumbent president by how he performs in a crisis. George W. Bush's popularity took a nosedive after Hurricane Katrina in 2005, when his administration failed spectacularly at providing flood relief to New Orleans. Barack Obama's popularity took a hit after a BP oil well blew out in the Gulf of Mexico in 2010 -- and fell further when his administration bungled the rollout of his healthcare plan in 2013. Trump's White House operates in perpetual chaos. Now it faces an external crisis that will require coordinating multiple federal agencies with state and local authorities. Until 2018, the White House had an office dedicated to planning for international epidemics, but Trump abolished it. "A single coordinator for the response would be useful," Ronald A. Klain, who led the Obama administration's response to an Ebola outbreak in 2014, told me. "If that job were still in place ... you'd already have someone in the seat." Instead, Trump created a task force headed by Alex Azar, his secretary of Health and Human Services -- but it's basically a committee of officials who have other day jobs. Azar and White House acting Chief of Staff Mick Mulvaney spent weeks arguing over how much money to ask from Congress for the coronavirus crisis. Azar wanted more; Mulvaney, a relentless budget cutter, wanted less. They finally settled on $2.5 billion, which Azar proposed on Tuesday -- long after the request could have been made, Democrats said. Mulvaney has also proposed a budget that would slash the government's main epidemic-fighting agencies, including the CDC and the Public Health Service by billions of dollars. That doesn't seem very sensible right now. Meanwhile, it's not clear that the White House has a detailed plan for dealing with a coronavirus epidemic in the United States. "What is being communicated to public health [and] safety professionals and the public?" Juliette Kayyem, a former Homeland Security official, asked. "What standards for school closings and how will they be enforced? Will major events be canceled and what are the standards for doing so?" "I haven't heard planning ... for these relatively simple measures," she wrote. The consequences of failure could be dire, she warned. "Panic is a result of a public believing there is no plan." Trump isn't to blame for the coronavirus. He won't be to blame if China's economic slowdown sparks a global recession. But a president who claims credit when the stock market goes up cannot blame others when the stock market plummets -- although he's sure to try. As a businessman who boasted he could run the country better than any politician, Trump will deserve the blame if his administration bungles this crisis. His competence will be on trial. He appears to be whistling past the quarantine station hoping the epidemic doesn't spread. So far, he's been lucky -- but luck is not a strategy. -- McManus' column appears on Sunday and Wednesday. Caption: PHOTO: WORKERS SPRAY disinfectant to guard against the new coronavirus at a market in Daegu, South Korea. The fast-moving virus is expected to hit the U.S. hard, posing a major test of President Trump's competence. PHOTOGRAPHER:Lim Hwa-young Yonhap 
Feb 25, 2020	Any USC students studying abroad in South Korea or parts of Italy affected by the coronavirus outbreak are required to return home, university officials announced Tuesday evening. “The U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention has issued a Level 3 travel advisory for South Korea, which advises against all non-essential travel,” USC officials said in an email obtained by The Times. “As a result, we are requiring students to leave ... and we are working actively with them to make arrangements to travel back to USC.” Students in the Veneto and Lombardy regions of Italy — which have seen a sudden surge in infections — are also required to return, while those studying elsewhere in the country are encouraged to stay in close contact with their program administrators in case the situation changes. “Your safety, well-being, and ability to continue your studies and other activities remain the highest priorities for the entire leadership of USC,” the administrators said in the email, sent at 5:19 p.m. This week, CDC leaders advised communities to take precautions in the event that coronavirus starts spreading in the United States, which they said was inevitable. More than 2,700 people have died from the virus, the majority in mainland China. In the United States, there have been 57 confirmed cases; 40 of those are repatriated individuals from the Diamond Princess cruise ship. There are 15 confirmed cases in California. Times staff writers Colleen Shalby and Alex Wigglesworth contributed to this report. 
Feb 25, 2020	The International Olympic Committee has three months before it must decide on whether to cancel the 2020 Summer Games because of the coronavirus outbreak, an influential committee member said Tuesday. Dick Pound, a Canadian IOC member for more than four decades, told the Associated Press that a final determination could probably wait until late May, two months before the scheduled July 24 opening ceremony. Pound acknowledged that if the virus forces a change, cancellation — rather than postponement or relocation — would be the most likely outcome. “This is the new war and you have to face it,” he said. “In and around that time, I’d say folks are going to have to ask: ‘Is this under sufficient control that we can be confident about going to Tokyo or not?’” The IOC and local organizers have said they are consulting with the World Health Organization and are confident about moving forward with the Games. But COVID-19 continues to spread through China, where updated totals include more than 77,000 reported cases and 2,600 deaths. The virus has shown up in South Korea, the Middle East and Europe. The impact has been less severe in Japan, with hundreds of cases and four deaths. The Olympics are no stranger to this sort of crisis in the months leading up to the competition. The 2014 Winter Games in Sochi were shadowed by threats of terrorist attacks from Chechen rebels. In 2016, Rio de Janeiro and the rest of Brazil was dealing with the Zika virus. This time around, some health officials have expressed concern about holding large public gatherings in summer, but others have insisted it is much too early to make any such pronouncements. Earlier this month, a London mayoral candidate angered Japanese officials by suggesting his city, which hosted the Summer Games in 2012, could serve as a last-minute replacement. Pound said that relocating the Olympics would probably be impossible at this point. He added that any sort of postponement would be difficult because of conflicts with other sporting and television events. “As far as we all know, you’re going to be in Tokyo,” he said, referring to athletes training for the Games. “All indications are at this stage that it will be business as usual.” 
Feb 25, 2020	The Dow Jones industrials plunged more than 1,000 points in a stock market rout Monday, its worst day in two years, amid concerns that the spreading coronavirus is seriously disrupting the global economy. The drop of 1,031.61 points in the Dow, to 27,960.80, was the third-largest point decline on record. It was a sharp turnaround from the market's climb to all-time highs earlier this month. On a percentage basis the 3.56% pullback was nowhere near the worst ever.  The sell-off was across the board. The Standard & Poor's 500 index fell 3.35%, and the tech-laden Nasdaq composite index skidded 3.71%. Hard-hit sectors included airlines and other travel-related companies and technology, energy and financial shares. Norwegian Cruise Lines, Carnival Corp. and Royal Caribbean Cruises all plunged 8% or more, as did American Airlines Group Inc. Apple Inc., American Express Co. and Visa Inc. all fell 4% or more. Stocks that are popular with small investors also got hit hard. Tesla Inc., for instance, dropped 7.5% after more than doubling since the start of the year, and Plug Power Inc. fell 6.6%. As investors dumped stocks, they fled to assets considered relatively safer, such as gold and U.S. government bonds. Gold jumped 1.7% to 1,672.40 per troy ounce, and higher prices for the benchmark 10-year Treasury note sent the bond's yield to a near-record low of 1.37%. "In times of uncertainty, large institutional investors tend to sell first and ask questions later," said Greg McBride, chief financial analyst with Bankrate.com. The slide followed steep declines in Europe and Asia, with major indices in Germany, France and Japan tumbling 3.5% to 5%. The U.S. stock market had fared relatively well and set new highs this month despite the spread of the coronavirus from its initial outbreak in China. But amid reports over the weekend that the virus had worsened in countries such as South Korea, Italy and Iran, concerns grew that the worldwide economy and companies' profits could be further eroded by the contagion. More than 80,000 people worldwide have been infected by the virus. Several major U.S. companies -- including Apple, MGA Entertainment Inc., Under Armour Inc., Starbucks Corp. and Mattel Inc. -- with ties to China already have said the virus is negatively affecting their sales. The virus has disrupted factory production in China and consumer demand there for U.S. goods and services along with travel. Oil prices also tumbled Monday as traders feared an economic slowdown could slow demand for crude. The price of the benchmark West Texas intermediate crude fell $1.95, or 3.7%, $51.43 a barrel on U.S. markets. Many investors and analysts had already considered the stock bull market -- now in its 11th year -- long in the tooth and ripe for a pullback, which the virus provided. "The coronavirus is a genuine concern, so instead of a couple of percentage points we got a three-plus percentage decline" in the stock market, said John Bollinger, head of Bollinger Capital Management in Redondo Beach. But Bollinger noted that pullbacks of 3% to 4% have routinely occurred during the long rally and that this drop also could be temporary. "This might be a one-day wonder," Bollinger said. "I suspect we'll see some more pain here, but I think we're in a correction, not a bear market." Wall Street technically defines a correction as a 10% drop from its most recent highs. The Dow Jones industrials hit a record-high 29,551.42 on Feb. 12, so the blue-chip average now is down 5.4% from that level. Monday's drop was the worst point decline for the Dow since it fell 1,032.89 points on Feb. 8, 2018. The worst point decline was three days earlier, when the average dropped 1,175.21. Both sell-offs were in response to fears of higher interest rates. Some analysts said the latest pullback shouldn't scare long-term investors. "Stay the course, and if you've been waiting for a better buying opportunity, the stock market is 3% cheaper than it was Friday," McBride said. Jason Ware, chief investment officer of Albion Financial Group, said that "certainly the coronavirus is going to slow economic growth" but that given the market's recent highs, "if it wasn't the coronavirus eventually we would have a pullback or correction at some point based on some other market event." "We fall into that behavioral trap where we say, 'OK, it's down 3% but it could go down 5% or 10% and I need to wait until the dust settles," Ware said. "But of course, by the time the dust settles you've missed the bounce back up. That's what makes timing and jumping in and out of the market so difficult." Within an hour after the market's close, President Trump -- who routinely touts the market's gains and was no doubt aware of its drop Monday while he's visiting India -- tweeted that the coronavirus "is very much under control in the USA" and added, "Stock Market starting to look very good to me!" Before Monday's drop, the ratio of the S&P 500's price to its components' average anticipated earnings for the next 12 months was averaging about 19, well above its historical average of about 15.5 and a signal that prices were getting rich. The ratio has now slipped back to 18.8, according to FactSet. By comparison, the S&P's price-earnings ratio after its plunge in February 2018 was 16.5. The index surged 29% in the next two years. Analysts said that some of the underlying trends supporting stocks remained unchanged, including low interest rates and mild inflation. They also said the coronavirus will probably prompt central banks in the United States and abroad to maintain monetary policies that, for now, would not cause a notable jump in interest rates. That said, "for traders and short-term types," the spreading virus "is a major event" as evidenced by the steep drops in certain stocks, Bollinger said. "It's a short-term threat to the earnings of these companies." -- The Associated Press was used in compiling this report. Caption: PHOTO: THE SLIDE in U.S. markets followed steep declines in Europe and Asia, with major indices in Germany, France and Japan tumbling 3.5% to 5%. Above, traders work on the floor of the New York Stock Exchange. PHOTOGRAPHER:Spencer Platt Getty Images PHOTO:THE DOW FELL 1,031 points, the third-largest point drop ever but nowhere near the worst on a percentage basis. Many analysts had considered the bull market ripe for a pullback. Above, the NYSE. PHOTOGRAPHER:Spencer Platt Getty Images PHOTO:A CREW arrives to disinfect a market in Seoul as a precaution against COVID-19, which has sickened more than 80,000 globally. PHOTOGRAPHER:Ahn Young-joon Associated Press 
Feb 24, 2020	The Dow Jones industrials plunged more than 1,000 points in a stock market rout Monday, its worst day in two years, amid concerns that the spreading coronavirus is seriously disrupting the global economy. The drop of 1,031.61 points in the Dow, to 27,960.80, was the third-largest point decline on record. It was a sharp turnaround from the market’s climb to all-time highs earlier this month. On a percentage basis the 3.56% pullback was nowhere near the worst ever. The sell-off was across the board. The Standard & Poor’s 500 index fell 3.35%, and the tech-laden Nasdaq composite index skidded 3.71%. Hard-hit sectors included airlines and other travel-related companies, technology, energy and financial shares. Norwegian Cruise Lines, Carnival Corp. and Royal Caribbean Cruises all plunged 8% or more, as did American Airlines Group Inc. Apple Inc., American Express Co. and Visa Inc. all fell 4% or more. Stocks that are popular with small investors also got hit hard. Tesla Inc., for instance, dropped 7.5% after more than doubling since the start of the year, and Plug Power Inc. tumbled 6.6%. As investors dumped stocks, they fled to assets considered relatively safer, such as gold and U.S. government bonds. Gold jumped 1.7% to 1,672.40 per troy ounce, and higher prices for the benchmark 10-year Treasury note sent the bond’s yield to a near-record low of 1.37%. “In times of uncertainty, large institutional investors tend to sell first and ask questions later,” said Greg McBride, chief financial analyst with Bankrate.com. The slide followed steep declines in Europe and Asia as well, with major indices in Germany, France and Japan tumbling 3.5% to 5%. The U.S. stock market had fared relatively well and set new highs this month despite the spread of the coronavirus from its initial outbreak in China. But amid reports over the weekend that the virus had worsened in countries such as South Korea, Italy and Iran, concerns grew that the worldwide economy and companies’ profits could be further eroded by the contagion. More than 79,000 people worldwide have been infected by the virus. Several major U.S. companies — including Apple, MGA Entertainment Inc., Under Armour Inc., Starbucks Corp. and Mattel Inc. — that have ties with China already have said the virus is negatively affecting their sales. The virus has disrupted factory production in China and consumer demand there for U.S. goods and services along with travel. Oil prices also tumbled Monday as traders feared an economic slowdown could slow demand for crude. The price of the benchmark West Texas intermediate crude fell $1.95, or 3.7%, $51.43 a barrel on U.S. markets. Many investors and analysts had already considered the stock bull market — now in its 11th year — long in the tooth and ripe for a pullback, which the virus provided. “The coronavirus is a genuine concern, so instead of a couple of percentage points we got a three-plus percentage decline” in the stock market, said John Bollinger, head of Bollinger Capital Management in Redondo Beach. But Bollinger noted that pullbacks of 3% to 4% have routinely occurred during the long rally and that this drop also could be temporary. “This might be a one-day wonder,” Bollinger said. “I suspect we’ll see some more pain here, but I think we’re in a correction, not a bear market.” Wall Street technically defines a correction as a 10% drop from its most recent highs. The Dow Jones industrials hit a record-high 29,551.42 on Feb. 12, so the blue-chip average now is down 5.4% from that level. Monday’s drop was the worst point decline for the Dow since it fell 1,032.89 points on Feb. 8, 2018. The worst point decline was three days earlier, when the average dropped 1,175.21. Both sell-offs were in response to fears of higher interest rates. Some analysts said the latest pullback shouldn’t scare long-term investors. “Stay the course, and if you’ve been waiting for a better buying opportunity, the stock market is 3% cheaper than it was Friday,” McBride said. Jason Ware, chief investment officer of Albion Financial Group, said that “certainly the coronavirus is going to slow economic growth” but that given the market’s recent highs, “if it wasn’t the coronavirus eventually we would have a pullback or correction at some point based on some other market event.” “We fall into that behavioral trap where we say, ‘OK, it’s down 3% but it could go down 5% or 10% and I need to wait until the dust settles,” Ware said. “But of course, by the time the dust settles you’ve missed the bounce back up. That’s what makes timing and jumping in and out of the market so difficult.” Within an hour after the market’s close, President Trump — who routinely touts the market’s gains and was no doubt aware of its drop Monday while he’s visiting India — tweeted that the coronavirus “is very much under control in the USA” and added, “Stock Market starting to look very good to me!” Before Monday’s drop, the ratio of the S&P 500’s price to its components’ average anticipated earnings for the next 12 months was averaging about 19, well above its historical average of about 15.5 and a signal that prices were getting rich. The ratio has now slipped back to 18.8, according to FactSet. By comparison, the S&P’s price-earnings ratio after its plunge in February 2018 was 16.5. The index surged 29% in the next two years. Analysts said some of the underlying trends supporting stocks remained unchanged, including low interest rates and mild inflation. They also said the coronavirus will probably prompt central banks in the United States and abroad to maintain monetary policies that, for now, would not cause a notable jump in interest rates. That said, “for traders and short-term types,” the spreading virus “is a major event” as evidenced by the steep drops in certain stocks, Bollinger said. “It’s a short-term threat to the earnings of these companies.” The Associated Press contributed to this report. 
Feb 22, 2020	Authorities in South Korea were on high alert after discovering a new cluster of hundreds of patients infected with the novel coronavirus over two days, many of the new infections associated with a secretive Christian sect that has been described as a "cult." More than 100 of the newly confirmed infections were among those who attended services or were affiliated with a branch of the Shincheonji Church of Jesus in the city of Daegu in the southeast of South Korea, bringing the country's total infected to 346 as new infections were showing signs of slowing in China. Public health officials were trying to track down some 4,475 members of the church, 544 of whom reported having symptoms, according to South Korea's Center for Disease Control. Two of those infected with the virus have died in South Korea.  The surprise surge of infections in South Korea, where authorities had closely tracked the infected, publicized their whereabouts and tested anyone who had been in contact, revealed the challenges facing governments attempting to stop the virus' spread and keep its citizens safe. Hitoshi Oshitani, a professor of virology at Japan's Tohoku University School of Medicine and a former advisor to the World Health Organization on communicable diseases, said that after the initial phase of tracking infections among those with travel histories from China's Hubei province -- where the outbreak began -- routes of infection would become harder and harder to trace. "This transmission chain becomes invisible; we cannot detect these transmission chains. It's completely out of our radar," Oshitani told foreign journalists in Tokyo on Wednesday. "In coming weeks we may see [a] very large outbreak somewhere in Asia or Africa; that is my major concern now." South Korea had 51 confirmed cases of the virus as of Wednesday evening, before the emergence of the cluster in Daegu. Authorities said much of the surge was associated with Shincheonji, a religious sect founded in 1984 by Lee Man-hee, who calls himself "the promised pastor." The church announced it had shut down all 74 of its churches and other facilities around South Korea and was cooperating with authorities. The church has missions in at least 15 countries outside South Korea, and has been accused in various countries including England and New Zealand of being a cult-like organization with excessive control and influence over its members. South Korea's CDC, in providing its infection statistics, described Shincheonji as "a Korean cult." Media reports quoted former members saying services take place in tight quarters where congregants sit close to one another on the floor. The church's association with the virus also caused alarm among some South Koreans because members have been known to hide their affiliation in order to propagate the religion. Infections in four South Korean provinces were linked to the church, according to South Korean authorities. The 88-year-old Lee told his followers in an internal message that the virus was the work of the devil "to stop the rapid growth of Shincheonji," according to South Korea's Yonhap news agency. "Just like Job's faith was tested, it is an attempt to destroy our progress," he wrote. Some of the infections may be linked to the recent funeral of Lee's brother in Cheongdo, a county adjacent to Daegu, considered a sacred site by members of the church because it is Lee's birthplace. South Korean President Moon Jae-in directed his staff to investigate the attendees of the church service and Lee's brother's funeral. The cases brought the city of Daegu -- South Korea's fourth largest city, with some 2.4 million people -- to a virtual standstill as local officials advised residents to stay home. A K-pop concert scheduled for March, where BTS was part of the lineup, was canceled; all kindergartens and preschools were advised to shut down for the time being. Caption: PHOTO: WORKERS spray disinfectant in Daegu, South Korea, where coronavirus cases have surged. PHOTOGRAPHER:Kim Jun-beom Yonhap 
Feb 21, 2020	Authorities in South Korea were on high alert after discovering a new cluster of hundreds of patients infected with the novel coronavirus over two days, many of the new infections associated with a secretive Christian sect that has been described as a “cult.” The bulk of the newly confirmed infections were among those who attended services or were affiliated with a branch of the Shincheonji Church of Jesus in the city of Daegu in the southeast of South Korea, bringing the country’s total infected to 346 as of Saturday morning local time as new infections were showing signs of slowing in China. Public health officials were trying to track down some 4,475 members of the church, more than 500 of whom reported having symptoms, according to South Korea’s Center for Disease Control. Two of those infected with the virus have died in South Korea. The surprise surge of infections in South Korea, where authorities had closely tracked the infected, publicized their whereabouts and tested anyone who had been in contact, revealed the challenges facing governments attempting to stop the virus’ spread and keep its citizens safe. Hitoshi Oshitani, a professor of virology at Japan’s Tohoku University School of Medicine and a former advisor to the World Health Organization on communicable diseases, said after the initial phase of tracking infections among those with travel histories from the Hubei province of China where the outbreak began, routes of infection would become harder and harder to trace. “This transmission chain becomes invisible, we cannot detect these transmission chains. It’s completely out of our radar,” Oshitani told foreign journalists in Tokyo on Wednesday. “In coming weeks we may see very large outbreak somewhere in Asia or Africa; that is my major concern now.” South Korea had 51 confirmed cases of the virus as of Wednesday evening, before the emergence of the cluster in Daegu. Authorities said much of the surge was associated with Shincheonji, a religious sect founded in 1984 by Lee Man-hee, who calls himself “the promised pastor.” The church announced it had shut down all 74 of its churches and other facilities around South Korea and was cooperating with authorities. The church has missions in at least 15 countries outside South Korea, and has been accused in various countries including England and New Zealand of being a cult-like organization with excessive control and influence over its members. South Korea’s CDC, in providing its infection statistics, described Shincheonji as “a Korean cult.” Media reports quoted former members saying services take place in tight quarters where congregants sit close to one another on the floor. The association of the church with the virus also caused alarm among some South Koreans because members have been known to hide their affiliation with the church in order to propagate the religion. Infections in four different South Korean provinces were linked to the church, according to South Korean authorities. The 88-year-old Lee told his followers in an internal message that the virus was the work of the devil “to stop the rapid growth of Shincheonji,” according to South Korea’s Yonhap news agency. “Just like Job’s faith was tested, it is an attempt to destroy our progress,” he wrote. Some of the infections may be linked to the recent funeral of Lee’s brother in Cheongdo, a county adjacent to Daegu, considered a sacred site by members of the church because it is Lee’s birthplace. Many of the newly detected cases were patients at a hospital in the same building as the funeral site; both deaths occurred at the hospital. South Korean President Moon Jae-in directed his staff to investigate the attendees of the church service and Lee’s brother’s funeral. The cases brought the city of Daegu, South Korea’s fourth largest city of about 2.4 million, to a virtual standstill as local officials advised residents to stay home. A K-pop concert scheduled for March, where BTS was part of the lineup, was canceled; all kindergartens and preschools were advised to shut down for the time being. 
Feb 18, 2020	The mysterious virus first emerged in the winter in eastern China, a never-before-seen pathogen that would rattle the world's sense of safety and ignite a global panic. In the months that followed, hundreds of people began seeking medical treatment because they were coughing, struggling to breathe and, in some cases, approaching death. Scientists racing to quell the outbreak determined the source was a novel strain of coronavirus. The World Health Organization called for immediate action to prevent the global health threat from sweeping across multiple continents and killing thousands.  It was early 2003, the beginning of the battle against severe acute respiratory syndrome, more commonly known as SARS. The SARS outbreak was the first deadly epidemic caused by a coronavirus. "It was a tremendous concern," said Alan Rowan, a public health professor at Florida State University involved in Florida's response to the SARS outbreak. "It was a novel virus, and it was frightening." Much like the strain of coronavirus currently spreading across the world, the SARS virus prompted people to hoard face masks, cancel trips to Asia and institute massive quarantines amid fears that the disease would become entrenched. But eight months after SARS began circulating, it was contained. The virus died out. The stamping out of SARS has been lauded as one of the biggest recent public health victories, achieved with a strong and swift response and a dose of good luck. But as the number of cases of the new coronavirus swells, it appears less likely that history is going to repeat itself. The virus' path suggests containment will be much more difficult than with SARS and the harm much greater, experts say. On Feb. 9, the death toll from COVID-19 surpassed that of SARS. In the days since, it has climbed even higher. 'Enormous panic' After originating in southeastern China's Guangdong province in late 2002, SARS had spread by early spring to about 1,500 people. Officials from the World Health Organization said SARS could become the most serious health threat to emerge in more than 20 years, with the exception of AIDS. SARS was a pneumonia-like illness that killed about 1 in every 10 people stricken, far higher than the estimated 1-in-50 mortality rate for COVID-19 infections. "There was enormous panic," said Lawrence Gostin, director of the World Health Organization Collaborating Center on National and Global Health Law. The SARS outbreak, which reached 32 countries and territories, was ultimately contained using traditional public health measures, such as testing, isolating patients and screening people at airports and other places where they might spread the virus, Gostin said. The strategy is simple: If sick people can be stopped from infecting healthy people, the disease will eventually die off. But limiting the current outbreak with these tried-and-true public health strategies has proved harder now because of the sheer number of cases, Gostin said. By the end of the SARS epidemic, 8,000 people had been infected. Already, more than 73,000 people have been diagnosed with COVID-19, and some experts think undetected milder cases push the true tally even higher. "It's affecting hundreds of thousands of people, and potentially a lot more going forward. It's really hard to contain once you've got that kind of saturation," Gostin said. "This is a much bigger challenge than SARS." During SARS, remembered as the first pandemic of the 21st century, public health officials watched in horror as an interconnected, global society facilitated the spread of disease like never before. A Canadian couple who visited Hong Kong started a SARS outbreak in Toronto that killed 24 people. Virus cousins Those risks are even greater now. Chinese people travel domestically and internationally at a much higher rate now than in 2003, which makes containment "that much more difficult," Gostin said. The World Health Organization has declared COVID-19 an international health emergency and announced Friday that the virus reached a fifth continent, Africa, after a case was detected in Egypt. Any dips in weekly case numbers should not be interpreted as signs of abatement, officials say. "This outbreak could still go in any direction," Director-General Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus said during a news conference last week. Officials know how fickle these viruses can be. The SARS response benefited from "good fortune as well as good science," Dr. David Heymann, who led the World Health Organization's infectious disease unit during the SARS pandemic, wrote in a 2004 paper evaluating the international response to the disease. Officials were lucky that SARS never popped up in developing countries with less sophisticated healthcare systems that would have struggled to contain the illness, he wrote. The virus was also easier to stop because it turned out to have relatively low transmissibility, he wrote. "Its rapid containment is one of the biggest success stories in public health in recent years," Heymann wrote. "How narrow was the escape from an international health disaster? What tipped the scales?" Scientists will probably soon find out. SARS and COVID-19 are like cousins, sharing 70% of their genetic material. Both are corona- viruses, a family of viruses that before 2003 had been known to cause only the common cold in humans. While the SARS virus replicated deep in people's lungs, probably contributing to the higher mortality rate, that also made it less likely to spread than the COVID-19 virus, said Dr. Stanley Perlman, a microbiologist at the University of Iowa who studies coronaviruses. The new coronavirus grows in people's noses and airways, so it can be more easily spread through coughing and sneezing, like the flu, he said. Though people with SARS probably weren't contagious until they were very ill, that isn't the case for COVID-19, so it will be harder to catch people before they infect others, he said. "As soon as you start having very, very minor symptoms, that sore throat, that itchiness, that sneezing, then you're contagious," Perlman said. "I don't think it's going to be like SARS and just go away." Even if COVID-19 doesn't die out, it could wane so much that cases become extremely rare, or emerge only in the winter. Viruses tend to have seasonality, appearing for only a few months a year, so some hope warmer weather will make the virus recede. Faster response With this outbreak, international officials were notified much sooner and the virus was sequenced much faster than with SARS. Yet COVID-19 remains trickier to get ahead of because of the virus' traits, said Brittany Kmush, a public health researcher at Syracuse University's Falk College. Viruses spread most when they are very contagious and not that deadly, she said. If a virus is very lethal, patients often die before they can transmit the illness to many other people. COVID-19's low mortality rate compared with SARS, though a relief to doctors, may actually hinder prevention efforts, she said. "I think if SARS had similar characteristics to this coronavirus, it would still be circulating," Kmush said. Caption: PHOTO: AN IMPERIAL guard wears a mask in Seoul outside the Gyeongbok Palace, the main royal palace during the Joseon Dynasty. South Korea has seen at least 30 cases of the novel coronavirus that began in Wuhan, China. PHOTOGRAPHER:Ahn Young-joon Associated Press P: GRAPHIC: Sizing up COVID-19 and SARS (MAPS: the World) CREDIT: Lorena Iniguez Elebee Los Angeles Times 
Feb 15, 2020	The coronavirus outbreak that originated in China is serious enough to qualify as a global health emergency. But is it a pandemic? Excellent question. Let's review some epidemiology basics to find out. Think back to the town where you grew up, and the infections that made the rounds. An "endemic" level of disease -- or a community's baseline prevalence of it -- isn't always zero. Consider chicken pox in the United States, or malaria in some African countries. Endemic disease certainly isn't preferable, but it's expected.  A sudden increase in the number of people with a particular disease in a limited area can signal the onset of an outbreak. So can the emergence of an unusual type of disease, such as a strain of the flu that's never been seen before. If an outbreak expands to a broader population, it becomes an epidemic. That's the case with the novel coronavirus spreading in China and beyond. The decision by the World Health Organization to declare a "public health emergency of international concern" wasn't an arbitrary one. The WHO considers three factors when weighing that designation: 1. Is the outbreak unusual or unexpected? With a never-before-seen virus like COVID-19, the answer is yes. 2. Does the outbreak have implications for health beyond a national border? With dozens of exported cases on four continents, the answer is another yes. 3. Does the outbreak require immediate international action? Since airport screenings and aid money are needed to contain the virus' spread, the answer is once again yes. But epidemics can be severe without ever rising to the level of a pandemic, so long as they predominantly affect one region -- in this case, China. The U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention defines a pandemic as one that has spread to several countries or continents, usually affecting a large number of people. The severity of illnesses is not a consideration, nor is the number of deaths. There are currently 29 confirmed coronavirus cases in Japan, 67 in Singapore and 33 in Thailand, for example. Compared with China, which is dealing with more than 66,000 cases, most experts agree: It's not a pandemic -- yet. But as scientists learn more about the virus, the prospect of a pandemic looks increasingly likely. "Diseases are not terribly good at respecting borders," said U.S. Health and Human Services Secretary Alex Azar. The new coronavirus appears to be spreading readily among humans. That makes it more similar to influenza -- a classic pandemic agent -- than to other coronaviruses. A handful of patients in countries including Germany, South Korea, Japan and the United States have become sick with COVID-19 despite having no travel history to China.If the coronavirus is soon contained in those countries, "we would just call those individual outbreaks that occurred and were controlled," said Dr. Tom Inglesby, director of the Center for Health Security at the Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health. But if the number of cases in Europe and the United States drastically escalates with no clear ties back to China, "that is enough to call it a pandemic," he said. Beyond the case count, a pandemic contrasts with an epidemic because it has global consequences. Right now, the hit to China's workforce is steep, but few other countries face a real health or economic crisis. Aside from airport screenings and frequent hand-washing, it's mostly business as usual. The coronavirus that causes Middle Eastern respiratory syndrome, or MERS, never got past this stage. Since it began circulating in humans in 2012, MERS has infected only about 2,500 people, mostly in and around the Arabian Peninsula. On the other hand, the coronavirus responsible for severe acute respiratory syndrome, or SARS, earned pandemic status because it affected 26 countries, with ongoing chains of transmission not just in China, the epicenter, but also in Canada, Hong Kong, Taiwan, Singapore and Vietnam. The new coronavirus could wind up following the path of the H1N1 swine flu, which caused a pandemic in 2009. That outbreak subsided in 2010, but the virus continues to circulate as one of the primary strains of the seasonal flu. Sam Scheiner, a mathematical modeling expert for infectious diseases at the National Science Foundation, said that if COVID-19 joins the list of seasonal respiratory viruses, it could ultimately lead to tens of thousands of deaths in the United States each year. Caption: PHOTO: A MAKESHIFT HOSPITAL treats COVID-19 patients in Wuhan City, China. The disease appears to be spreading readily among humans, but it's been largely confined to China, which has seen some 66,000 cases. PHOTOGRAPHER:EPA/Shutterstock 
Feb 13, 2020	On Friday evening, supermarkets in Taipei put out their usual stocks of toilet paper, stacked floor-to-ceiling in brick-sized packets stuffed into bags decorated with colorful cartoon characters. By Monday, just barren racks -- and bewildered shoppers -- were left. In Taiwan, Hong Kong and Singapore, shoppers are stockpiling toilet paper, hand sanitizers, rice, instant noodles, cured meats, sanitary napkins and other products as fears over the new strain of coronavirus from China continue to ripple across Asia.  Many consumers are worried that more infections in their countries and territories -- which have some of the highest numbers of coronavirus cases outside China -- will make it unsafe to go shopping. Others are concerned that the Chinese economy will be weakened by the outbreak and unable to keep exporting the goods many rely on. Still others were scared when images of empty shelves and snaking lines outside supermarkets flooded social media over the weekend, making them think they should be stocking up too. "This is mental illness, too much panic," griped Chiu Yuan-chao, 50, a Taipei elementary school volunteer and mother of two. Chiu tried to order toilet paper online after she realized supermarkets were empty, but the e-commerce website she usually uses was sold out. She eventually tracked down three small packs at a convenience store. "I'm not too worried yet," Chiu said. "But if China can't get a lid on this outbreak or find a cure, then there will be more panic." Since the virus began popping up outside China in January, consumers from the U.S. to Southeast Asia have been buying up protective masks to guard against infection, even though doctors say the thin masks cannot stop transmission. Some of the hoarding in Taiwan is driven by reports that toilet paper and sanitary napkins could be used, in a pinch, as makeshift masks. "When there is this sort of extraordinary demand, it's simply a question of fear," said Liang Kuo-yuan, president of Yuanta-Polaris Research Institute, an economic think tank in Taipei, the Taiwanese capital. "You can impose some controls, but once a government does something like that, people become even more afraid." The virus that was discovered in Wuhan, China, in December had killed 1,118 people as of Wednesday -- more than the SARS epidemic that originated in China in 2003 -- but with only one fatality outside China. The Chinese government responded by imposing lockdowns in Wuhan and much of surrounding Hubei province, while multiple Asian countries have banned travelers from China. A dozen Asian countries have reported cases of the virus but no signs that the outbreak is spreading rapidly among the general population. In Singapore, which has 47 coronavirus cases, the most outside China, the government raised its disease alert level Friday to orange, indicating a severe outbreak was spreading from person to person. After the announcement, shelves were emptied of hand sanitizer, napkins, tissues, noodles, rice and other staples, with many Singaporeans fearing what would happen if the threat were elevated to red, the highest level. Singaporeans, who boast the highest per-capita income in Asia and pride themselves on the efficiency of their authoritarian city-state, are also known for a ruthless survival instinct. It's a result of the country's small size and scant natural resources, and produces a national ethos that fears losing out. "No hand sanitizer, no canned goods, no paper products," lamented Jeeva Pillay, a 45-year-old data engineer who moved to Singapore from South Africa last month. She and her husband spent much of Sunday waiting in line at another supermarket for paper towels and cleaning supplies for their new apartment, but coming away empty-handed. "Clearly people are panicking," Pillay said. "We didn't feel like there was a need to stock up, but now we feel like we have to follow suit." The run on goods prompted the government-linked NTUC FairPrice grocery chain to limit purchases: four packs of paper products such as toilet paper, two bags of rice, four packets of instant noodles and about $36 worth of vegetables. Over the weekend, Singapore Prime Minister Lee Hsien Loong urged residents to not panic and insisted the government was better prepared than during the SARS epidemic. "We are not locking down the city or confining everybody to stay at home," Lee said. "We have ample supplies, so there is no need to stock up with instant noodles, tinned food or toilet paper, as some people did yesterday." The alert prompted fears of being holed up indoors indefinitely, said Rajiv Biswas, a Singapore-based economist at the market research firm IHS Markit. "People became very nervous," Biswas said. "Supermarket shelves were empty over the weekend I guess because people were planning to bunker into their houses until this was over." In Hong Kong, fears of the virus, which has infected 50 people, have cleaned out nearly all stocks of sanitary goods. Consumers line up at the semiautonomous Chinese territory's dispensaries up to five hours before they open, sometimes pouncing on toilet paper seconds after the shelves are restocked. Rice, canned sardines and lunch meats were also selling out. The panic buying recalled the anxious days of 2011, when fears of radiation emanating from the earthquake-damaged Fukushima Daiichi nuclear reactor in Japan fueled a run on table salt in Hong Kong, out of an erroneous belief that iodine would ward off ill effects. "In both situations people are panicking when facing hazards, so I think the [people's] attitude is not improved," 19-year-old Hong Kong shopper Hailey Yan said. "But for now, with better technology, we have more access to information. The younger generation is more objective when facing rumors of hoarding, but for some elder people, they still have the idea of stocking up on food to prevent hunger." Panicked bulk buying of surgical masks has also been reported in Japan, South Korea, Thailand and Vietnam. South Korean authorities last week stiffened penalties for hoarding masks or sanitizing liquids. Violators face up to two years in prison or fines of about $42,000. Authorities in Taiwan, which has reported 18 coronavirus infections, this week recommended prosecution for three women suspected of spreading social media messages suggesting that toilet paper, table napkins and sanitary napkins could be used to craft mask substitutes, and warning that those products could soon be in short supply. The women could be prosecuted under anti-fake news laws passed in early 2019 to prevent rumors affecting consumers. -- Special correspondent Jennings reported from Taipei and Times staff writer Bengali from Singapore. Special correspondent Antonia Tang in Hong Kong contributed to this report. Caption: PHOTO: A COUPLE shop for groceries in Beijing. Consumers in Asia have been stockpiling key items, fearing the coronavirus epidemic will curtail exports from China. PHOTOGRAPHER:Kevin Frayer Getty Images 
Feb 12, 2020	On Friday evening, supermarkets in Taipei put out their usual stocks of toilet paper, stacked floor-to-ceiling in brick-sized packets stuffed into bags decorated with colorful cartoon characters. By Monday, just barren racks — and bewildered shoppers — were left. In Taiwan, Hong Kong and Singapore, shoppers are stockpiling toilet paper, hand sanitizers, rice, instant noodles, cured meats, sanitary napkins and other products as fears over the new strain of coronavirus from China continue to ripple across Asia. Many consumers are worried that more infections in their countries and territories — which have some of the highest numbers of coronavirus cases outside China — will make it unsafe to go shopping. Others are concerned that the Chinese economy will be weakened by the outbreak and unable to keep exporting the goods many rely on. Still others were scared when images of empty shelves and snaking lines outside supermarkets flooded social media over the weekend, making them think they should be stocking up too. “This is mental illness, too much panic,” griped Chiu Yuan-chao, 50, a Taipei elementary school volunteer and mother of two. Chiu tried to order toilet paper online Monday after she realized supermarkets were empty, but the e-commerce website she usually uses was sold out. She eventually tracked down three small packs at a convenience store. “I’m not too worried yet,” Chiu said. “But if China can’t get a lid on this outbreak or find a cure, then there will be more panic.” Since the virus began popping up outside China in January, consumers from the U.S. to Southeast Asia have been buying up protective masks to guard against infection, even though doctors say the thin masks cannot stop transmission. Some of the hoarding in Taiwan is driven by reports that toilet paper and sanitary napkins could be used, in a pinch, as makeshift masks. “When there is this sort of extraordinary demand, it’s simply a question of fear,” said Liang Kuo-yuan, president of Yuanta-Polaris Research Institute, an economic think tank in Taipei, the Taiwanese capital. “You can impose some controls, but once a government does something like that people become even more afraid.” The virus that was discovered in Wuhan, China, in December had killed 1,118 people as of Wednesday — more than the SARS epidemic that originated in China in 2003 — but with only one fatality outside China. The Chinese government responded by imposing lockdowns in Wuhan and much of surrounding Hubei province, while multiple Asian countries have banned travelers from China. A dozen Asian countries have reported cases of the virus but no signs that the outbreak is spreading rapidly among the general population. In Singapore, which has 47 coronavirus cases, the most outside China, the government raised its disease alert level Friday to orange, indicating a severe outbreak was spreading from person to person. After the announcement, shelves were emptied of hand sanitizer, napkins, tissues, noodles, rice and other staples, with many Singaporeans fearing what would happen if the threat were elevated to red, the highest level. Singaporeans, who boast the highest per-capita income in Asia and pride themselves on the efficiency of their authoritarian city-state, are also known for a ruthless survival instinct. It’s a result of the country’s small size and scant natural resources, and produces a national ethos that fears losing out. “No hand sanitizer, no canned goods, no paper products,” lamented Jeeva Pillay, a 45-year-old data engineer who moved to Singapore from South Africa last month. She and her husband spent much of Sunday waiting in line at another supermarket for paper towels and cleaning supplies for their new apartment, but coming away empty-handed. “Clearly people are panicking,” Pillay said. “We didn’t feel like there was a need to stock up but now we feel like we have to follow suit.” The run on goods prompted the government-linked NTUC FairPrice grocery chain to limit purchases: four packs of paper products such as toilet paper, two bags of rice, four packets of instant noodles and about $36 worth of vegetables. Over the weekend, Singapore Prime Minister Lee Hsien Loong urged residents to not panic and insisted the government was better prepared than during the SARS epidemic. “We are not locking down the city or confining everybody to stay at home,” Lee said. “We have ample supplies, so there is no need to stock up with instant noodles, tinned food or toilet paper, as some people did yesterday.” The alert prompted fears of being holed up indoors indefinitely, said Rajiv Biswas, a Singapore-based economist at market research firm IHS Markit. “People became very nervous,” Biswas said. “Supermarket shelves were empty over the weekend I guess because people were planning to bunker into their houses until this was over.” In Hong Kong, fears of the virus, which has infected 50 people, have cleaned out nearly all stocks of sanitary goods. Consumers line up at the semiautonomous Chinese territory’s dispensaries up to five hours before they open, sometimes pouncing on toilet paper seconds after the shelves are restocked. Rice, canned sardines and lunch meats were also selling out. The panic buying recalled the anxious days of 2011, when fears of radiation emanating from the earthquake-damaged Fukushima Daiichi nuclear reactor in Japan fueled a run on table salt in Hong Kong, out of an erroneous belief that iodine would ward off ill effects. “In both situations people are panicking when facing hazards, so I think the [people’s] attitude is not improved,” 19-year-old Hong Kong shopper Hailey Yan said. “But for now, with better technology, we have more access to information. The younger generation is more objective when facing rumors of hoarding, but for some elder people, they still have the idea of stocking up on food to prevent hunger.” Panicked bulk buying of surgical masks has also been reported in Japan, South Korea, Thailand and Vietnam. South Korean authorities last week stiffened penalties for hoarding masks or sanitizing liquids. Violators face up to two years in prison or fines of about $42,000. Authorities in Taiwan, which has reported 18 coronavirus infections, this week recommended prosecution for three women suspected of spreading social media messages suggesting that toilet paper, table napkins and sanitary napkins could be used to craft mask substitutes, and warning that those products could soon be in short supply. The women could be prosecuted under anti-fake news laws passed in early 2019 to prevent rumors affecting consumers. The Taiwanese government’s Industrial Development Bureau clarified on its Facebook page that those paper goods couldn’t be used for masks. The bureau’s deputy director, Yang Bo-ken, said this week that suppliers were ready to restock toilet paper in stores, although clerks told customers it could take several days for the goods to reach shelves. Liang, of the Taipei think tank, said governments in the region should ensure they can ship enough nonperishable goods from outside China in case the virus incites more panic. “The most important thing they can do is ensure supplies,” he said. Special correspondent Jennings reported from Taipei and Times staff writer Bengali from Singapore. Special correspondent Antonia Tang contributed to this report from Hong Kong. 
Feb 10, 2020	Seven hours before the K-pop band SuperM took the stage for its sold-out show at the Forum last week, crowds were already packed outside the venue. No one needed to be there so early. The unseasonably hot weather sent sweat down fans' faces -- many covered with surgical masks, perhaps from coronavirus fears -- and dampened their SuperM sweatshirts, SuperM T-shirts and SuperM proprietary lightsticks. But thousands of young K-pop stans had waited months for this day, when an unprecedented supergroup of South Korea's top pop stars would headline Los Angeles as part of a U.S. and worldwide arena tour. The boys were just steps away, in fact, down the Forum Club stairs, past the giant portraits of Bob Dylan and Guns N' Roses, in a windlowless backstage green room. There, SuperM's Taemin, Kai, Baekhyun, Mark, Ten and Lucas (all early to mid-20s), kicked back on a gigantic couch, dressed in Balenciaga sweatshirts and high-streetwear bomber jackets. Their green, blue and bleach-blond hair fell over skin so flawless it looked like they'd had Instagram filters implanted.  Taeyong, the seventh, was a bit worse for wear, clutching his stomach in agony from an unspecified illness. He powered through the shivering to silently nod hello to a Times reporter, before beelining back to the dressing room to recover. Still, the band felt prepared for the night. "I was really nervous when I first went on that stage, I actually didn't have too much confidence," Lucas said, about the band's first-ever live show outside the offices of their U.S. label Capitol back in October (all members but Mark used a translator for English interviews). "A lot of the nervousness came from the fact that I really wanted to put my best foot forward. But now, I can definitely say I feel more confident about where I am." Super M's only been a group for six months, but they were as surefire an idea as any in pop. Its members had been K-pop stars for nearly their whole lives, in the groundbreaking groups EXO, SHINee, NCT127 and WayV. In the wake of BTS' rout of the U.S. pop charts and stadiums, SuperM is already tipped as the next phenomenon in K-pop, with four popular bands' fan bases built in, and both Capitol and SM Entertainment, the most storied label in K-pop from founder Lee Soo-Man, behind them. In October, the band set a record for debut week sales by a K-pop act and topped the Billboard 200 album charts with its self-titled EP. K-pop pressure But it's also endured tragedy, including the 2017 suicide of Jonghyun, Taemin's bandmate in SHINee. These seven young men, none older than 27, face the all-consuming demands of K-pop celebrity and an industry going through a time of profound self-reflection and change. As they limbered up for this set -- maybe the biggest show of their young careers in this band -- they knew the stakes. "This is basically like the re-debut for a lot of us," Kai said. "There is some of that pressure and that expectation on us, because there was a kind of shock value to this group. This is going to be a different kind of stage." In K-pop, it's common for bands to be modular. Groups often have sub-units or spinoffs to appeal to different markets like Chinese speakers. It's especially helpful for boy bands, where superstardom is no insulation from compulsory military service in South Korea, and acts can be reconfigured to keep stars on the road. But nothing like SuperM has happened in the genre before, where standout members of already superfamous bands joined forces. "The Avengers of K-pop" comparisons come up often, but maybe instead think of the 1992 U.S. Olympic basketball "Dream Team," with seven-part harmonies and two-hour sets of impeccable choreography. Even though all the members are in their 20s, in the ultra-compressed world of K-pop, SuperM is intergenerational. "I used to listen to SHINee before I even came to the label to train," Mark, 20, said, looking over admiringly at his bandmate Taemin, 26. "To have our voices be harmonized together, and to be able to see him as a guy I know as a friend, that changes the way I listen to his music or see his performance." Being in the new band was also a chance to break out of the established roles in their main acts. "In EXO, I'm one of the youngest, but here I'm one of the oldest and that's a really fun dynamic," Kai, 26, said. "When I look at Lucas, I remember back when I first debuted and that makes me feel young again, like 'Oh, I remember when I was like that too.' " "Men get more attractive as they get older, so it's kind of better to debut later," 21-year-old Lucas joked, ribbing his bandmate in return. SuperM isn't diluted for Western tastes. But they are particularly rangy for K-pop: At the Forum show, Taemin, one of the older members and a K-pop veteran since 2008, sang pristine R&B on "Goodbye" and nailed every mark of a long, complicated solo dance. Kai's trap-influenced "Confession" was the raciest number, punctuated by long flashes of abs that sent fans into paroxysms of lust. "The genre as a whole is exploding over here," said Tarynn Law, 27, who works at a music tech firm in Malibu and ponied up $175 for a floor seat to the Forum show. "Artists like Taemin and EXO haven't toured here in quite some time or, in WayV's case, at all, which makes SuperM's love for the States pretty special for a lot of fans too." The group's new material -- the purring melodic bounce of "No Manners" and the hard-pivoting EDM of "Jopping" (a goofy portmanteau of "Jumping" and "Popping") -- show an ear for K-pop sounds that can translate not just globally but specifically on U.S. streaming and arena tours. "I personally think that this group itself is not really westernized or altered at all for any type of market," said Baekhyun. But he agrees that their sound challenges both K-pop and Western styles. "To be honest, when I first heard the song 'Jopping,' I thought it sounded a little bit too different. But now when I see the U.S. or the international fans' reaction, it really made an impression on them. There was a bigger picture that Mr. Lee was thinking of." After helping to push NCT127 to the top tier of K-pop acts in the U.S., Capitol sees SuperM as both the most promising new bet in K-pop today, and the start of a deeper relationship with the Korean label SM Entertainment and its founder Lee Soo-Man, at 67 a titanic figure in South Korean business and culture (imagine Steve Jobs or Marvel's Kevin Feige, if they'd invented a music genre that became their country's most visible export). Given K-pop's uniquely devoted fan culture, where physical record sales are an expression of loyalty and fans camp out to buy $70 avant-garde sweatshirts, it's no surprise that Capitol wanted to continue what "Mr. Lee," as he is affectionately known in South Korea, had started. "Like many music executives, I've watched with keen interest how K-pop's immense popularity has been spreading around the globe," Steve Barnett, the chairman and CEO of Capitol Music Group, said in an email. "I've certainly wanted to be in this space for a while, but I knew I had to find the right partner. Mr. Lee is an incredibly impressive and successful entertainment executive and creative force. Everything is first rate with his company and the artists he develops and brings to the world." A stronger spotlight Indeed, Mr. Lee, who hand-picked the members of SuperM, was at the Forum show, and when the camera panned to him in his suite, he was cheered as loudly as any star on stage. Given BTS' "Saturday Night Live" and Grammy performances, Blackpink's knockout set at Coachella last year and the reunion of veteran K-pop act BigBang this year at the same fest, the genre and its figureheads have never been more visible in the U.S. But the squeaky-clean scene has, over the last few years, faced many of the same reckonings about overwork, toxic fan culture, misogyny and mental health that the wider entertainment industry has dealt with. Last year, K-pop was shaken by the suicides of two female stars, Goo Hara and Sulli, that thrust those long-simmering issues to the forefront. Taemin knows that sense of tragedy more intimately than anyone. As a founding member of SHINee, he was devastated by the suicide of his bandmade Jonghyun in 2017. The loss shook K-pop as a whole, including all the members of SuperM. But Taemin lost a bandmate and close friend. He still struggles with how to speak about it, and when the topic came up, a Capitol rep encouraged him to be as honest as he felt comfortable with. He wanted to keep the personal pain of that loss private, he said, but acknowledged that speaking out on mental health issues in K-pop is the only way to effect change. "When it comes to celebrities, it's always kind of a double-edged sword. They're loved by so many, but at the same time, they're in the spotlight and everything they do is analyzed or scrutinize by so many people," Taemin said. "But the industry is definitely changing for the better." In a few hours, they would walk out to a packed Forum and show fans what K-pop is capable of. For two hours, they demonstrated the virtuosity, musical range and physical craft that goes into a set pushing the peak of a genre. As a cultural phenomenon, K-pop has nothing left to prove in America anymore. Now it's up to its acts to show what's possible within it. "It's really encouraging to see how we can all bridge the gap, and everyone can just be part of a global music scene," Kai said. "This shows us that K-pop is not just for K-pop fans anymore." Caption: PHOTO: AS K-POP explodes in global popularity, the band SuperM tries for a different dynamic in the face of tragedy. PHOTOGRAPHER:Genaro Molina Los Angeles Times PHOTO:MEMBERS OF OTHER top K-pop bands came together to form SuperM, which performed a sold-out show at the Forum on Feb. 1 that Kai called their "re-debut." PHOTOGRAPHER:Genaro Molina Los Angeles Times 
Feb 8, 2020	In the prosperous capitals of Asia, money could buy anything -- until a mysterious coronavirus hit, striking fear in rich and poor alike. Now, surgical masks are nearly impossible to find on store shelves from Taipei to Hong Kong to Manila, prompting a panic reminiscent of wartime scarcity, with long lines and reports of hoarding, price gouging and fake products. People have turned to social media to share creative solutions. How about a mask made of a maxi pad? Half an orange? A water bottle? Bad advice abounds. Note to self: Steaming masks to disinfect them does not work.  Some governments have organized mask lotteries. Others are rationing masks. Political leaders tour mask factories, seeking to reassure citizens that manufacturing is being ramped up. On an increasingly interconnected continent, every major Asian city has extensive business and tourism ties with China, where the deadly outbreak originated. At their simplest, the masks are a thin, pleated layer of gauze -- a few millimeters of protection from the world. Other versions, like the N95 used by healthcare workers, contain advanced carbon filters. Most people are just glad to have a mask in standard white, blue, green or black, but plaid, camouflage, heart and cartoon animal versions are also seen on the streets. People in China, Japan and other parts of Asia are accustomed to donning surgical masks to fend off pollution or germs, as well as to protect others from sneezes and coughs. Many have a small stash at home, but that will last only so long. Medical experts say it is more important to wash your hands than to wear a mask. Early indications are that the new strain of coronavirus, which causes flu-like symptoms and has killed more than 700 people, is less lethal than 2003's SARS virus. Cases have been confirmed in two dozen countries, but the vast majority are in the Chinese city of Wuhan and the surrounding province of Hubei. As conditions deteriorate in Wuhan and other parts of China, life has proceeded with limited disruption elsewhere in Asia, other than the extension of school vacations in some areas and an undercurrent of paranoia. For those uncomfortably close to the outbreak's epicenter, surgical masks provide a degree of insurance against an unseen enemy. In some corners of the internet, the masks have become a new form of chic. Instagram influencers have seized on the trend, striking glamorous poses in masks while urging their followers to adopt good hygiene habits and support those affected by the outbreak. "PREVENTION is better than cure. Let's pray that we can get through this together. All stores MASK OUT OF STOCK," wrote Adena Wilson from the Philippines, who has 27,700 Instagram followers, under a photo of herself in an off-the-shoulder top and black face mask. In China, where the outbreak has rippled beyond Hubei province, masks are such a precious commodity that officials in southwestern Yunnan province co-opted a shipment meant for the city of Chongqing. A municipal health official was fired over the incident. The BBC reported that China, one of the world's largest producers of surgical masks, imported 220 million masks between Jan. 24 and Feb. 2. Communist Party members in the city of Xian banded together to sew homemade masks with two layers of gauze, two layers of white cloth and one layer of plastic wrap, washed three times with disinfectant. Nearly 200 households received two masks apiece. The local government of Xiamen in Fujian province has launched a lottery system for mask purchases through the WeChat messaging app. Winners can buy six masks from designated local stores. Nanjing is among the cities instituting online reservation systems for masks. Shortly after news of the coronavirus broke in late January, masks began selling out across Southeast Asia -- an indication of how tightly interwoven this region is. The virus could easily spread through tourists, migrant workers and factory supply chains that benefit the economies of many countries. In the Malaysian state of Sabah, a popular draw for Chinese sunbathers and snorkelers, drugstores quickly sold out of face masks. Earlier this week, President Rodrigo Duterte of the Philippines reassured his country that stockpiles of face masks would be replenished after being depleted by panicked buyers. The health minister in Thailand handed out free masks to passersby Friday, then provoked controversy by berating European tourists who refused to take them, saying they should be "kicked out" of the country. Singapore, which has 30 confirmed coronavirus cases, the most outside China, responded to the outbreak with typical efficiency. Each of the city-state's 1.3 million households was allotted four masks, with soldiers working around the clock to prepare the packages. A government website helped residents figure out when and where to collect the white surgical-style masks, which come with a label stating: "Do not use this if you are well." Many Singaporeans seemed to be following the directive, with only a slight increase in the numbers of people wearing masks on the streets. Still, many drugstores were sold out. In Hong Kong, where pro-democracy street protests have been ongoing for months, the situation was more chaotic as lines outside chain drugstores stretched for blocks. A box of 50 masks that cost $8 before the outbreak now fetches around $40. Some mom-and-pop pharmacies carry masks, but Hong Kongers say they have seen piles of them loosely packed in plastic bags. Social media videos show people scavenging masks from garbage cans. Popular anger has been directed at the Hong Kong government and its chief executive, Carrie Lam, who are accused of responding too slowly to the outbreak and putting people at risk by refusing to completely seal the border with China. The virus has sickened about two dozen people in Hong Kong, killing one. The government says it has ordered more face masks and boosted production in the city's prisons, where inmates churn out tens of thousands per day. South Korean officials are cracking down on people trying to profit off the mask shortage. Hoarding of masks is now punishable by prison or fines. People can report abusive sales tactics to a tip line and website, with nearly 200 inspectors assigned to investigate. In the capital city of Seoul, many stores are sold out of masks. Meanwhile, officials are distributing free masks on buses and at subway stops, as well as to the needy. Some masks in government packaging are advertised online, raising concerns that they are being resold for profit. North Korea says it is boosting mask production. An illegal mask trade may also be flourishing in the secretive, authoritarian country, with smugglers hawking South Korean-made masks near the border with China, according to Daily NK, a Seoul-based news site with sources inside North Korea. In Taiwan, many are desperately seeking masks despite assurances from government officials that people need facial protection only if they are ill or in crowded places. On the self-governing, democratic island, which China claims as a renegade province, nearly every crisis relates back to the mainland. Images of masks imprinted with the Taiwanese national flag were widely shared online. Chinese people should be forced to wear these, commenters joked sardonically -- China does not recognize Taiwan as a country and will not allow Taiwan to join the World Health Organization. At first, convenience stores were authorized to sell masks three at a time. Officials scrapped that system after long lines and shortages, in favor of a new rationing system that began Thursday. But, so far, there only seemed to be more long lines and more shortages. At Li Tai Pharmacy in Taipei's Daan district on the first day of the new system, a stream of customers arrived asking for masks. The store's daily allotment of 200 adult masks had been sold out since 9 a.m., though some children's masks were still left. A harried store manager said he had planned to start selling the masks in the afternoon because the computer system for logging the purchases was not ready. But people who had waited outside the store since 8 a.m. protested. So the manager collected their ID cards and sold them each two masks for five New Taiwan dollars, or about 17 cents, apiece -- a price set by the government. On Tuesdays, Thursdays and Saturdays, people with even-numbered ID cards can purchase masks -- a maximum of two per week. Mondays, Wednesdays and Fridays are for odd-numbered cards. On Sunday, everyone is allowed to buy. "They're already gone?" said a man in a black mask. "What good is this?" Another customer, Morgan Tsai, bought gauze so she could fashion her own face masks. The green mask she wore was given to her by a friend, she said, and she had been reusing it often. She does not believe the advice from government officials that most people do not need to wear masks. "If everyone believes that, why are they in line to buy masks?" said Tsai, who is in her 40s and works in marketing. "If the government spoke honestly and transparently, people wouldn't panic." "May I interrupt?" asked a bare-faced elderly man. "I have diabetes, and I don't have enough masks. How do I even get any? All I can do is stay home." Chang reported from Taipei, Taiwan; Bengali from Singapore; and Kim from Seoul. Nicole Liu and Gaochao Zhang of The Times' Beijing bureau, Times staff writer David Pierson in Singapore, special correspondent Tang Wai Yin in Hong Kong and special correspondent Ralph Jennings in Taipei and Kota Kinabalu, Malaysia, contributed to this report. Caption: PHOTO: MASKS aren't vital to stave off the coronavirus, but they are a must-have for many in Asia. With supplies limited, some have resorted to homemade options. PHOTOGRAPHER:AFP/Getty Images; EPA/Shutterstock PHOTO:IN BEIJING, a man swims with a mask on. China imported 220 million masks between Jan. 24 and Feb. 2. PHOTOGRAPHER:Wang Zhao AFP/Getty Images PHOTO:FLIGHT ATTENDANTS arrive in Thailand. The masks provide a sense of insurance against illness. PHOTOGRAPHER:Rungroj Yongrit EPA/Shutterstock 
Feb 7, 2020	In the prosperous capitals of Asia, money could buy anything — until a mysterious coronavirus hit, striking fear in rich and poor alike. Now, surgical masks are nearly impossible to find on store shelves from Taipei to Hong Kong to Manila, prompting a panic reminiscent of wartime scarcity, with long lines and reports of hoarding, price gouging and fake products. People have turned to social media to share creative solutions. How about a mask made of a maxi pad? Half an orange? A water bottle? Bad advice abounds. Note to self: Steaming masks to disinfect them does not work. Some governments have organized mask lotteries. Others are rationing masks. Political leaders tour mask factories, seeking to reassure citizens that manufacturing is being ramped up. On an increasingly interconnected continent, every major Asian city has extensive business and tourism ties with China, where the deadly outbreak originated. At their simplest, the masks are a thin, pleated layer of gauze — a few millimeters of protection from the world. Other versions, like the N95 used by healthcare workers, contain advanced carbon filters. Most people are just glad to have a mask in standard white, blue, green or black, but plaid, camouflage, heart and cartoon animal versions are also seen on the streets. People in China, Japan and other parts of Asia are accustomed to donning surgical masks to fend off pollution or germs, as well as to protect others from sneezes and coughs. Many have a small stash at home, but that will last only so long. Medical experts say it is more important to wash your hands than to wear a mask. Early indications are that the new strain of coronavirus, which causes flu-like symptoms and has killed more than 700 people, is less lethal than 2003’s SARS virus. Cases have been confirmed in two dozen countries, but the vast majority are in the Chinese city of Wuhan and the surrounding province of Hubei. As conditions deteriorate in Wuhan and other parts of China, life has proceeded with limited disruption elsewhere in Asia, other than the extension of school vacations in some areas and an undercurrent of paranoia. For those uncomfortably close to the outbreak’s epicenter, surgical masks provide a degree of insurance against an unseen enemy. In some corners of the internet, the masks have become a new form of chic. Instagram influencers have seized on the trend, striking glamorous poses in masks while urging their followers to adopt good hygiene habits and support those affected by the outbreak. “PREVENTION is better than cure. Let’s pray that we can get through this together. All stores MASK OUT OF STOCK,” wrote Adena Wilson from the Philippines, who has 27,700 Instagram followers, under a photo of herself in an off-the-shoulder top and black face mask.  PREVENTION is better than cure . Let’s pray that we can get through this together. All stores MASK OUT OF STOCK ?????? Video on my YouTube channel Don’t forget do subscribe ???? Adena Wilson link on my profile . . . . . . #travelblogger #travel #cebu #philippines #coronavirus #coronavirusoutbreak #cebu #cebublog #cebuvlogger #blog #blogger #vlogger #philippines #igers #igph #igersph A post shared by Adena Wilson ?? (@adenawilson.ph) onJan 30, 2020 at 1:13am PST  In China, where the outbreak has rippled beyond Hubei province, masks are such a precious commodity that officials in southwestern Yunnan province co-opted a shipment meant for the city of Chongqing. A municipal health official was fired over the incident. The BBC reported that China, one of the world’s largest producers of surgical masks, imported 220 million masks between Jan. 24 and Feb. 2. Communist Party members in the city of Xian banded together to sew homemade masks with two layers of gauze, two layers of white cloth and one layer of plastic wrap, washed three times with disinfectant. Nearly 200 households received two masks apiece. The local government of Xiamen in Fujian province has launched a lottery system for mask purchases through the WeChat messaging app. Winners can buy six masks from designated local stores. Nanjing is among the cities instituting online reservation systems for masks. Shortly after news of the coronavirus broke in late January, masks began selling out across Southeast Asia — an indication of how tightly interwoven this region is. The virus could easily spread through tourists, migrant workers and factory supply chains that benefit the economies of many countries. In the Malaysian state of Sabah, a popular draw for Chinese sunbathers and snorkelers, drugstores quickly sold out of face masks. Earlier this week, President Rodrigo Duterte of the Philippines reassured his country that stockpiles of face masks would be replenished after being depleted by panicked buyers. The health minister in Thailand handed out free masks to passersby Friday, then provoked controversy by berating European tourists who refused to take them, saying they should be “kicked out” of the country. Singapore, which has 30 confirmed coronavirus cases, the most outside China, responded to the outbreak with typical efficiency. Each of the city-state’s 1.3 million households was allotted four masks, with soldiers working around the clock to prepare the packages. A government website helped residents figure out when and where to collect the white surgical-style masks, which come with a label stating: “Do not use this if you are well.” Many Singaporeans seemed to be following the directive, with only a slight increase in the numbers of people wearing masks on the streets. Still, many drugstores were sold out. In Hong Kong, where pro-democracy street protests have been ongoing for months, the situation was more chaotic as lines outside chain drugstores stretched for blocks. A box of 50 masks that cost $8 before the outbreak now fetches around $40. Some mom-and-pop pharmacies carry masks, but Hong Kongers say they have seen piles of them loosely packed in plastic bags. Social media videos show people scavenging masks from garbage cans. Popular anger has been directed at the Hong Kong government and its chief executive, Carrie Lam, who are accused of responding too slowly to the outbreak and putting people at risk by refusing to completely seal the border with China. The virus has sickened about two dozen people in Hong Kong, killing one. The government says it has ordered more face masks and boosted production in the city’s prisons, where inmates churn out tens of thousands per day. South Korean officials are cracking down on people trying to profit off the mask shortage. Hoarding of masks is now punishable by prison or fines. People can report abusive sales tactics to a tip line and website, with nearly 200 inspectors assigned to investigate. In the capital city of Seoul, many stores are sold out of masks. Meanwhile, officials are distributing free masks on buses and at subway stops, as well as to the needy. Some masks in government packaging are advertised online, raising concerns that they are being resold for profit. North Korea says it is boosting mask production. An illegal mask trade may also be flourishing in the secretive, authoritarian country, with smugglers hawking South Korean-made masks near the border with China, according to Daily NK, a Seoul-based news site with sources inside North Korea. In Taiwan, many are desperately seeking masks despite assurances from government officials that people need facial protection only if they are ill or in crowded places. On the self-governing, democratic island, which China claims as a renegade province, nearly every crisis relates back to the mainland. Images of masks imprinted with the Taiwanese national flag were widely shared online. Chinese people should be forced to wear these, commenters joked sardonically — China does not recognize Taiwan as a country and will not allow Taiwan to join the World Health Organization. At first, convenience stores were authorized to sell masks three at a time. Officials scrapped that system after long lines and shortages, in favor of a new rationing system that began Thursday. But, so far, there only seemed to be more long lines and more shortages. At Li Tai Pharmacy in Taipei’s Daan district on the first day of the new system, a stream of customers arrived asking for masks. The store’s daily allotment of 200 adult masks had been sold out since 9 a.m., though some children’s masks were still left. A harried store manager said he had planned to start selling the masks in the afternoon because the computer system for logging the purchases was not ready. But people who had waited outside the store since 8 a.m. protested. So the manager collected their ID cards and sold them each two masks for five New Taiwan dollars, or about 17 cents, apiece — a price set by the government. On Tuesdays, Thursdays and Saturdays, people with even-numbered ID cards can purchase masks — a maximum of two per week. Mondays, Wednesdays and Fridays are for odd-numbered cards. On Sunday, everyone is allowed to buy. “They’re already gone?” said a man in a black mask. “What good is this?” Another customer, Morgan Tsai, bought gauze so she could fashion her own face masks. The green mask she wore was given to her by a friend, she said, and she had been reusing it often. She does not believe the advice from government officials that most people do not need to wear masks. “If everyone believes that, why are they in line to buy masks?” said Tsai, who is in her 40s and works in marketing. “If the government spoke honestly and transparently, people wouldn’t panic.” “May I interrupt?” asked a bare-faced elderly man. “I have diabetes, and I don’t have enough masks. How do I even get any? All I can do is stay home.” Chang reported from Taipei, Taiwan; Bengali from Singapore; and Kim from Seoul. Nicole Liu and Gaochao Zhang of The Times’ Beijing bureau, Times staff writer David Pierson in Singapore, special correspondent Tang Wai Yin in Hong Kong and special correspondent Ralph Jennings in Taipei and Kota Kinabalu, Malaysia, contributed to this report. 
Feb 3, 2020	As she walks through campus and sits in class, Rosen Huynh tries extra hard to suppress her coughs. Fear of the coronavirus, which was first detected in December in China, has spread around the world, and many people like Huynh are suddenly hyperaware of their East Asian roots. Every cough, every wheeze, the 22-year-old says, seems to elicit furtive glances and odd looks. "I don't know if it's just people looking at me coughing or because I'm an Asian person coughing, they think I might have the coronavirus," said Huynh, who lives in Monterey Park. "I feel like every time I cough, people are going to be uncomfortable with that. I shouldn't have to feel that way."  Viruses often spark panic. But the coronavirus has spread something else besides misinformation and false rumors: xenophobia and anti-China sentiment. People have fielded discrimination and vitriolic attacks in public spaces, including suspicious looks and nasty comments; they've seen others scrambling to avoid them. A doctor in Ontario said her son was cornered at school by children who wanted to "test" him for the virus just because he is half-Chinese. "Taking Calc 151 with only Asians in the classroom ... I hope I don't catch coronavirus ... thinkin about dropping this class now," a student wrote on his Snapchat story. The new coronavirus, which can cause respiratory illness and pneumonia, has infected at least 17,373 people worldwide, killing at least 362 of them as of Sunday night, with only one death outside China. Eleven cases have been confirmed in the United States, including six in California. False health information including warnings to avoid Asian food and Asian-populated areas has circulated, and videos of Asian people eating bats accompanied by inaccurate speculation about the cause of the virus and dehumanizing comments have gone viral. A barrage of vicious discussion and derogatory jokes about Chinese people or Asians in general have gathered steam online, drawing on age-old racist tropes associating Chinese people with disease, filth and dirty food, experts say. Some in California felt their fears of racism around the virus were confirmed Thursday when UC Berkeley's health services center listed xenophobia toward Asian people as a "normal reaction" in an informational post on Instagram focused on "managing fears and anxiety" about the pneumonia-like sickness. The campus received a flood of criticism for the post. "Feeling good about the light fear people have had of me in public all week," campus alum Michelle Lee wrote sarcastically in a tweet. The post was "blatant and awful" in its harm to people of color, and remarkable considering more than 40% of last year's freshman class was Asian, said Angie Chen, legislative aide for a Berkeley City Council member and recent alum of the university. "People can feel nervous, that's valid," she said. "But grouping in xenophobia with all the other things, like anxiety and helplessness, legitimizes these responses to the virus." Amid backlash, the university deleted the post and apologized. "We regret any misunderstanding it may have caused and have updated the language in our materials," read a statement shared by the Tang Center on Friday. Aida Zhu, 21, who was about to board a flight back home to San Diego, saw an agent with the Transportation Security Administration staring at her as she shuffled through security at William P. Hobby Airport in Houston while wearing a mask. "I hope you're not ill," he said to her in a disgusted tone. Zhu said she's been mulling over the incident all week. She thinks racist sentiment has been latent, but there all along. "The coronavirus is bringing it to the surface." Andrew Nguyen, 22, an employee at Aape, a retail clothing store in West Hollywood, was ringing a customer up last week when the man gave him a dirty look. Nguyen reached into the bag to scan the tag on the mask the man was purchasing -- the type of face mask meant to be fashionable, not a medical one -- his fingers brushing the cloth. The man brusquely said, "Can you get me a new one?" "Why?" Nguyen shot back. "Because you touched it," the man responded. It happened when videos of Asian people eating "weird" things were going around, Nguyen said. "I felt like maybe he had seen one of those." Reading the vitriolic comments on articles about the virus has taken a toll on 26-year-old Katherine Lu. She's not worried about experiencing racism in person, however, since she lives in Los Angeles and rarely takes public transit. "If I lived in a metropolitan area where trains were essential to my day-to-day life, I would worry that people were worried about sharing the same airspace as me, just based on my face," she said. "The coronavirus is an opportunity for them to safely express their racist thoughts in a way that can be excused." The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention advised people not to panic about the coronavirus and against stereotyping people in a statement issued Friday. "Do not assume that if someone is of Asian descent, they have coronavirus," said Dr. Nancy Messonnier, director of the CDC's National Center for Immunization and Respiratory Diseases. But many have panicked; calls for self-imposed or community-imposed sanctions that are not based on official medical advisory have erupted. "Close UCSB temporarily before one of us dies from the coronavirus," one student posted, linking to a petition on Change.org, on an informal Facebook page where UC Santa Barbara students sell used items. "We have a large number of commuters from China and other people visiting China that have the potential to infect everyone." After receiving critical comments, the post was edited to read "this is not directed towards any particular group of people," and later deleted. The Change.org petition was still online as of Sunday, and has garnered more than 1,000 signatures. "We have this tendency to confuse people who are sick with entire groups of people, and that's what makes it discriminatory," said Gilbert Gee, a professor at UCLA's Fielding School of Public Health. "If someone exhibits symptoms, treat the sickness -- people who might actually have the disease. When you single out entire groups of people, that becomes prejudice," he said. Huynh said one of her professors went on a spiel about the virus at the beginning of class last week. He asked that students who had recently traveled to China refrain from attending class for a few weeks. His comments made her feel alienated, she said, as one of the few Asian people in the class. When she tweeted about the incident, writing, "sir your xenophobia is showing," she was slammed by a steady stream of racist replies. "Your home nation's garbage quality of life is a product of your own people's negligence," one user tweeted at her, using a racial slur and other vulgar language. Where practical concerns about infection end and where fear, misinformation and xenophobia begin is not always clear, but medical experts have pointed out that the coronavirus should not be top of mind for people in the U.S. So far, 11 people in the United States have been diagnosed with the coronavirus. None have died. By contrast, the flu has killed roughly 10,000 Americans since October. "The racialization of coronavirus as this exotic foreign threat has a lot to do with the hysterical response in the West," Mark Tseng-Putterman, a graduate student in American studies at Brown University, said in an email. The U.S. decided to break the quarantine on Wuhan and evacuate its diplomatic personnel, "but you're not going to have people wondering if the white people on the subway or in the store are diplomats who could be spreading the infection," he said. Geopolitical tensions and U.S. political strategy that sees China as, in the words of Secretary of State Michael R. Pompeo, the "central threat" facing the U.S. may also be fueling some of the xenophobia. This is clear in conspiracy theories that have circulated, such as those claiming that photos of heavy machinery clearing land for emergency quarantine hospitals in Wuhan were actually digging mass graves or those that claim the Chinese Communist Party itself created the virus, Tseng-Putterman said. "That these cynical rumors are being spread while lives have been lost, millions of Chinese families have had their Spring Festival disrupted, and countless medical workers are putting their lives on the line to contain the virus is quite disappointing," he said. As airlines cancel flights to China and the U.S. issues a "do not travel" advisory, and China takes its own dramatic measures -- quarantining more than 50 million people -- anti-Chinese sentiment has reverberated globally. Hundreds of thousands in South Korea and Malaysia signed petitions asking that Chinese nationals be banned from entering their countries. In Vietnam, restaurants put up signs declaring "No Chinese." Discrimination draws on this idea "that is very, very old indeed -- that Chinese people as a race, no matter where they are, are disease carriers," said Erika Lee, professor of history and Asian American studies at the University of Minnesota. "Yellow peril," the strain of thought that maintained all things Asia were a great threat to the white world, can be traced back to Europe in the 19th century. The idea took a particularly violent and effective turn in the U.S., where policies were often created based on the idea that Asian people were disease-ridden, Lee said. Chinese migrants were subject to invasive and often humiliating medical inspections upon arriving at Angel Island that Europeans arriving through Ellis Island weren't. When the bubonic plague hit San Francisco at the beginning of the 20th century, Chinatown was forcibly quarantined. Public health fears are easily projected on racial groups or other marginalized communities, said Gee, the UCLA professor. For example, one of the earliest names for HIV was "gay-related immune deficiency," and homophobic stigma helped fuel the epidemic. In the early 1930s, Los Angeles County and California public health officials submitted a resolution to Congress recommending a mass deportation of Filipinos. They argued that high rates of tuberculosis among Filipinos overburdened public health infrastructure. "Treat people who exhibit symptoms rather than targeting people for quarantine or barring them from public places simply because of the way that they look," said Lee, the University of Minnesota professor. "It's really about using common sense and not letting fear and panic drive us to revert back to more base fear of foreigners." Caption: PHOTO: LOS ANGELES COUNTY Supervisor Hilda Solis, flanked by Assemblyman Ed Chau, left, and Health Officer Dr. Muntu Davis, holds a fake letter that circulated on Facebook about a coronavirus outbreak in Carson. PHOTOGRAPHER:Damian Dovarganes Associated Press 
Feb 2, 2020	When some 5,000 Chinese travelers arrived in South Korea last month for a company retreat, local officials rolled out a red carpet, handed them bouquets and renamed a city street after the health food firm they worked for. In recent days, however, Chinese tourists have received a different kind of greeting, as fears rise over the global spread of the deadly coronavirus that originated in the Chinese city of Wuhan. More than 600,000 South Koreans have signed an online petition asking that Chinese nationals be banned from entering their country. In Malaysia, more than 400,000 have signed a similar petition. Mongolia and North Korea, meanwhile, have sealed their borders to Chinese travelers, and the Philippines has stopped issuing visas on arrival for the Chinese.  "Even North Korea is banning Chinese from entering," the South Korean petition read. "It'll be too late after it reaches our shores. Preemptive measures are necessary." Like many of China's Asian neighbors, South and North Korea are heavily dependent on Chinese tourists and their fast-increasing spending power. The health company tour group alone, officials in the west coast city of Incheon estimated, would bring in nearly $20 million in unspecified economic gains. The widespread fears come in spite of the fact that most public health officials generally advise against travel restrictions because of the potential to cause more harm -- by hindering medical personnel, breeding a false sense of security and motivating people to skirt any bans, making infections much harder to track. Studies on the efficacy of such travel bans in the past have concluded they only briefly delayed but were ultimately unable to stop the spread of epidemics, that the costs outweighed any benefits, and that they may have in fact exacerbated the global crisis. China's own dramatic measures to contain the virus -- quarantining people within the most heavily infected areas and, beginning last week, suspending all outbound group tours -- do not appear to have lowered concerns in countries where the Chinese have been traveling in large numbers. Moreover, travel into China is now being strongly frowned upon. The U.S. State Department on Thursday issued a Level 4 "Do Not Travel" alert on China -- the highest-level warning, also in place for conflict zones including Syria and Afghanistan. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention also urged no nonessential travel to the country. And on Friday, Delta Air Lines and American Airlines announced they would halt all flights between the U.S. and China. The coronavirus, which has spread to more than 20 countries and caused at least 305 deaths, is the first outbreak originating in China since the 2003 SARS epidemic, which began in southern China. Back then, 16 million Chinese tourists went abroad a year; by 2018, as China's middle class mushroomed and with many countries easing visa restrictions to attract its travelers, the number increased more than tenfold to 162 million. Chinese spending overseas has far eclipsed that of travelers from other countries, lavishing the world with almost double what Americans spent abroad. The rapid surge has meant a particularly dramatic increase of Chinese tourists in nearby Asian countries, and businesses and governments have been eager to cater to them. The alarm since the outbreak over any and all Chinese, irrespective of whether they are from the heavily affected areas or are showing symptoms, has been fiercest in some of the destinations most dependent on tourism from China. Restaurants and retailers in South Korea and Japan, where China accounts for a third of all tourists, have posted signs on their storefronts saying "No Chinese Allowed." An Indonesian governor was pilloried online after a video showed him personally greeting a Chinese tour group at the airport; no matter that the group came from a city nearly 1,000 miles from Wuhan, far from the center of the outbreak. Malaysian media widely reported a Chinese couple's arrest after they had allegedly sneaked their child out of quarantine at a hospital despite showing symptoms; a video clip of their detention at the airport has gone viral. Even some fans of the hugely popular K-pop group BTS suggested on Twitter that Chinese nationals should be prohibited from the boy band's concert in Seoul scheduled for April, out of coronavirus concerns. The leaders of South Korea's main opposition party Tuesday urged the government to institute a ban on travel from China. South Korea's President Moon Jae-in on Thursday cautioned against succumbing to "fear and hatred" surrounding the epidemic. "We're not only up against the virus. We also need to stand firm against excessive anxiety and vague fears," he said. In the U.S. in 2014, several dozen members of Congress urged the Obama administration to impose bans on travel from three West African nations plagued by Ebola. No ban was enacted after public health officials and medical experts argued against it and urged calm. "It's only human to want to protect ourselves and our families," Tom Frieden, then-director of the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, wrote at the time. "But, as has been said, for every complex problem, there's a solution that's quick, simple and wrong. A travel ban is not the right answer." Ebola is transmitted between humans through direct contact with blood or bodily fluids. While the new virus is still being studied, similar coronaviruses in the past have spread through respiratory droplets released into the air when those infected sneeze or cough. Last week in Myeongdong, a shopping district in central Seoul popular with Chinese tourists, Chinese-language signs advertised hair treatments, beauty products and street food. A line snaked out the door of a pharmacy selling face masks; next door, a shop hawking K-pop albums and goods sat deserted. Cosmetics stores prominently displayed buy-one, get-one-free bottles of hand sanitizer in their shop windows. With efforts mounting to curtail travel, some businesspeople were expressing concerns about their bottom line. Clothing boutique operator Lee Hee-sook, 55, has weathered SARS and then MERS, which originated in the Middle East and plagued South Korea in 2015. But a travel ban now on Chinese tourists could be the last straw, she said. "It's selfish individuals thinking, I only care about my survival," she said. Most retailers, she said, "are barely hanging on, and this will destroy them." The brunt of the crisis will be borne by China's economy, which has all but ground to a halt and is expected to be slow to recover. Tourism officials elsewhere in Asia were also walking on eggshells. "We don't want Chinese tourists to feel unhappy or discriminated against. We also hope that Malaysians do not panic or misunderstand Chinese tourists," Malaysian Inbound Tourism Assn. President Uzaidi Udanis told reporters. "The Chinese market is very important for the domestic tourism sector." Indonesia's tourism minister also urged his countrymen to welcome Chinese tourists. Wolfgang Georg Arlt, chief executive of China Outbound Tourism Research Institute and a longtime consultant to governments and companies seeking to attract Chinese tourists, said any travel ban when the Chinese government was already taking drastic, proactive measures was probably excessive and disproportionate to the risk. Painting all Chinese tourists in a suspicious light could result in a backlash when tourism rebounds, he said. "If it's not worse than SARS, we'll have a three-month period where things are bad. After that it'll jump back," he said. "The Chinese government is taking unprecedented steps. ... I don't think from the Chinese point of view, they'd be happy if host governments top that." Caption: PHOTO: TOURISTS in masks visit Bangkok. Chinese spending overseas has far eclipsed that of other travelers, and many destinations rely on visitors from China. PHOTOGRAPHER:Lillian Suwanrumpha AFP/Getty Images 
Jan 31, 2020	The World Health Organization declared Thursday that the deadly outbreak fueled by a new coronavirus from China has become a global health emergency, citing fears that the microbe will soon reach smaller, poorer countries incapable of stemming its spread. The decision will probably make new resources available to health officials around the world who are battling a virus that has sickened more than 9,000 people on four continents and claimed at least 213 lives. It will also establish WHO's authority to lead the international response and strengthen the organization's hand in shaping the domestic decisions of its 194 member nations. WHO Director-General Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus said the organization is not recommending any measures that would limit travel or international trade. Those are some of the most potent tools at his agency's disposal, but they are not necessary at this time, he told reporters in Geneva.  Health experts who have been tracking the virus' spread said WHO's declaration was more than justified. "Declaring an emergency gives WHO the authority to make recommendations that are very influential," said Lawrence Gostin, an expert on public health law at Georgetown University. "It signals to the world this is a global crisis and we all need to come together to address it." But experts also acknowledged that WHO has no way to enforce its recommendations or to constrain the actions of members. Even with the new declaration, the agency will be able to do little more than cajole and exhort the international community to cooperate, and to guide the efforts of philanthropies active in public health efforts. Tedros took pains to reassure China that WHO's declaration implied no criticism of the country's actions, including the "extraordinary measures" it has taken to limit the spread of the novel coronavirus, known officially as 2019-nCoV. Among other things, the government ordered an unprecedented quarantine affecting 50 million people in 17 cities. "China is setting a new standard for outbreak response, and it's not an exaggeration," he said. Yet with the virus now present in 22 countries and territories, and with person-to-person transmission confirmed to have taken place in five countries besides China, the potential for it to cause mayhem in countries "with weaker public health systems" was Tedros' chief concern. "We must all act together now to limit further spread," he said. Researchers from China's leading public health agency calculated that the epidemic established itself by doubling in size every 7.4 days, according to a report published Wednesday in the New England Journal of Medicine. They also estimated that each person infected with the coronavirus passed it along to 2.2 others -- on par with the 1918 Spanish flu. An expert advisory committee debated for almost eight hours before recommending that WHO formally declare the outbreak a public health emergency of international concern. In doing so, the members recognized that the never-before-seen virus is spreading internationally, poses serious health threats, and could affect travel and trade. China first informed WHO about cases of the new virus in late December. Experts say there is significant evidence the virus is being transmitted among people in China and have noted with concern several instances in other countries -- including Japan, Germany, Canada, Vietnam, South Korea, France and most recently the U.S. -- where there have also been isolated cases of human-to-human spread. The spread of 2019-nCoV in Vietnam, a country with a rudimentary system in place to detect, track and isolate new infections, is particularly alarming to infectious disease experts. Tedros made clear that the declaration must galvanize the international community's efforts to help vulnerable countries fight the spread of coronavirus. "We must support countries with weaker health systems" by providing them with tests that can quickly identify and treat those infected, he said. And when a vaccine to prevent infection becomes available, those countries must gain access to them, he added. Dr. Tom Frieden, former director of the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, praised WHO for being realistic about the threat the outbreak presents. Thursday's action "matches the situation on the ground," he said. The decision is likely to help channel more money and manpower toward countries such as Cambodia, the Philippines, Malaysia, Nepal and Thailand, all of which have seen a small number of infections. Additional resources from nongovernmental organizations including Doctors Without Borders and charitable groups such as the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation could be extremely useful for governments struggling to bring in medical teams and identify infected persons, Gostin said. But WHO's direct influence is limited. It can't force member countries to adopt trade or travel restrictions, nor can it prevent them from taking overly aggressive steps limiting the movement of people or goods. "One sad truth about declaring an emergency is that it doesn't legally and technically grant WHO any enhanced powers or release any emergency funding," said Gostin, who added that such a crucial deficiency should be fixed. In its deliberations leading to Thursday's declaration, the WHO advisory committee relied on regulations adopted by the United Nations after the 2003 outbreak of severe acute respiratory syndrome, which sickened more than 8,000 people and caused 774 deaths. To declare an "emergency of international concern," the agency must find that an outbreak "constitutes a public health risk to other states through the international spread of disease," or that it poses a "significant risk of international travel or trade restrictions." A burgeoning Ebola epidemic in West Africa was designated a public health emergency of international concern in 2014 after the virus spread beyond its epicenter of Guinea, Sierra Leone and Liberia to seven other countries, including the United States. In 2016, the international agency did the same for the rapidly spreading Zika virus as the mosquito-borne pathogen marched across the Americas, causing miscarriages and birth defects when pregnant women were infected. Most recently, WHO declared a public health emergency in July as cases of Ebola mushroomed in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and spilled over into neighboring Uganda. But the agency declined on multiple occasions to give that status to an outbreak of Middle East respiratory syndrome, which is caused by a coronavirus that jumped from camels to humans. Though it sickened nearly 2,500 people in 27 countries and caused 858 deaths, WHO said travel and trade restrictions would not serve a public health purpose. -- The Associated Press contributed to this report. Caption: PHOTO: FUNERAL workers disinfect themselves after handling a coronavirus victim in Wuhan, China. The virus has sickened more than 9,000 people and killed 213. PHOTOGRAPHER:Chinatopix 
Jan 30, 2020	The World Health Organization declared Thursday that the deadly outbreak fueled by a new coronavirus from China has become a global health emergency, citing fears that the microbe will soon reach smaller, poorer countries incapable of stemming its spread. The decision will probably make new resources available to health officials around the world who are battling a virus that has sickened more than 9,770 people on four continents and claimed at least 213 lives. It will also establish WHO’s authority to lead the international response and strengthen the organization’s hand in shaping the domestic decisions of its 194 member nations. WHO Director-General Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus said the organization is not recommending any measures that would limit travel or international trade. Those are some of the most potent tools at his agency’s disposal, but they are not necessary at this time, he told reporters in Geneva. Health experts who have been tracking the virus’ spread said the WHO’s declaration was more than justified. “Declaring an emergency gives WHO the authority to make recommendations that are very influential,” said Lawrence Gostin, an expert on public health law at Georgetown University. “It signals to the world this is a global crisis and we all need to come together to address it.” But experts also acknowledged that WHO has no way to enforce its recommendations or to constrain the actions of members. Even with the new declaration, the agency will be able to do little more than cajole and exhort the international community to cooperate, and to guide the efforts of philanthropies active in public health efforts. Tedros took pains to reassure China that WHO’s declaration implied no criticism of the country’s actions, including the “extraordinary measures” it has taken to limit the spread of the novel coronavirus, known officially as 2019-nCoV. Among other things, the government ordered an unprecedented quarantine affecting 50 million people in 17 cities. “China is setting a new standard for outbreak response, and it’s not an exaggeration,” he said. Yet with the virus now present in 22 countries and territories, and with person-to-person transmission confirmed to have taken place in five countries besides China, the potential for it to cause mayhem in countries “with weaker public health systems” was Tedros’ chief concern. “We must all act together now to limit further spread,” he said. Researchers from China’s leading public health agency calculated that the epidemic established itself by doubling in size every 7.4 days, according to a report published Wednesday in the New England Journal of Medicine. They also estimated that each person infected with the coronavirus passed it along to 2.2 others — on par with the 1918 Spanish flu. An expert advisory committee debated for almost eight hours before recommending that WHO formally declare the outbreak a public health emergency of international concern. In doing so, the members recognized that the never-before-seen virus is spreading internationally, poses serious health threats, and could affect travel and trade. China first informed WHO about cases of the new virus in late December. Experts say there is significant evidence the virus is being transmitted among people in China and have noted with concern several instances in other countries — including Japan, Germany, Canada, Vietnam, South Korea, France and most recently the U.S. — where there have also been isolated cases of human-to-human spread. The spread of 2019-nCoV in Vietnam, a country with a rudimentary system in place to detect, track and isolate new infections, is particularly alarming to infectious disease experts. Tedros made clear that the declaration must galvanize the international community’s efforts to help vulnerable countries fight the spread of coronavirus. “We must support countries with weaker health systems” by providing them with tests that can quickly identify and treat those infected, he said. And when a vaccine to prevent infection becomes available, those countries must gain access to them, he added. Dr. Tom Frieden, former director of the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, praised WHO for being realistic about the threat the outbreak presents. Thursday’s action “matches the situation on the ground,” he said. The decision is likely to help channel more money and manpower toward countries such as Cambodia, the Philippines, Malaysia, Nepal and Thailand, all of which have seen a small number of infections. Additional resources from non-governmental organizations including Doctors Without Borders and charitable groups such as the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation could be extremely useful for governments struggling to bring in medical teams and identify infected persons, Gostin said. But WHO’s direct influence is limited. It can’t force member countries to adopt trade or travel restrictions, nor can it prevent them from taking overly aggressive steps limiting the movement of people or goods. “One sad truth about declaring an emergency is that it doesn’t legally and technically grant WHO any enhanced powers or release any emergency funding,” said Gostin, who added that such a crucial deficiency should be fixed. In its deliberations leading to Thursday’s declaration, the WHO advisory committee relied on regulations adopted by the United Nations after the 2003 outbreak of severe acute respiratory syndrome, which sickened more than 8,000 people and caused 774 deaths. To declare an “emergency of international concern,” the agency must find that an outbreak “constitutes a public health risk to other states through the international spread of disease,” or that it poses a “significant risk of international travel or trade restrictions.” A burgeoning Ebola epidemic in West Africa was designated a public health emergency of international concern in 2014, after the virus spread beyond its epicenter of Guinea, Sierra Leone and Liberia to seven other countries, including the United States. In 2016, the international agency did the same for the rapidly spreading Zika virus as the mosquito-borne pathogen marched across the Americas, causing miscarriages and birth defects when pregnant women were infected. Most recently, WHO declared a public health emergency in July as cases of Ebola mushroomed in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and spilled over into neighboring Uganda. But the agency declined on multiple occasions to give that status to an outbreak of Middle East respiratory syndrome, which is caused by another coronavirus that jumped from camels to humans. Though it sickened nearly 2,500 people in 27 countries and caused 858 deaths, WHO said travel and trade restrictions would not serve a public health purpose. The Associated Press contributed to this report. 
Jan 28, 2020	In recent days, in the largest quarantine effort in history, Wuhan city in China was put on lockdown and the Chinese government imposed wide-ranging restrictions on both domestic and foreign travel. The actions are aimed at containing a brand-new coronavirus called 2019-nCoV, which as of Monday had killed more than 80 people and sickened nearly 3,000 in China. But the quarantine's effectiveness is far from certain. Local transmission may be reduced, but the virus has already spread beyond China, with cases as far afield as Thailand, South Korea, Vietnam, Japan and the United States. And even if the quarantine is effective, it doesn't address the far bigger issue: How do we stop this from happening again?  The emergence of this new virus was predictable, even inevitable. To understand why requires looking back to an earlier virus that emerged in China, SARS. Like the new illness, SARS was caused by a coronavirus. In 2003, it exploded out of a "wet market" in Guangdong where civet cats, raccoon dogs and multitudes of other animals were caged together in tight, squalid conditions. It appears the new virus has similar origins. The initial victims were all connected to a huge wholesale market in Wuhan, where a thousand stalls housed untold numbers of live animals kept in crowded, filthy conditions. Such "wet markets" are widespread in China, providing a newly affluent upper class with status-enhancing exotic animals to serve at dinner. Some people also believe that eating wild animals has health benefits. The problem with the markets is that the unsanitary and tightly packed conditions in which the animals are held create perfect environments for the evolution of viruses that can jump from one species to another. The Chinese government shut down wet markets after the SARS outbreak, but that ban was short-lived. With SARS, the virus came initially from bats and then was passed, apparently, to civet cats and eventually to humans. Initial indications point to the new coronavirus, too, having come from bats, but it isn't yet known how it made its way to humans. Coronaviruses have proven themselves masters at jumping from one species to another, and how they affect each species can differ greatly. An infection hardly noticeable in a wild animal, perhaps a civet cat, may spread easily to the next cage, whether that cage houses more civets or another mammalian species. With coronaviruses, the jump from species to species appears to happen fairly easily. The massive poultry farms of Asia, which may house as many as 5 million chickens, present a different but also potentially lethal source of human infection. There, viruses such as influenza become highly adapted and, in crowded circumstances, ever more deadly to chickens, as there is no cost to the virus if it's lethal -- the next host is only a beak away. These virulent avian influenzas can and have killed people. But humans have to catch them directly from the birds. Because they have become so precisely adapted to chickens, the viruses have little potential for human-to-human transmission. The same evolutionary process can occur on massive pig farms, and can be even more dangerous to people, since people are more like pigs than like chickens. The deadly 2009 swine flu pandemic sprang out of one such massive pig farm in Veracruz, Mexico, where hundreds of pigs died in an outbreak that eventually moved into people. Caging different wild beasts together by the hundreds or thousands, as in a wet market, can produce a particularly dangerous environment for infectious diseases like coronaviruses. Not only is there an array of possible host species, but large numbers of humans are brought into close contact with the animals, too. With SARS, as well as the new coronavirus, it appears that the virus jumped first to the people working with these animals in the market, and then began another process of evolution, which allowed it to spread from human to human, adapting to its new host species and becoming more effective at that adaptation all the time. As a result of such evolution, we get brand-new human diseases like 2019-nCoV, which did not exist only months ago. It's too early to know what kind of threat the present virus poses. What's important is that we finally learn the right lesson. If we want to forestall the evolution of ever-newer, and possibly deadlier, human-adapted viruses, live animal markets must be permanently shut down. Until the Chinese government outlaws these markets, until factory farms housing millions of animals are eliminated, until we take the inevitable logic of disease evolution into account, novel, and potentially deadly, human diseases will continue to arise. Again. And again. And again.  Credit: Wendy Orent is the author of "Plague: The Mysterious Past and Terrifying Future of the World's Most Dangerous Disease" and "Ticked: The Battle Over Lyme Disease in the South." 
Jan 27, 2020	Health officials confirmed California's first two cases of the new strain of coronavirus in Los Angeles and Orange counties Sunday, brought by travelers who came from the epicenter of the outbreak in Wuhan, China. In both counties, the virus infecting the two individuals was the same strain as the one that has spread to more than 2,700 people in 14 countries and territories and caused 80 deaths since it was discovered late last month in central China. Three other cases have been diagnosed in the U.S., one each in Arizona, Washington state and Chicago. In L.A. County, the infected person was a returning traveler from Wuhan who is receiving medical treatment at a hospital, officials said.  The Orange County patient is in good condition and is in isolation at a hospital, health officials said. In both counties, health authorities are following up with anyone who has had close contact with the patients, but they noted that casual contact with an infected person -- such as visiting the same grocery store or movie theater -- carries only "minimal risk of developing infection." "The risk of local transmission remains low," officials said. The L.A. County patient is a Wuhan resident who was on a return flight to China with a layover at Los Angeles International Airport on Wednesday when he alerted officials that he was feeling ill, L.A. County public health officials said during a news conference Sunday. "The infected person presented themselves immediately for care at LAX airport once they noticed they weren't feeling well," said L.A. County public health director Dr. Barbara Ferrer. The patient was taken from LAX directly to a hospital, Ferrer said. The Arizona case, which was also announced Sunday, was a Maricopa County resident who health officials described as "a member of the Arizona State University community" but who did not live in university housing. The patient had recently returned from a trip to Wuhan, health officials said. The patient was not severely ill and was being kept in isolation, the Arizona Department of Health Services and Maricopa County Department of Public Health said. Officials were working to identify and reach out to people who might have been exposed to the virus while the patient was contagious, officials said. The new strain of coronavirus, known as 2019-nCoV, can cause respiratory illness and pneumonia. It was originally thought to be spreading only from animals to people in central China, but there are now indications it is also spreading among people. The virus can lead to symptoms including fever, coughing and shortness of breath, and in extreme cases it can be fatal. Most of the dozens of deaths tied to the coronavirus to date have been in the central Chinese province of Hubei, of which Wuhan is the capital. Most of the dead were at least 50 years old with underlying medical problems or weakened immune systems, Chinese officials said. But a 36-year-old man succumbed to the coronavirus last week, and a healthcare worker also was reported to be among the fatalities. Health experts in the United States have said that there is no evidence to suggest the new coronavirus is any more virulent than the flu. But because this strain of coronavirus is new, health officials are on high alert, and researchers will have to start from square one in creating a vaccine, which will probably take years to develop. Coronaviruses include a large variety of viruses -- the common cold as well as those that caused Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome (SARS) and Middle East Respiratory Syndrome (MERS). SARS and MERS sickened thousands of people around the world and caused hundreds of deaths. It is too soon to tell how the new strain compares to coronaviruses that fueled the previous epidemics, experts said. "I think that there are important unanswered questions about this outbreak," said Anne W. Rimoin, an epidemiologist at the UCLA Fielding School of Public Health and director of the UCLA Center for Global and Immigrant Health. "We don't know how easily people transmit the virus or how ill it can make otherwise healthy people. We just don't know the true risks posed by this new virus, and these are the questions that will need to be answered." As of Friday, 18 people between the ages of 3 and 58 had been tested for the virus in California, according to the state Department of Public Health. They included a traveler who arrived at Los Angeles International Airport on a flight from Mexico City and was taken to a hospital early Thursday for an evaluation. L.A. County public health officials could not confirm whether the Mexico City traveler was the same one with the virus. "We're working very closely with LAX; we have staff stationed at the quarantine station," said Dr. Sharon Balter, director of the L.A. County Public Health Department's Acute Communicable Disease Control program. "All travelers who are arriving from China are being screened.... [LAX officials] call us immediately if they think anybody needs to be tested and then they work with our staff ... to get them to a hospital that's appropriate to test them, and everything went as one would expect in this case." Dr. Sonia Angell, director of the California Department of Public Health, said in a statement Sunday that the immediate health risk to the general public in California is low, but "the California Department of Public Health has been preparing for this situation by working closely with local health departments and health care providers." Healthcare workers who treat anyone with this kind of infectious disease should make sure they wash their hands after contact and consider wearing protective eye gear, officials said. At Orange County Global Medical Center and Regional Trauma Center, patients who come in with respiratory symptoms are given masks, and an infectious disease specialist regularly consults with the staff to provide education about what to look for when performing triage, said Dr. Vu Huynh, medical director of emergency services. If a patient is suspected to be infected with coronavirus, staffers have been instructed to quarantine them in an isolated room and contact the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention so a special series of tests can be performed, Huynh said. So far, the hospital has had one patient tested, and the results came back negative, he said. Still, the staff is prepared to see more cases of the virus. "There could have been a lot of cases that weren't caught at the beginning, and maybe those patients traveled," Huynh said. "With Southern California being a multicultural area, I think there's more risk." Though the U.S. has not seen a major outbreak, the virus has spread widely across Asia in the last month. China's health minister said the country was entering a "crucial stage" as "it seems like the ability of the virus to spread is getting stronger." As the spread of the virus continued to accelerate and fears intensified, two of Hong Kong's biggest attractions, Hong Kong Disneyland and Ocean Park, announced they were closing for the time being. The Asian Football Confederation said it was moving an Olympic qualifying event scheduled to start Feb. 3 from Nanjing to Sydney, Australia, and the International Tennis Federation moved a regional Fed Cup qualifying event from Dongguan to Kazakhstan next month. Beijing said it would delay the start of classes for all schools, from kindergarten to universities, until after the Lunar New Year holiday ends this week. In the Hong Kong suburb of Fanling, protesters set fire to the lobby of a building in an unoccupied public housing complex where officials had proposed quarantining suspected coronavirus cases. The fire was extinguished, and no major damage was reported. Also on Sunday, Chinese authorities announced a temporary ban on the trade of wild animals and warned the public against eating wild animal meat. No wildlife can be transported or sold in any markets or online, according to text of the announcement in state media, and officials said they will "severely investigate and punish" violators. The pneumonia-like illnesses from the newly identified coronavirus first appeared last month in Wuhan, where most of the early victims said they had visited a large seafood and live animal market. Other cases have been reported in Japan, South Korea and Thailand. Singapore, Vietnam and Hong Kong reported their first cases Thursday. The State Department announced Sunday morning that it will relocate personnel at the U.S. Consulate General in Wuhan to the U.S. via a single flight Tuesday from Wuhan to San Francisco. There is limited space for private American citizens on the flight, officials said. "Capacity is extremely limited; priority will be given to individuals at greater risk from coronavirus," the State Department said in a news statement. Canada reported its first case Saturday in Toronto. Officials said the man is in his 50s and recently flew from Wuhan to Guangzhou, China, and then on to Toronto on Thursday. The first coronavirus cases in Europe have also been confirmed, with three patients being treated in French hospitals. All three had recently traveled to China; they were reportedly doing well, officials said. The CDC is screening passengers on direct and connecting flights from Wuhan at five major airports in Atlanta, Chicago, New York, San Francisco and Los Angeles. Experts say that the U.S. is well equipped to deal with any possible outbreak and that it's important to remain calm. "Fear spreads a lot faster than the virus itself," Rimoin said. "We need to make sure that people do not have undue worry. We have a good public health system in place, and we've been preparing for this." -- Times staff writers Emily Baumgaertner in Los Angeles and Cindy Chang in Beijing contributed to this report. The Associated Press was used in compiling this report. Caption: PHOTO: VENDORS WEAR protective masks at a street market Sunday in Beijing amid the coronavirus outbreak. PHOTOGRAPHER:Kevin Frayer Getty Images PHOTO:A HEALTH worker checks the temperatures of passengers at a subway station in Beijing on Sunday. PHOTOGRAPHER:Betsy Joles Getty Images 
Jan 26, 2020	As Chinese President Xi Jinping issued a public warning Saturday of "serious" concerns over the deadly coronavirus outbreak, officials in the epicenter of Wuhan scrambled for more beds amid chaos at local hospitals, with the effects rippling across China and beyond. In Beijing, tourist attractions, including exhibitions at the Summer Palace and parts of the Great Wall, were closed indefinitely. Ice skating rinks popular with locals were also shut down. The U.S. State Department urged Americans not to travel to Wuhan, a city of 11 million in central China that has been under lockdown since Thursday, with all trains, buses and airplane flights suspended. Beginning Sunday, most private vehicle use was banned in downtown Wuhan and surrounding cities were also placed under lockdown.  Early Sunday, Chinese officials announced that the death toll from the virus, which is believed to have jumped from animals to humans at a seafood and wildlife market, has increased to 56 people, almost all in Hubei province, where Wuhan is the capital. Most of those who have died were elderly, but a 36-year-old man succumbed to the virus last week, and a healthcare worker was also reported among the fatalities. In total, the National Health Committee reported 1,979 confirmed cases in China, including 324 severe cases. The outbreak intensified as millions of Chinese were traveling for the Lunar New Year holiday, dampening celebrations around the country on Saturday. Earlier in the week, many Chinese had already gone to their hometowns to be with family or boarded planes for vacations abroad. Cases have been confirmed in South Korea, Japan and other locations in Asia, with Australia and Malaysia reporting their first cases Saturday. Most of the patients had recently been to Wuhan. Chinese travel agencies have been told to halt all group tours, the state-owned English-language China Daily newspaper reported, citing the China Assn. of Travel Services. In Hong Kong, city leader Carrie Lam said her government would raise its response to the highest emergency level and shutter primary and secondary schools for two more weeks beyond the coming week's Lunar New Year. Lam also said that direct flights and trains from Wuhan would be blocked. With five cases of the illness reported in Hong Kong, a marathon that was expected to draw 70,000 participants Feb. 9 was canceled, the South China Morning Post newspaper reported. Two cases have been diagnosed in the U.S., one in Washington state and one in Chicago. The Chicago patient is a woman in her 60s who had recently returned from Wuhan and had not had significant contact with anyone beyond her household, said Allison Arwady, commissioner of the Chicago Department of Public Health. The first coronavirus cases in Europe have also been confirmed, with three patients being treated in French hospitals. All three had recently traveled to China; they were doing well, according to officials. A leading infectious disease specialist treating two of the patients said the illness appears less serious than comparable previous outbreaks, such as the SARS epidemic that resulted in more than 800 deaths in 2003. A respiratory disease expert with the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention said she expected more coronavirus cases in the U.S., including among patients' close contacts and medical workers. But she said there was no need for Americans to panic. "Again, while there are many unknowns, CDC believes that the immediate risk to the American public continues to be low at this time, but that the situation continues to evolve rapidly," said Nancy Messonnier, director of the CDC's National Center for Immunization and Respiratory Diseases. Symptoms of the virus include fever, coughing and shortness of breath, with severe cases progressing to pneumonia. It is not clear how lethal the virus is or even whether it is as dangerous as the ordinary flu, which kills thousands of people every year in the U.S. The rapid increase in reported deaths and illnesses does not necessarily mean the situation is getting worse, experts cautioned, but could reflect better monitoring and reporting of the virus. After a slow start when the first cases were diagnosed in December, Chinese officials have sought to demonstrate a strong response to the outbreak -- unlike during SARS, when they downplayed the threat for months. On Saturday at a Communist Party Central Committee meeting to address the outbreak, Xi ordered officials at all levels of government to make it their top priority. "Life is of paramount importance. When an epidemic breaks out, a command is issued. It is our responsibility to prevent and control it," Xi said, describing the outbreak as "serious," according to the New China News Agency. Amid reports that patients with flu-like symptoms were being turned away from hospitals, about 450 military medical workers, as well as healthcare workers from other parts of the country who have volunteered to help, were arriving in Wuhan. Local officials ordered Wuhan hospitals to staff 24-hour clinics to examine people with fevers and pneumonia symptoms. More than 1,400 new beds have been added. A Wuhan city emergency command set up to address the outbreak announced Saturday that a second new hospital, with 1,300 beds, would be built within two months. State-run news media posted photos of the first hospital under construction, with swarms of bulldozers smoothing a dirt field. The Ministry of Commerce announced that 2 million protective masks would be sent to Wuhan. The ministry also ordered eggs, fish, beef, pork and other staples to be released into Wuhan from food reserve centers. The ministry also asked that supermarkets, pharmacies and gas stations remain open, and that restaurants should provide food delivery to households. In Beijing, officials announced that temperature screenings would be held at subway stations. People returning to the city from the Wuhan area should quarantine themselves at home for 14 days, a city notice said. -- The Associated Press contributed to this report. Caption: PHOTO: A MEDICAL WORKER checks a patient in a Wuhan intensive care unit. The city has added more than 1,400 hospital beds, and clinics were staffed 24 hours. PHOTOGRAPHER:Xiong Qi New China News Agency 
Jan 26, 2020	The Los Angeles area is bracing for the new strain of coronavirus, which has spread to at least 2,019 people in 14 countries and territories since it was discovered late last month in central China. "While we have had no cases yet, it is likely we will see some, and we are ready," Dr. Sonia Angell, director of the California Department of Public Health, said in a video released this week. As of Friday, 18 people between the ages of 3 and 58 had been tested for the virus in California, according to the state Department of Public Health. They included a traveler who arrived at Los Angeles International Airport on a flight from Mexico City and was taken to a hospital early Thursday for an evaluation.  Angell said the immediate health risk to the public in California is low, based on current information, but the department is carefully monitoring the virus and considers it "a serious public health concern." So far, only two people have tested positive for the virus in the United States -- a man in Washington state and a woman in Illinois. Though the U.S. has not seen a major outbreak, the virus has spread widely in Asia in the last month, killing at least 56 people and sickening nearly 2,000 more in China, officials there say. In China, the pneumonia-like illnesses from the newly identified coronavirus first appeared last month in Wuhan, an industrial and transportation hub in central China's Hubei province. Other cases have been reported in Japan, South Korea and Thailand. Singapore, Vietnam and Hong Kong reported their first cases Thursday. Last week, federal authorities announced that passengers flying from Wuhan into LAX, San Francisco International Airport and John F. Kennedy International Airport in New York would be examined for the virus' symptoms. Though the coronavirus hasn't yet arrived in California, it has affected travel agencies at a time when they typically do a brisk business. "Today is the first day of the Chinese New Year, but no one is here to go back to China," Albert Eng, owner of Chosen Travel in Monterey Park, said Saturday. 
Jan 24, 2020	As Chinese officials take unprecedented measures to contain the spread of a new respiratory virus of unknown potency, 21 million people at the epicenter of the outbreak are under quarantine and Lunar New Year celebrations around the country have been canceled. Despite the health crisis, millions of people have traveled to their hometowns or abroad for the holiday and will eventually return to urban areas, heightening concerns that the coronavirus, which has killed 25 people and radiated a sense of unease around the world, will take root beyond the central Chinese province of Hubei. The historic Forbidden City, a marquee tourist attraction in Beijing, was temporarily closed. In Wuhan, a city of 11 million where the outbreak appears to have originated at a seafood and wildlife market, all air, train and bus transportation ground to a halt, with six surrounding cities under similar quarantines. Surgical masks were mandatory when venturing into public, but supplies were running out, trapping people in their homes.  On Thursday, the World Health Organization stopped short of declaring the outbreak a global health emergency, citing the small number of cases outside China and the strong efforts by the Chinese government to curb the spread. The decision "should not be taken as a sign that WHO does not think the situation is serious or that we're not taking it seriously. Nothing could be further from the truth," WHO Director General Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus said. "WHO is following this outbreak every minute of every day." Stemming the spread of the coronavirus is a crucial test for Chinese President Xi Jinping, who has consolidated his power domestically amid growing tensions with the U.S. over trade and other issues. In 2002 and 2003, China was slow to respond to the SARS virus, which killed nearly 800 people, affected 8,000 and spread to more than a dozen countries. The coronavirus disrupted one of the largest holiday migrations in the world, leaving many Chinese stranded with suitcases while scrolling for news updates. On the social media platform Weibo, Wuhan residents described living in a state of siege, with dwindling food supplies at home and fears that running out of surgical masks would prevent them from going out. "Three people are in our family. All we have left are two small baby cabbages, two tomatoes, two potatoes, two pounds of meat, six eggs, one pound of frozen dumplings and five bags of instant noodles," wrote a Wuhan resident. "Got to hold up for at least three days, and hopefully things will get better.... The main thing is we can't get any masks, so we are afraid of going out." So far, most patients stricken with the pneumonia-like illness have had connections to Wuhan. Most of the 25 deaths occurred in Hubei province, and most of those who died were older than 50. More than 600 cases have been confirmed, mostly in Hubei but also in Beijing, Shanghai and other parts of China, as well as Thailand, Japan, Taiwan and South Korea. A case has been reported in Washington state, and a traveler from Mexico arriving at Los Angeles International Airport was taken to a hospital early Thursday for evaluation. Much is still unknown about the previously unseen coronavirus, which has a crown-like shape under a microscope and was initially transmitted from animals to humans. The coronavirus family includes SARS. Chinese health officials said this week that they are still determining the severity of the illness and its contagiousness, though they believe it can be transmitted from person to person, with healthcare workers included among the cases. They also do not know what animal from the seafood market was the initial host of the disease, with preliminary research pointing to snakes or bats. Linfa Wang, a virologist at Duke-National University of Singapore who recently visited Wuhan, said he could not think of a time when a large city had been shut down to contain a virus whose lethality has not yet been established. "The Chinese government is absolutely taking the most draconian measure," said Wang, who helped identify bats as the animal hosts of SARS. "But with Chinese New Year coming and the lessons learned from SARS, it's better to overreact than underreact." City and provincial officials have drawn criticism for being slow to respond when the virus emerged in December and anxiety spread from the provinces to the nation's capital. But Xi set a new tone this week by calling for transparency in releasing information and stressing cooperation with international authorities. Experts said the Chinese government has learned from its poor performance during SARS, when officials withheld information and initially did not take strong action to combat the disease. Dali Yang, a political science professor at the University of Chicago, said local Chinese officials initially downplayed the new coronavirus and might have lost crucial time in warning the public. The detention in early January of eight people who commented online about the coronavirus marked an initial attempt to clamp down on internet rumors, he said. "People had already gotten on the road. A day's difference is a big difference," Yang said. "And this was not just one day or two days." But he said Xi's statement signals to local officials that they must take decisive action, including being open with the public. "If this pandemic is controlled, his intervention would be seen as a success," Yang said of Xi. "If it's not controlled, it will have a major impact on the economy." The Chinese government has responded by immediately notifying WHO and sharing the genomic sequence of the virus, said Nicholas David Thomas, an associate professor at City University of Hong Kong. Thomas called the government reaction a "sea change" from SARS. This time, officials are quickly working to contain the outbreak as well as to convince Chinese citizens that vital information is being shared, knowing that much is at stake. "Health issues involve regime legitimacy," Thomas said. "Not-so-successful reforms can feed into, 'Can we actually trust the government to tell us about it?' The response has been good." Thomas predicted that viral outbreaks like this one could become a "new normal" in China, as increasing demand for meat, coupled with increasing urbanization, means more close contact between animals and humans. China's aging population also means that new viruses will take a deadlier toll than in a younger population, he said. In Wuhan after the quarantine was imposed Thursday, people rushed to stock up on surgical masks but were limited to one. Hubei provincial officials announced plans to build a five-acre hospital to handle the increased patient load. Chinese television showed hospital workers in white protective suits and goggles facing crowds of patients. But reports circulated on Weibo that patients with flu-like symptoms were being turned away at hospitals. "Doctors say there are only several dozen beds, and the only way to free up beds is when someone dies," one person wrote. During a normally joyful holiday -- often the only time of the year that extended families are all in one place -- people spoke of hoarding food instead of feasting on freshly made delicacies. There was resentment and tension. One person on Weibo alluded to negative comments about Wuhan by people from other regions. "We are living in a closed city. We can't buy necessities from supermarkets. Vegetables are super expensive, we can't buy masks anywhere, and we have to welcome the new year with instant noodles," the person wrote. "Even in this condition, we are still holding up, yet we have to face hatred from you guys." -- Times staff writer David Pierson in Singapore contributed to this report. Caption: PHOTO: A DRIVER'S TEMPERATURE is taken at a highway checkpoint Thursday in Wuhan, China, a city of 11 million where the coronavirus appears to have originated. Experts see President Xi Jinping's responses as a sign of progress since the SARS outbreak of 2002 and 2003. PHOTOGRAPHER:Chinatopix P: GRAPHIC: MAP: Coronavirus cases CREDIT:Los Angeles Times 
Jan 22, 2020	A man in Washington state has been sickened by the new coronavirus spreading through Asia, marking the first confirmed case in the United States, experts from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention announced Tuesday. The patient, a resident of Snohomish County, Wash., recently returned to the United States after visiting the region around Wuhan, China, the epicenter of the outbreak. Once inside the U.S., he began to experience pneumonia-like symptoms and notified his doctor about his travel history. Test results for the virus returned positive over the weekend. The man, who is in his 30s, was transported to Providence Regional Medical Center in Everett, where he is being monitored and is in good condition, officials said.  Chinese officials said that at least 440 cases had been reported as of early Wednesday, most of them in Wuhan and surrounding Hubei province, where nine have died. Officials have also identified 21 cases in Beijing, Shanghai and southern Guangdong province. Additional cases of infected patients have been confirmed in South Korea, Japan and Thailand, according to the Chinese government. And Taiwan's disease surveillance officials said Tuesday that one traveler to Wuhan had returned sickened with the virus. The patient in Everett is the only known case outside of Asia, and he represents the farthest spread of the novel coronavirus. "We do expect additional cases in the U.S. and globally," said Dr. Nancy Messonnier, director of the CDC's National Center for Immunization and Respiratory Diseases. At the same time, public health officials emphasized that the virus posed a low risk to the American public, and that it was unlikely to spread widely here. Chinese health officials initially said that most patients infected in Wuhan were exposed to live animals in a large seafood market, suggesting that the virus jumped from another species into humans and may not spread directly from person to person. But the Washington state patient, along with several others, said he had not visited the market. On Monday, Zhong Nanshan, a Chinese government scientist, announced on Chinese state television that the virus can be transmitted between humans. Even before that development, health officials were concerned that the virus would spread more widely as travel picks up for the Lunar New Year. Airline passengers arriving from the outbreak region are already being screened for the virus' pneumonia-like symptoms at L.A. International Airport, San Francisco International Airport and New York's John F. Kennedy International Airport. The CDC said it would begin monitoring travelers at Chicago's O'Hare International Airport and Hartsfield-Jackson Atlanta International Airport this week. The Washington state patient entered the country before any of those screenings were implemented. But even if they had been in place, he would not have been detected because he was asymptomatic at the time, experts said. "Leave no doubt: Entry screening is just one part of a multilayered system," said Dr. Martin Cetron, the head of the CDC's Division of Global Migration and Quarantine. "Individuals are empowered to make good decisions if they're informed." Experts said increased airport screenings will be expensive, and that it will take some time to get answers to basic questions like what animal was the source of this virus and what makes some people more susceptible to infection than others. "Basic epidemiology questions remain unanswered," said Rebecca Katz, director of the Center for Global Health Science and Security at Georgetown University. "The CDC is the best of the best, and we should have faith in their leadership." Officials have begun to trace the Washington man's contacts from China to his home in the U.S. in order to identify other people who may be infected, said Dr. Scott Lindquist, a communicable disease epidemiologist at the Washington State Department of Health. Caption: PHOTO: TRAVELERS wear masks at a Beijing railway station this week. Chinese officials have reported at least 440 cases of a new coronavirus, including nine deaths. PHOTOGRAPHER:Mark Schiefelbein Associated Press 
Jan 22, 2020	As millions of Chinese people jam onto trains and planes, headed to their hometowns and overseas for the Lunar New Year in the world's biggest annual mass migration, fears are growing that a new respiratory coronavirus could spread. Chinese health authorities said Wednesday morning that the number of people killed by the outbreak had increased to nine and the number of cases had reached 440 since illnesses from coronavirus were reported in December. All the deaths occurred in Hubei province, whose capital, Wuhan, is the epicenter of the outbreak, officials said. Li Bin, deputy director of the National Health Commission, told reporters that Japan and South Korea had confirmed one case each and Thailand three. The U.S. and Taiwan also confirmed one case each on Tuesday.  The outbreak began at a seafood and live animal market in Wuhan that sold bats, cats, marmots and other wild animals in addition to fish, according to public health officials. Most early patients were linked to the market, where the virus is believed to have jumped from animals to humans. The confirmation of cases in other parts of China and beyond raised the specter of an outbreak on the scale of the SARS virus, which killed nearly 800 people and sickened about 8,000 in 2003, mostly in Asia. In South Korea, a 35-year-old woman from Wuhan tested positive for the virus, called 2019-nCoV, one day after arriving at Seoul's Incheon International Airport. With China's expanding wealth, air travel by its citizens has become increasingly common. Some use the time off from work around the New Year holiday to go abroad, forgoing the more traditional pilgrimage home. Airports around the world are on alert. Travelers from Wuhan arriving at Los Angeles International Airport, San Francisco International Airport and New York's John F. Kennedy International Airport are being screened, including filling out questionnaires and having their temperatures taken, said the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, which has deployed about 100 additional staff members to the three airports. Those with symptoms of the virus, which include fever, cough and difficulty breathing, will undergo additional health assessments, the agency said. In Singapore, travelers arriving from China are being screened for fever. A 44-year-old Singaporean woman who had been to Wuhan was found to have pneumonia and was being treated and tested for coronavirus in an isolation ward -- the seventh suspected case of the virus in Singapore. The CDC said on its website that much about the virus remains unclear, from the severity of the illness to how it spreads. The risk to Americans remains low, the agency said, but officials are taking "proactive preparedness precautions." In some cases, the virus can cause pneumonia, severe acute respiratory syndrome, kidney failure and death. Coronaviruses have a crown-like appearance under a microscope and are characterized by transmission from animals to humans. Some are no more serious than the common cold, while others can be deadly. On Monday, a respiratory disease expert with the Chinese government said cases of human-to-human transmission had been confirmed, raising the possibility that the virus could spread rapidly. Some medical workers have also tested positive for the virus, the English-language China Daily newspaper reported. In addition to those in Wuhan, five people in Beijing, two in Shanghai and 14 in the southern province of Guangdong have been diagnosed with the new virus, according to Chinese health authorities. Most had ties to Wuhan, while two in Guangdong had close contact with other patients. Chinese President Xi Jinping said that prevention and control of the outbreak is crucial, particularly because of the massive flow of Lunar New Year travelers. Xi ordered maximum efforts to treat patients, identify the causes of the infection and its spread, strengthen monitoring and standardize treatments, according to the state-run New China News Agency. Xi also said information should be released in a timely manner, and he stressed the importance of international cooperation. Officials in Wuhan are restricting the flow of people leaving the city, Foreign Ministry spokesman Geng Shuang said at a news conference on Monday. At Beijing's West Station on Tuesday, railway travelers dragged heavy suitcases, bound for destinations across the country to celebrate the arrival of the new year on Saturday. Some said they were not worried about the virus. "It's not close to here," said a 26-year-old factory worker who gave only his surname, Wang, on his way to his hometown of Xian. Wang wore a light blue surgical mask, saying he had a cold that he did not want to give to others. Wang Pao, 35, who works in the service industry, said he had donned a gray surgical mask for his journey to Hebei province as a precaution against catching the virus. He said he feared it would spread with the millions of journeys taken during the holiday period. "It's the new year, so people are traveling all over the country," he said. Near a bank of automated ticket dispensers, a man in a white mask said the virus could easily take root in Beijing. The man's friend Hu Qihao, wearing a black mask, said he also was uneasy about the virus. The two were headed to nearby Hebei province on the slow train, which would take four hours -- but at least they had bought reserved seats. "Beijing already has cases of the pneumonia," said Hu, 21, who works at a liquor store. Taiwan on Tuesday reported its first confirmed case of the virus, brought in by a Taiwanese woman who was recently in Wuhan, according to the island's Central News Agency. Memories of the SARS outbreak, which killed nearly 40 people on the island, are still fresh, said Lee Chun-yi, a legislator representing parts of the southern city of Tainan. About 850,000 Taiwanese live in mainland China, government figures show, with many typically returning home to spend the New Year holiday with family. North Korea had stopped receiving foreign tourists as of Wednesday as a precaution against the virus, according to China-based tour operator Young Pioneer Tours. -- Times staff writers David Pierson in Singapore, Victoria Kim in Seoul, special correspondent Ralph Jennings in Taipei, Taiwan, and the Associated Press contributed to this report. Caption: PHOTO: WITH THE Lunar New Year arriving Saturday, millions of Chinese will be traveling amid the coronavirus outbreak. Above, travelers at a Beijing railway station. PHOTOGRAPHER:Mark Schiefelbein Associated Press 
Jan 21, 2020	As millions of Chinese people jam onto trains and planes, headed to their hometowns and overseas for the Lunar New Year in the world’s biggest annual mass migration, fears are growing that a new respiratory coronavirus could spread. Chinese health authorities said Wednesday morning that the number of people killed by the outbreak had increased to nine and the number of cases had reached 440 since illnesses from coronavirus were reported in December. All the deaths occurred in Hubei province, whose capital, Wuhan, is the epicenter of the outbreak, officials said. Li Bin, deputy director of the National Health Commission, told reporters that Japan and South Korea had confirmed one case each and Thailand three. The U.S. and Taiwan also confirmed one case each on Tuesday. The outbreak began at a seafood and live animal market in Wuhan that sold bats, cats, marmots and other wild animals in addition to fish, according to public health officials. Most early patients were linked to the market, where the virus is believed to have jumped from animals to humans. The confirmation of cases in other parts of China and beyond raised the specter of an outbreak on the scale of the SARS virus, which killed nearly 800 people and sickened about 8,000 in 2003, mostly in Asia. In South Korea, a 35-year-old woman from Wuhan tested positive for the virus, called 2019-nCoV, one day after arriving at Seoul’s Incheon International Airport. With China’s expanding wealth, air travel by its citizens has become increasingly common. Some use the time off from work around the New Year holiday to go abroad, forgoing the more traditional pilgrimage home. Airports around the world are on alert. Travelers from Wuhan arriving at Los Angeles International Airport, San Francisco International Airport and New York’s John F. Kennedy International Airport are being screened, including filling out questionnaires and having their temperatures taken, said the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, which has deployed about 100 additional staff members to the three airports. Those with symptoms of the virus, which include fever, cough and difficulty breathing, will undergo additional health assessments, the agency said. In Singapore, travelers arriving from China are being screened for fever. A 44-year-old Singaporean woman who had been to Wuhan was found to have pneumonia and was being treated and tested for coronavirus in an isolation ward — the seventh suspected case of the virus in Singapore. The CDC said on its website that much about the virus remains unclear, from the severity of the illness to how it spreads. The risk to Americans remains low, the agency said, but officials are taking “proactive preparedness precautions.” In some cases, the virus can cause pneumonia, severe acute respiratory syndrome, kidney failure and death. Coronaviruses have a crown-like appearance under a microscope and are characterized by transmission from animals to humans. Some are no more serious than the common cold, while others can be deadly. On Monday, a respiratory disease expert with the Chinese government said cases of human-to-human transmission had been confirmed, raising the possibility that the virus could spread rapidly. Some medical workers have also tested positive for the virus, the English-language China Daily newspaper reported. In addition to those in Wuhan, five people in Beijing, two in Shanghai and 14 in the southern province of Guangdong have been diagnosed with the new virus, according to Chinese health authorities. Most had ties to Wuhan, while two in Guangdong had close contact with other patients. Chinese President Xi Jinping said that prevention and control of the outbreak is crucial, particularly because of the massive flow of Lunar New Year travelers. Xi ordered maximum efforts to treat patients, identify the causes of the infection and its spread, strengthen monitoring and standardize treatments, according to the state-run New China News Agency. Xi also said information should be released in a timely manner, and he stressed the importance of international cooperation. Officials in Wuhan are restricting the flow of people leaving the city, Foreign Ministry spokesman Geng Shuang said at a news conference on Monday. At Beijing’s West Station on Tuesday, railway travelers dragged heavy suitcases, bound for destinations across the country to celebrate the arrival of the new year on Saturday. Some said they were not worried about the virus. “It’s not close to here,” said a 26-year-old factory worker who gave only his surname, Wang, on his way to his hometown of Xian. Wang wore a light blue surgical mask, saying he had a cold that he did not want to give to others. Wang Pao, 35, who works in the service industry, said he had donned a gray surgical mask for his journey to Hebei province as a precaution against catching the virus. He said he feared it would spread with the millions of journeys taken during the holiday period. “It’s the new year, so people are traveling all over the country,” he said. Near a bank of automated ticket dispensers, a man in a white mask said the virus could easily take root in Beijing. The man’s friend Hu Qihao, wearing a black mask, said he also was uneasy about the virus. The two were headed to nearby Hebei province on the slow train, which would take four hours — but at least they had bought reserved seats. “Beijing already has cases of the pneumonia,” said Hu, 21, who works at a liquor store. Taiwan on Tuesday reported its first confirmed case of the virus, brought in by a Taiwanese woman who was recently in Wuhan, according to the island’s Central News Agency. Memories of the SARS outbreak, which killed nearly 40 people on the island, are still fresh, said Lee Chun-yi, a legislator representing parts of the southern city of Tainan. About 850,000 Taiwanese live in mainland China, government figures show, with many typically returning home to spend the New Year holiday with family. Chiu Cheng-hsun, a professor and physician in Linkou Chang Gung Memorial Hospital’s pediatric respiratory department, said the island is vulnerable because of its proximity to China and the flow of business travelers and tourists to the mainland. “Given this kind of background, if prevention is not done well, Taiwan could be the first place to be hit,” he said. North Korea had stopped receiving foreign tourists as of Wednesday as a precaution against the virus, according to China-based tour operator Young Pioneer Tours. The vast majority of foreign tourists to North Korea come from China, a rare source of foreign currency for the isolated country that is not subject to international sanctions. Times staff writers David Pierson in Singapore, Victoria Kim in Seoul, special correspondent Ralph Jennings in Taipei, Taiwan, and the Associated Press contributed to this report. 
Jan 21, 2020	A man in Washington state has been sickened by the new coronavirus spreading through Asia, marking the first confirmed case in the United States, experts from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention announced Tuesday. The patient, a resident of Snohomish County, Wash., recently returned to the United States after visiting the region around Wuhan, China, the epicenter of the outbreak. Once inside the U.S., he began to experience pneumonia-like symptoms and notified his doctor about his travel history. Test results for the virus returned positive over the weekend. The man, who is in his 30s, was transported to Providence Regional Medical Center in Everett, where he is being monitored and is good condition, officials said. Chinese officials said that at least 440 cases had been reported as of early Wednesday, most of them in Wuhan and surrounding Hubei province, where nine have died. Officials have also identified 21 cases in Beijing, Shanghai and southern Guangdong province. Additional cases of infected patients have been confirmed in South Korea, Japan and Thailand, according to the Chinese government. And Taiwan’s disease surveillance officials said Tuesday that one traveler to Wuhan has returned sickened with the virus. The patient in Everett is the only known case outside of Asia, and he represents the farthest spread of the novel coronavirus. “We do expect additional cases in the U.S. and globally,” said Dr. Nancy Messonnier, director of the CDC’s National Center for Immunization and Respiratory Diseases. At the same time, public heath officials emphasized that the virus poses a low risk to the American public, and that it’s unlikely to spread widely here. Chinese health officials initially said that most patients infected with the virus in Wuhan were exposed to live animals in a large seafood market, suggesting that the virus jumped from another species into humans and may not spread directly from person to person. But the Washington state patient, along with several others, said he had not visited the market. On Monday, Zhong Nanshan, a Chinese government scientist, announced on Chinese state television that the virus can be transmitted between humans. Even before that development, public health officials were concerned that the virus would spread more widely as travel picks up for the Lunar New Year. Airline passengers arriving from the outbreak region are already being screened for the virus’ pneumonia-like symptoms at Los Angeles International Airport, San Francisco International Airport and John F. Kennedy International Airport in New York. The CDC said it would begin monitoring travelers at Chicago’s O’Hare International Airport and Hartsfield-Jackson Atlanta International Airport this week. The Washington state patient entered the country before any of those screenings were implemented. But even if they had been in place, he would not have been detected because he was asymptomatic at the time, experts said. “Leave no doubt: Entry screening is just one part of a multilayered system,” said Dr. Martin Cetron, the head of the CDC’s Division of Global Migration and Quarantine. “Individuals are empowered to make good decisions if they’re informed.” Outside experts cautioned that the increased airport screenings will be expensive, and that it will take some time to get answers to basic questions like what animal was the source of this virus and what makes some people more susceptible to infection than others. “Basic epidemiology questions remain unanswered,” said Rebecca Katz, the director of the Center for Global Health Science and Security at Georgetown University. “The CDC is the best of the best, and we should have faith in their leadership.” Officials have begun to trace the Washington man’s contacts from China to his home in the United States in order to identify other people who may be infected, said Dr. Scott Lindquist, a communicable disease epidemiologist at the Washington State Department of Health. 
