2020-03-13	From Washington to Madrid, politicians across the globe have been exposed to the novel coronavirus.  British Prime Minister Boris Johnson is the first major world leader to publicly acknowledge having COVID-19. He recovered after spending time in intensive care. Not long afterward, Johnson, 55, became a new father.  Here's our watch list of presidents, prime ministers and supreme leaders who have been tested or may be at risk for infection.  Israel's Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu  Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu self-isolated after an aide tested positive for the virus. His office said the 70-year-old leader took a test and remained in quarantine until he was cleared by Israel's Health Ministry and his personal doctor. Netanyahu's test was negative after Israel's health minister tested positive for the virus.  German Chancellor Angela Merkel  German Chancellor Angela Merkel tested negative for the new coronavirus, her spokesman said on March 23. The German leader went into self-isolation after she came into contact with a doctor who has tested positive for coronavirus, her spokesperson told German media outlets on March 22.  The Associated Press reported that Merkel had received a vaccination from the doctor.  U.S. President Donald Trump  President Donald Trump has tested negative for the novel coronavirus, the White House announced on March 14. During a press briefing earlier that day, Trump said he had been tested for the virus following interactions with two Brazilian officials who later tested positive.  The president’s physician, Sean P. Conley, said in a memo released by the White House that Trump decided to get tested after they conferred about the matter.  Trump had contact with at least two infected individuals: Fabio Wajngarten, the communications secretary for Brazil's President Jair Bolsanaro, and Brazil's charge d'affairs, Nestor Forster.  Both men were with Trump at his Florida resort, Mar-a-Lago. Both Wajngarten and Forster have since tested positive for COVID-19.  Brazil's President Jair Bolsonaro said he has also tested negative for COVID-19.  On April 2, Trump announced he'd tested negative again and the White House is now testing people expected to be in close proximity to either Trump or Vice President Mike Pence.  Vice President Mike Pence  Vice President Mike Pence his wife Karen Pence were tested on March 21 for the coronavirus after a Pence staffer tested positive. Both tests were negative.  Spain's Prime Minister Pedro Sanchez  Prime Minister Pedro Sanchez's wife tested positive for the new coronavirus, Spain's government announced on March 15. Begoña Gómez and the prime minister are both in good health, the government said at the time. Gómez has since recovered.  Two members of Sanchez’s cabinet, the minister of equality and the minister of regional affairs, have also tested positive. Other members of the cabinet had tested negative.  Canadian Prime Minister Justin Trudeau  Canadian Prime Minister Justin Trudeau's wife, Sophie Grégoire Trudeau tested positive for coronavirus, according to Cameron Ahmad, communications director for the prime minister. She has recovered.  Prime Minister Trudeau spent 14 days in isolation as a precaution but did not develop symptoms of the disease. He was the first major world leader to go into quarantine.  More:Canadian Prime Minister Justin Trudeau's wife tests positive for coronavirus  Australian Prime Minister Scott Morrison  A senior cabinet member in Australia's government, Peter Dutton, was infected with coronavirus.  Australia's prime minister, Scott Morrison, has not been tested based on medical advice, according to Australian news reports.  Dutton was in Washington for meetings connected to the so-called Five Eyes security pact, an intelligence alliance comprising Australia, Canada, New Zealand, Britain and the U.S. A March 6 photo from that event shows Dutton standing next to Ivanka Trump, Attorney General William Barr and other White House officials.  More:Australian politician who met Ivanka Trump, Attorney General William Barr infected with coronavirus  Iran's Supreme Leader Ayatollah Ali Khamenei  Iran’s utmost authority for all domestic and foreign policy has seen several of his closest aides diagnosed with coronavirus.  Iran has the largest clusters of cases in the Middle East. It's not known whether Khamenei and Iran's President Hassan Rouhani have been tested.  But more than 10% of Iran's lawmakers have fallen ill with the disease and it has also not spared top officials, including its senior vice-president, Cabinet ministers, Revolutionary Guard members and health ministry officials.  Several lawmakers have died.  Recently, Khamenei has peddled an unsubstantiated conspiracy theory suggesting the country’s coronavirus outbreak could be part of a biological attack on the Islamic Republic.  Italian Prime Minister Giuseppe Conte  Italy is one of the hardest-hit countries in Europe.  At least one politician has publicly disclosed infection; Nicola Zingaretti, the leader of the country’s Democratic Party, said he tested positive.  Lockdown in Italy:My quarantine, a worried wait for a test result – and relief  “So, it’s arrived, I also have coronavirus,” he said in a Facebook post. “I am fine, and therefore I am in quarantine at home. From here, I’ll continue to do what I can do ... I have always said ‘don’t panic’ and that we will fight this.”  But there's no indication that Italy's prime minister, Giuseppe Conte, has contracted the disease.  Powerful chief of staff to Nigeria’s President Muhammadu Buhari  Abba Kyari died from complications related to coronavirus on April 17. Kyari was the trusted chief of staff to President Buhari and widely viewed as one of the most powerful people in Africa’s largest economy. It is not known if Buhari has been tested.  Russian Prime Minister Mikhail Mishustin  Mishustin confirmed he was infected with coronavirus on May 1.  "I have to observe self-isolation and follow orders of doctors," he said in a statement. "This is necessary to protect my colleagues."  Mishustin's prime minister role is considerably less powerful than Russian President Vladimir Putin's.  North Korea's leader Kim Jong Un  There are no officially confirmed coronavirus cases in North Korea. This is not because there aren't any but because the secretive nation has resisted calls to share its public health information.  When Kim Jong Un disappeared last month for more than two weeks there was speculation he could be hiding from the virus.  Grim milestone:Italy's coronavirus deaths surpass China's  Contributing: Associated Press
2020-03-23	The USA TODAY Fact Check team is dedicated to verifying claims and fighting misinformation. Here's a list of recent fact-checks related to coronavirus:  Where did coronavirus originate?  On coronavirus symptoms, preventions, treatments  On government response to coronavirus  On pandemics  On coronavirus impacts  On living through the coronavirus pandemic  This list will be updated regularly. Be sure to check back for the latest fact-checks on the COVID-19 pandemic.  Thank you for supporting our journalism. You can subscribe to our print edition, ad-free app or electronic newspaper replica here.  Our fact check work is supported in part by a grant from Facebook.
2020-04-14	AP  SEOUL, South Korea – A barrage of North Korean missiles fired from the ground and fighter jets splashed down on the waters off the country's east coast Tuesday, South Korea’s military said, a major show of force on the eve of a state anniversary in the North and parliamentary elections in the rival South.  The back-to-back launches were the most high-profile among a series of weapons tests that North Korea has conducted amid stalled nuclear talks and outside worries about a possible coronavirus outbreak in the country.  North Korean troops based in the eastern coastal city of Munchon first launched several projectiles – presumed to be cruise missiles – Tuesday morning, South Korea’s Joint Chiefs of Staff said in a statement.  In recent weeks, North Korea has test-launched a variety of missiles and other weapons amid deadlocked nuclear negotiations with the United States.  Tuesday’s launches came a day before North Korea marks the 108th birthday of North Korea’s late founder, Kim Il Sung, the grandfather of leader Kim Jong Un. South Korea holds parliamentary elections on the same day.  It's unusual for North Korea to launch cruise missiles. Most of the weapons it's tested were ballistic missiles or long-range artillery shells.  All the recently tested missiles were short-range and didn’t pose a direct threat to the U.S. mainland. A test of a missile capable of reaching the U.S. homeland would end North Korea’s self-imposed moratorium on major weapons tests and probably completely derail nuclear diplomacy with the United States.  North Korea has repeatedly said there has been no coronavirus outbreak on its soil. An outbreak could become a humanitarian disaster because of the North’s lack of medical supplies and its fragile health care infrastructure.
2020-04-17	Stan Choe, Damian J. Troise and Alex Veiga  The Associated Press  In Wall Street’s tug of war between hope and pessimism about the coronavirus pandemic, hope is pulling back. U.S. stocks joined a worldwide rally Friday and closed out their first back-to-back weekly gain since the market began selling off two months ago.  The S&P 500 jumped 2.7% Friday, following up on even bigger gains in Europe and Asia, as investors latched onto several strands of hope about progress in the fight against the coronavirus. They included the White House’s release of guidelines for states to reopen their economies and a very early but encouraging report on a possible treatment for COVID-19.  The S&P 500 rose 75.01 points to 2,874.56. The Dow Jones Industrial Average jumped 704.81, or 3%, to 24,242.49, and the Nasdaq added 117.78, or 1.4%, to 8,650.14.  The gains came even as scary data piled higher about the economic and human toll of the virus, which has killed more than 150,000 worldwide and forced the formerly high-flying Chinese economy to shrink a crunching 6.8% last quarter. A measure of leading economic indicators in the U.S. plunged last month by the most in its 60-year history, the latest in a string of similarly unprecedented data reports.  Behind on child support?:If so, you won't get a stimulus check  Student loans:Will I get a stimulus check if I defaulted on my student loans?  “There’s no clear path yet” on when the pandemic and the economic devastation it’s caused will end, said Lindsey Bell, chief investment strategist at Ally Invest.  That’s caused the stock market to cycle up, down and up again, sometimes in the same day, as it tries to set prices now for where corporate profits will be months in the future.  Optimists have been more forceful recently as they point to infections leveling off in some hard-hit areas. That raises the possibility that parts of the economy could reopen, even if it’s not tomorrow, and an eventual pickup in profits. Optimists are willing to look through all the economic damage in the near term, which is being mitigated somewhat by massive aid from the Federal Reserve and the U.S. government.  “Just having that light at the end of the tunnel is what people really want to see,” said J.J. Kinahan, chief market strategist at TD Ameritrade.  Pessimists say the recent rally for stocks has been overdone and point to the severe pain shocking the health care system and the economy. They say conditions are unlikely to get back to anything approximating “normal” soon. Even the unprecedented aid from the Fed and Congress won’t be nearly enough for households and businesses to weather a protracted downturn.  “We’re trying to bridge from the current state to the aftermath, and that bridge is just not long enough,” said Eric Freedman, chief investment officer at U.S. Bank Wealth Management. “That’s the bearish case, that consumers are impacted beyond what the policy can provide because the virus extends and people really hold off on making more expenditures.”  In a sign of a bit less caution in the market, Treasury yields ticked higher but remain extremely low. The yield on the 10-year Treasury rose to 0.64% from 0.61% late Thursday, though it remains well below the 1.90% level it was near at the start of the year. Bond yields drop when their prices rise, and investors tend to buy Treasurys when they’re worried about the economy.  ”The government can give the mandate to reopen the economy, but it’s going to be all about how comfortable consumers feel in going back to their workplace and how comfortable they feel about going back to restaurants or doing other activities around other people,” said Ally Invest’s Bell. “The best way for us to get any insight into that is to listen to what corporations say about how they’re going to bring back their workforce. Is it going to be at a 25% rate? A 50% rate?”  Investors could hear such commentary in upcoming weeks, with hundreds of CEOs scheduled to discuss how badly their profits got hit by stay-at-home orders in the first three months of the year.  The market’s gains were widespread Friday, across all 11 sectors that comprise the S&P 500. Energy producers and banks led the way, a sharp turnaround from their laggardly ways earlier in the week when worries about the economy were at the forefront.  The S&P 500 has more than halved its loss since February’s high. After being down as much as 34% in March, it’s rallied and is now down only about 15%.  In European trading, the CAC 40 in Paris rose 3.4%, while Germany’s DAX climbed 3.1%. Britain’s FTSE 100 added 2.8%.  Japan’s Nikkei 225 index jumped 3.1%, the Hang Seng in Hong Kong advanced 1.6% and South Korea’s Kospi leaped 3.1%.  India’s S&P BSE 100 rose 2.8% after the central bank cut its benchmark interest rate to help the stalled economy and ease financing troubles amid a nationwide lockdown to fight the pandemic.  “Human spirit is ignited by the resolve to curb the pandemic,” said Reserve Bank of India Gov. Shaktikanta Das. “It is during our darkest moments that we must focus on the light.”
2020-04-20	President Trump tweeted late Monday that he planned to temporarily suspend immigration to the U.S.  The president cited the need to protect jobs in light of “the attack from the Invisible Enemy,” a reference to the ongoing coronavirus pandemic.  "In light of the attack from the Invisible Enemy, as well as the need to protect the jobs of our GREAT American Citizens, I will be signing an executive order to temporarily suspend immigration into the United States!” Trump tweeted.  President Trump said he would be enacting the change in policy by signing an executive order. There were no more details about the plan, which would almost certainly face legal challenges.  The rapid spread of the virus — which in mere months has generated almost 2.5 million documented cases globally, about a third of which are in the U.S. — has prompted the administration to enact travel restrictions from most of Europe as well as China, Canada, Iran, Mexico and South Korea.  The announcement drew a swift reply from Democratic Texas congressman Joaquin Castro, who tweeted that "the action is not only an attempt to divert attention away from Trump’s failure to stop the spread of the coronavirus and save lives, but an authoritarian-like move to take advantage of a crisis and advance his anti-immigrant agenda. We must come together to reject his division."  Over the past weeks of the crisis, which has seen many states shut down, the administration has made moves to clamp down on asylum seekers and immigrants seeking entry into the country.  Critics contend that Trump is using the crisis, which has killed more than 42,000 Americans and paralyzed the economy, to further America First policies that have long been focused on making it more difficult for foreigners to live and work in the U.S.  Trump's order comes as protesters in various states have taken to the streets and state capital steps to demand that businesses start opening back up soon.  Businesses small and large have been decimated by the national economic paralysis. But health officials are united in their belief that opening the country up too soon could cause virus cases to surge and health care facilities to be overwhelmed.  Although cases continue to grow in some parts of the country, governors of South Carolina, Georgia and Tennessee made moves Monday to start easing restrictions for their residents.  South Carolina allowed retail shops such as department stores to reopen, while in Georgia gyms, hair salons and tattoo parlors can open on Friday. Tennessee Gov. Bill Lee said his stay-at-home order would expire April 30, allowing most businesses to reopen by May 1.
2020-04-21	The Editorial Board  USA TODAY  As the United States eases out of a painful, job-killing phase of social distancing and sheltering at home, preventing the new coronavirus from roaring back will require shattering infection chains as rapidly as they reemerge.  This means identifying new infections so the sick are treated and their contacts quickly isolated. Ensuring success might also mean embracing digital surveillance technology, despite privacy risks.  Some nations are already using data collection, with aggressive testing and contact tracing, to manage COVID-19 without the same level of death and economic ruin the United States has endured.  Learn who else is infected  China's autocratic regime requires citizens to use smartphone software that rates their infection risk with color codes and shares that information with police; the government also runs facial-recognition scans via publicly located cameras to monitor those who are supposed to be quarantined.  Passengers arriving in South Korea, a democracy, are required to download a self-diagnosis app. And Seoul uses cellphone data, credit card transactions and security footage to track the movements of COVID-19 patients, making details public with addresses — but without names — in order to alert people and learn who else is infected.  This kind of privacy infringement wouldn't be tolerated in the United States, where citizens grew angry when the government collected telephone records after 9/11 in the name of counterterrorism. But China and South Korea now have coronavirus death rates — 3.3 per million and 4.6 per million residents, respectively — that are tiny fractions of the 130 deaths per million among Americans.  Between Big Brother and nothing at all  As the United States works toward reopening its economy, is there something between Big Brother surveillance and nothing at all? Something that could help guard against a deadly virus relapse? A joint effort by Apple and Google shows promise.  The companies have developed software technology that allows iPhone and Android devices new ways to swap data. Phone users would have to voluntarily enlist in this program by downloading an app from their local health care authority. Once installed, their smartphone would use short-distance Bluetooth technology to track all nearby contacts with other people who elected to use the same technology.  LAURENCE TRIBE:Don’t barter away our enduring liberties  The data would be stored on each individual phone and include no names or location information, only a "key" identifier exclusive to each nearby contact. These identifiers would be rotated on a randomized basis to prevent long-term tracking.  If a smartphone user fell sick with the novel coronavirus, they'd be diagnosed by their health authority and report this in the app. The iOS and Android devices of other people participating in the program would download these reports and look for a match to see whether they had been in contact with a coronavirus victim. The whole idea would be to trace and alert those who might also be infected, with the aim of cutting any COVID-19 infection chain.  This still is a sort of surveillance, although more palatable because of greater reliance on anonymity and voluntarism. And the promise of privacy protection carries added weight because of participation by Apple, which has a demonstrated history of refusing government demands for data.  Moreover, without a system like this, contact tracers by the thousands will have to rely solely on the memory of ailing COVID-19 patients to learn who else might be infected.  For this Apple/Google idea to work — it's to be rolled out by mid-May — many will have to choose it. California has been out front on coronavirus measures, and Gov. Gavin Newsom said this month that his government is exploring the tech giants' concept. Its effectiveness hinges on participation. Similar voluntary tracking software offered in Singapore and Iceland attracted only 20% to 40% of smartphone users, and epidemiologists believe 60% is the necessary threshold.  Americans have already shown a willingness to act in unity against coronavirus by staying home and maintaining social distances in numbers large enough to bring down rates of infection. The question will be whether they can show the same consensus when it comes to keeping the disease away.  If you can't see this reader poll, please refresh your page.  HOTLINE:Share your coronavirus story. We may publish your comments.
2020-04-21	AP  ROTTERDAM, Netherlands (AP) — Veteran coach Dick Advocaat has extended his contract with Feyenoord by one year to keep him in charge of the Rotterdam club through next season.  Feyenoord, which announced the contract extension Tuesday, hired Advocaat in late October to succeed Jaap Stam, who resigned after less than half a season in charge and with the team struggling at 12th in the Eredivisie.  Under the experienced Advocaat, Feyenoord surged up the table to stand third behind Ajax and AZ Alkmaar when the coronavirus crisis halted matches and cast doubt on the remainder of the season.  Advocaat said it felt strange to extend his contract amid the uncertainty of the virus restrictions, but it also spurred him to build on the team's form before the enforced stop.  “Before everything ground to a halt, we at Feyenoord were putting together something great; something was building in the team,” he said in a statement posted on the club's website. “I, the team and staff, want to finish it.”  The 72-year-old Advocaat has trained teams including PSV Eindhoven, Glasgow Rangers and the national teams of the Netherlands, Russia and South Korea.  ___  More AP soccer https://apnews.com/Soccer and https://twitter.com/AP_Sports
2020-04-21	It was three months ago that the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention announced the first confirmed coronavirus case in the U.S.  In the weeks since, health officials have confirmed hundreds of thousands of COVID-19 cases across the nation and tens of thousands of deaths. Millions more Americans have lost their jobs, and tens of millions are living under stay-at-home orders.  As we continue to learn more about the virus and grapple with the affects of the pandemic, here's a look back on how the outbreak began, and how it has unfolded in the U.S. so far.  Before arriving in the US, the virus spread through China and abroad  November: Various reports suggest that the first case arose in Wuhan, China, toward the end of 2019, though some reports point to cases in early December.  Various reports suggest that the first case arose in Wuhan, China, toward the end of 2019, though some reports point to cases in early December. Dec. 30: Li Wenliang, an ophthalmologist at Wuhan Central Hospital, alerted physicians about the emergence of a SARS-like illness. He was later detained by police on charges of spreading rumors.  Dec. 31: The Wuhan Municipal Health Commission reported 27 cases of viral pneumonia.  The Wuhan Municipal Health Commission reported 27 cases of viral pneumonia. Jan. 1: Wuhan officials closed down the Huanan seafood market, which is thought to be linked to the first group of cases.  Wuhan officials closed down the Huanan seafood market, which is thought to be linked to the first group of cases. Jan. 7: Chinese President Xi Jinping recognized the viral pneumonia internally during a meeting of China's highest council.  Chinese President Xi Jinping recognized the viral pneumonia internally during a meeting of China's highest council. Jan. 11: China reported its first death.  China reported its first death. Jan. 13: Thailand confirmed the first known case of the coronavirus outside China.  Thailand confirmed the first known case of the coronavirus outside China. Jan. 14: Top Chinese officials determined they likely were facing a pandemic, according to internal documents obtained by The Associated Press. In the following days, Wuhan hosted a mass banquet for tens of thousands of people.  Jan.17: Airport screenings  The CDC began implementing public health entry screening at San Francisco (SFO), New York (JFK) and Los Angeles (LAX) airports. The CDC would later add screening at two more airports Atlanta (ATL) and Chicago (ORD).  Jan. 21: First case confirmed in US  The CDC confirmed the first U.S. case of a new coronavirus that had killed six people so far in China. The Washington state man in his 30s returned from Wuhan a week earlier, on Jan. 15. Nancy Messonnier, director of the National Center for Immunization and Respiratory Diseases, called the news "concerning," particularly in light of reports that the virus has begun to spread from person to person.  Jan. 23: Wuhan locks down  Chinese authorities locked down at least three cities with a combined population of more than 18 million in an unprecedented effort to contain the virus during the busy Lunar New Year travel period.  Meanwhile, the World Health Organization declined to categorize the coronavirus as a global health emergency, saying there is no evidence of human-to-human infection outside China.  Jan. 24: First cases in Europe  French health officials confirmed the first three cases in Europe.  In China, the Lunar New Year holiday began. Public transportation halted for roughly 36 million people in 13 cities in central China, including Wuhan. Authorities in Wuhan said they were constructing a 1,000-bed hospital like one built in Beijing during a SARS outbreak, a similar respiratory virus.  President Donald Trump thanked China on Twitter for its efforts to contain the disease. "China has been working very hard to contain the Coronavirus. The United States greatly appreciates their efforts and transparency. It will all work out well. In particular, on behalf of the American People, I want to thank President Xi!" he said in a post.  Meanwhile, Sen. Rick Scott, R-Fla., urged the Trump administration to declare a public health emergency and sent a letter to the CDC requesting information about the agency’s plan to combat the virus. "We have to get serious about the threat of coronavirus coming from China," Scott said in a press release.  Jan. 24: Americans told 'risk is low'  Anthony Fauci, head of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, comments on the risk to Americans. "We don't want the American public to be worried about this because their risk is low," Fauci said. "On the other hand, we are taking this very seriously and are dealing very closely with Chinese authorities."  Many health professionals argued that the flu poses a greater threat than the coronavirus.  Jan. 28: 'Monitoring' since December  Alex Azar, secretary of Health and Human Services and chairman of the coronavirus task force, told reporters during a press briefing that the U.S. has "been monitoring this virus and preparing a response since back in December."  Jan. 29: 195 Americans return from China  The first group of passengers returned to the U.S. from China. They were expected to remain under observation for up to three days as they were screened, a CDC official said. The American passengers flew into California from Wuhan, with a stopover in Anchorage, Alaska, where they had also been screened.  Jan. 30: WHO declares global health emergency  The World Health Organization declared the coronavirus outbreak to be a "public health emergency of international concern." Dr. Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, director-general of the WHO, praised China for its quick response to the crisis, saying the emergency declaration "is not a vote of no confidence in China."  Medical staff in protective clothes are seen carrying a patient from an apartment suspected of having the virus in Wuhan, in Hubei province on January 30, 2020. HECTOR RETAMAL, AFP via Getty Images  Jan. 30: US reports first case of person-to-person transmission  The CDC reported that the first case of person-to-person transmission in the U.S. is the husband of a Chicago woman who developed symptoms after visiting China. "We understand this may be concerning, but based on what we know now, our assessment remains that the immediate risk to the American public is low," said Robert Redfield, director of the CDC.  Jan. 31: US public health emergency  The Trump administration declared the coronavirus outbreak to be a public health emergency in the United States, setting quarantines of Americans who have recently been to certain parts of China. CDC officials said it was the first quarantine order issued by the federal government in over 50 years.  Azar also announced a temporary suspension of entry into the United States of foreign nationals who had been in China in the previous 14 days. The ban was effective Feb. 2.  Meanwhile, officials began funneling all flights from China to the U.S. to one of seven airports that were designated ports of entry: New York, San Francisco, Seattle, Honolulu, Los Angeles, Chicago and Atlanta.  The outbreak had infected nearly 12,000 people, most of them in China, and killed more than 250 people, all in China.  Feb. 2: First death outside China  A 44-year-old Chinese man hospitalized in the Philippines became the first known fatality outside China from the new virus that has killed more than 300 people.  Feb. 6: First death in US  Autopsies on the bodies of two people who died at home on Feb. 6 and Feb. 17 showed they were positive for the virus, a California county announced April 21.  Previously, the first U.S. death had been thought to occur Feb. 29 outside Seattle. The autopsy findings revealed that the virus may have been spreading in U.S. communites earlier than previously known. The two people died during a time when very limited testing was available only through the CDC, and the agency's testing criteria restricted testing to only individuals with a known travel history and who sought medical care for specific symptoms.  Feb. 7: Whistleblower dies  The Chinese doctor who was reprimanded by security police for warning fellow doctors about the initial coronavirus outbreak died of the illness.  In the U.S., Secretary of State Mike Pompeo announced that his department facilitated the transportation of nearly 17.8 tons of donated medical supplies to the China, including "masks, gowns, gauze, respirators and other vital materials."  A USA TODAY analysis later finds that American companies sold more than $17.5 million worth of face masks, more than $13.6 million in surgical garments and more than $27.2 million in ventilators to China during the first two months of the year, far exceeding that of any other similar period in the past decade.  Feb. 11: COVID-19  The WHO announced a formal name for the coronavirus – COVID-19. Meanwhile, China reported its highest daily coronavirus death toll, the 103 additional fatalities pushing the total past 1,100. "With 99% of cases in China, this remains very much an emergency for that country, but one that holds a very grave threat for the rest of the world," WHO's Dr. Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus said.  The CDC confirmed the 13th U.S. coronavirus case, and about 800 Americans evacuated from Wuhan remain under quarantine. At a rally in New Hampshire, Trump said that, "in theory" once the weather warms up, "the virus" will "miraculously" go away.  Feb. 12: First American dies  A 60-year-old U.S. citizen became what appears to be the first American fatality from the global virus outbreak. The American victim, who was not identified, died in China after being diagnosed with the coronavirus in Wuhan, according to the U.S. Embassy.  Feb. 21: Pandemic 'likely'  Dr. Nancy Messonnier, director of the CDC's National Center for Immunization and Respiratory Diseases, told reporters that U.S. health officials are preparing for the coronavirus to become a pandemic. "We're not seeing community spread here in the United States, yet, but it’s very possible, even likely, that it may eventually happen," she said.  Feb. 23: Italy locks down  Schools, businesses and restaurants were closed in a dozen northern Italian towns following reports of two deaths tied to an outbreak of the coronavirus in the region. The virus would begin to spread rapidly through Europe and Iran.  Feb. 26: CDC reports community spread; Pence to lead task force  The CDC confirmed an infection in California that would represent the first U.S. person to contract the virus despite not visiting a foreign country recently or coming in contact with an infected patient. This brings the number of coronavirus cases detected in the U.S. to 15, with 12 of them related to travel and the other two to direct contact with a patient.  Meanwhile, Trump announced that Vice President Mike Pence would lead the administration's coronavirus response. "We're very, very ready for this," Trump said at a press conference. "The risk to the American people remains very low."  Feb. 28: Flawed test kits  Messonnier told reporters that the CDC has taken steps to address problems with flawed test kits mailed to state and local labs. The agency has also expanded criteria for coronavirus testing.  Feb. 29: FDA begins to open up testing  In an effort to increase testing, the Food and Drug Administration announced it would be opening up its emergency authorization process to allow new testing technologies at hospitals and health care facilities nationwide.  U.S. Surgeon General Jerome Adams echoed CDC guidance encouraging Americans not to buy face masks needed by medical professionals. "They are NOT effective in preventing general public from catching #Coronavirus, but if healthcare providers can’t get them to care for sick patients, it puts them and our communities at risk," he said on Twitter.  A man in Washington state died after contracting the coronavirus – what was initially thought to be the first death from the new disease in the U.S. Gov. Jay Inslee declared a state of emergency in Washington hours later, saying that the outbreak "could likely be a worldwide pandemic."  March 3: U.S. surpasses 100 cases  March 6: 'Anybody' can get a test  While touring the CDC headquarters in Atlanta, Trump told reporters: "Anybody that wants a test can get a test. That’s what the bottom line is."  March 11: Travel ban on Europe; WHO declares pandemic  Trump addressed the nation on the coronavirus outbreak and outlined strict travel restrictions on passengers arriving in the United States from hard-hit portions of Europe. Three days later, he added the United Kingdom and Ireland to the ban.  The WHO declared that the spread of COVID-19 had become a pandemic, which the organization has defined as "the worldwide spread of a new disease." Infections outside China have increased 13-fold in two weeks, WHO's director general said. In that same time, the number of countries hit by the outbreak has tripled.  March 12: US testing rollout 'a failing'  Dr. Anthony Fauci, director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, said the testing logjam constitutes a "failing" of the nation's health care system. "The idea of anybody getting (a coronavirus test) easily, the way people in other countries are doing it – we're not set up for that," Fauci told Congress. "That is a failing."  March 13: Trump declares national emergency  Trump declared the coronavirus pandemic to be a national emergency. Trump said the move would free up nearly $50 billion in additional disaster funding and would allow HHS to waive regulations and laws to deliver coronavirus testing quicker.  March 16: 15 days to slow the spread  Trump issued guidelines that called for Americans to avoid social gatherings of more than 10 people for the next 15 days and to limit discretionary travel, among other guidelines. Trump said the country may be dealing with a number of restrictions through July or August as a result of the virus. He acknowledged the economy may be heading into a recession.  March 17: Trump invokes the Defense Production Act  Trump invoked the Defense Production Act, a wartime authority that allows him to direct industry to produce critical equipment.  March 17: Report shows virus stable on surfaces  A study published in the New England Journal of Medicine found that viable virus could be detected up to three hours later in the air, up to four hours on copper, up to 24 hours on cardboard, and up to two to three days on plastic and stainless steel.  March 18: CDC report shows that all ages are at risk  A CDC report found that among the roughly 12% of COVID-19 cases in the U.S. known to need hospitalizations, about 1 in 5 were among people ages 20 to 44.  China reported no new domestic cases on the mainland – only cases in people returning from abroad.  March 19: U.S. surpasses 10,000 cases  March 24: Tokyo Olympics postponed  The International Olympic Committee and Japanese government agreed to postpone the 2020 Summer Olympics "to a date beyond 2020 but not later than summer 2021" due to the ongoing coronavirus pandemic. It is the first time in modern Olympic history that a global health issue has disrupted the Games.  March 26: US has most cases  The U.S. surged past China and Italy to become the planet's most infected nation. More than 1,296 people had died in the U.S.  March 27: Trump signs $2T stimulus package  President Donald Trump signed the largest stimulus package in U.S. history. The stimulus package was expected to provide $1,200 checks to many Americans – and more for families – while making available hundreds of billions of dollars for companies to maintain payroll through the crisis.  Trump also ordered his administration to use its authority under the Defense Production Act to force General Motors to expedite government contracts to build ventilators.  March 28: CDC issues travel advisory to New York area  The CDC issued a request asking residents of New York, New Jersey and Connecticut to curtail nonessential travel for 14 days.  Meanwhile, an infant younger than one year – who tested positive for the virus in Chicago – died.  March 29: White House extends social distancing guidelines  Trump announced that the White House would be extending its social distancing guidelines through April 30. "The peak in death rate is likely to hit in two weeks," Trump said. "Nothing would be worse than declaring victory before the victory is won." Trump said that he expects that, by June 1, "we will be well on our way to recovery."  April 1: The U.S. surpasses 200,000 cases  April 2: More than 1M confirmed cases worldwide  The world registered more than 1 million confirmed cases in less than five months. In reality, that mark was crossed much earlier because many more people have the virus but were not tested.  In the U.S., a record 6.65 million Americans filed first-time jobless claims the previous week, the Labor Department said. That number would later be revised up by 219,000 to an all-time high of 6.86 million.  April 3: CDC recommends use of face masks  The Trump administration advised people to start wearing face masks in public to stop the spread of the coronavirus, a reversal on previous guidance that urged people not to wear masks.  April 8: Wuhan lifts lockdown  The city of Wuhan was lit up after midnight to celebrate the lifting of a 76-day lockdown.  April 10: US marks deadliest day  More than 2,000 people in the U.S. died of coronavirus on Good Friday, a new daily high in the nation's fight against COVID-19. Dr. Deborah Birx, coordinator of the White House coronavirus task force, said that the U.S. has not "reached the peak" of the pandemic but that there were "encouraging" signs that the curves were flattening or lowering.  April 11: US has most deaths  The United States passed Italy to become the country with the most coronavirus deaths. However, as a proportion of the total population in the U.S., virus deaths remain at about one-sixth of those in hard-hit Italy or Spain. More than 19,700 people in the U.S. had died due to complications from the coronavirus. Worldwide, the death count surpassed 104,000.  April 14: All 50 states report deaths  All 50 states reported at least one death, and more than 23,000 Americans died. President Donald Trump said his administration will "halt" funding to the WHO as it conducts a review of the global organization's handling of the pandemic.  April 15: Protests erupt over stay-at-home orders  Demonstrators drove thousands of vehicles to Michigan's state Capitol, protesting the state's stay-at-home order. Protests also erupted in Kentucky, Oklahoma and North Carolina.  April 16: White House issues guidance to reopen  The White House issued guidelines to states aimed at easing social distancing restrictions and reopening parts of the country. About 14% of the U.S. workforce had filed for unemployment in the past month.  April 20: States announce plans to reopen  The governors of Tennessee, South Carolina and Georgia announced various measures aimed at easing restrictions on some businesses in their states.  April 21: FDA approves home-testing kit  LabCorp, a global life sciences company based in North Carolina, received FDA authorization for kits that enable people to collect nasal swab samples at home and mail them to a laboratory for testing.  April 23: $320B for small businesses  The House approved $484 billion legislation that includes funding for hospitals that have been overwhelmed during the crisis and money for a coronavirus testing program. The bill would pump $320 billion into the Paycheck Protection Program, which is designed to keep small businesses from shuttering and their workers from going on unemployment during the coronavirus pandemic.  April 24: Georgia reopens some businesses  In Georgia, gyms, tattoo parlors, hair and nail salons, massage therapists, and other businesses were allowed to reopen. Some businesses filled up with clients, but other remained dark.  The WHO issued a statement saying there is still "no evidence" that people who have recovered from COVID-19 and have antibodies are protected from a second infection.  April 26: More coronavirus symptoms  The CDC cautioned that six new symptoms could be signs of the coronavirus: chills, repeated shaking with chills, muscle pain, headache, sore throat and a loss of taste or smell.  April 28: 1M cases in the US  The United States topped 1 million confirmed cases – nearly a third of the world's cases. More than 57,000 people in the U.S. have died.
2020-04-21	South Korea's government said Tuesday it had no information to corroborate a media report suggesting that Washington is monitoring intelligence indicating North Korea's leader was gravely ill after he reportedly underwent heart surgery this month.  Seoul has not detected any unusual activity or signs coming from Pyongyang about Kim Jong Un's health, according to Kang Min-seok, a spokesman for the Blue House, the office and residence of South Korea President Moon Jae-in.  South Korea's statement comes after a CNN report, citing an unnamed U.S. official "with direct knowledge" of the matter, said the U.S. is keeping an eye on intelligence suggesting that the North Korean leader's health was in "grave danger." A second official cited by CNN said the intelligence about Kim's health was credible. The official acknowledged it was hard to assess how seriously ill he may be.  South Korea: North Korea fires barrage of missiles from ground and air  The North Korean leader's health has long been a focus of speculation. He's a heavy smoker and is obese. However, North Korea is one of the world's most secretive nations and information about its leader is extremely difficult to verify. Even his age is a matter of dispute, although most analysts think he's probably 36.  CNN's report late Monday followed a story in a Seoul-based website named Daily NK run by North Korean defectors. It reported that the North Korean leader had undergone heart surgery on April 12 and is recuperating at a villa outside the capital, Pyongyang. Daily NK's story is based on a single source inside North Korea.  Media reports about North Korea and its leadership have previously turned out to be inaccurate. Speculation about Kim Jong Un's health has increased in recent days partly because he skipped a recent commemoration connected to the nation's founding.  North Korean state media has not addressed Kim's health. The state-run Korean Central News Agency released a photo of him, dated April 11, which it said shows Kim attending a politburo meeting of the ruling Workers' Party of Korea in Pyongyang. However, neither the content nor the date of the photo could be independently verified.  North Korea is one of only a handful of nations to refuse to report data about coronavirus infections. Negotiations between Washington and Pyongyang aimed at dismantling North Korea's nuclear and ballistic missile programs have stalled amid the Trump administration's refusal to ease crippling sanctions on North Korea.  In March, Kim Jong Un's regime conducted nine missile tests, the most in a single month recorded in a database run by the James Martin Center for Nonproliferation Studies at the Middlebury Institute of International Studies. This month, North Korea launched back-to-back missiles, fired from the ground and fighter jets that splashed down into waters off the coast of Japan. The missiles were fired on the eve of the state anniversary celebrations that Kim Jong Un did not attend in person.
2020-04-21	WASHINGTON – President Donald Trump said there are plenty of coronavirus tests available, but many governors said they're running short even as states begin to lift their stay-at-home orders.  "This is probably the number one problem in America, and has been from the beginning of this crisis, the lack of testing," Maryland Gov. Larry Hogan, a Republican and the chairman of the National Governors Association, said on CNN Sunday.  Trump insisted Monday that there was “tremendous capacity” for coronavirus testing at U.S. labs. He said governors such as Hogan needed “to get a little knowledge” about the testing situation.  The country’s largest private labs said they have plenty of capacity to test samples sent from medical offices and hospitals, but governors in a wide array of states said health care providers can’t conduct the tests because of a lack of supplies such as swabs and a chemical known as a “reagent” crucial to the process.  Public health experts and private and public labs contacted by USA TODAY agreed that a major problem was a shortage of supplies at the testing sites where mucus samples are taken.  Wyoming Gov. Mark Gordon, a Republican, said states compete with each other to get more testing supplies, a process he described as “a slog.”  Concerns over testing escalated as the Trump administration issued guidelines meant to help states ease the temporary social distancing restrictions put in place to slow spread of the coronavirus and reopen their economies.  The guidelines call for a three-phase approach: testing, tracing contacts of those infected and, in time, treatment solutions.  “It’s a perilous set of circumstances trying to figure out how to make this work,” Gordon said last week, “and until we’ve got the testing up to speed – which has got to be part of the federal government stepping in and helping – we’re just not going to be there.”  Swab shortages  At a briefing, Trump discussed the swab issue, holding one up alongside a Q-Tip he pulled from his jacket pocket. Trump said swabs and reagents are “so easy to get,” arguing it was far harder to ramp up production of ventilators.  In a tacit acknowledgment of the urgency of producing more swabs, he announced that he would activate wartime powers under the Defense Production Act “to increase swab production in one U.S. facility by over 20 million additional swabs per month.”  Like other aspects of testing, the shortages are not consistent across the country. Thomas Denny, chief operating officer of the Duke Human Vaccine Institute and a former consultant to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, said his lab has no problems getting the supplies.  Ashish Jha, the director of the Harvard Global Health Initiative, blames the federal government for failing to address that unevenness.  "Everybody has different sets of problems, and the solution is greater coordination," he said. "So if one state has too many swabs but not enough reagents, and the other state doesn't have enough swabs but plenty of reagents, you can imagine swapping."  Instead, Jha said, states got into "bidding wars” for materials, like those that erupted around ventilators and protective equipment.  "What's happening is some states that are missing swabs, they're trying to call swab manufacturers,” he said. “And then those manufacturers are getting calls from 20 different states.”  Hospitals go it alone  From the beginning, America's stumbling rollout of testing significantly slowed the nation's response.  Flawed tests were shipped in February to state and county public health labs nationwide. The nation’s vast network of hospital and private commercial labs did not get the Food and Drug Administration’s regulatory green light until the end of February.  Dr. Dan Hanfling, who advised the Hospital Preparedness Program in the Obama and Trump administrations, noted there were "technical challenges" to developing accurate tests so quickly for a new virus.  One challenge, Hanfling said, is that testing was rolled out without an "ironclad guarantee that these tests are reliable" – a formula for setting expectations too high.  "People expect a certain level of testing, and we're just not technologically there yet," he said.  By the end of March into April, testing accelerated. The majority of tests were processed by six large commercial lab companies: ARUP, BioReference Laboratories, LabCorp, the Mayo Clinic, Quest Diagnostics and Sonic Healthcare.  Soon, those labs faced growing backlogs. On March 25, Quest Diagnostics had 160,000 test orders waiting to be processed, according to documents obtained by CNN.  Wendy Bost, senior director of corporate communication at Quest, acknowledged that initially, “the demand outstripped capacity.”  In frustration, hospitals and state public health labs started going it alone, developing their own tests and processes.  Coronavirus tests:Labs test 100,000 people each day for the coronavirus. That's still not enough.  Robert Hart, executive vice president and chief medical officer of Ochsner Health in Louisiana, said his state lab was the only place conducting testing, and it got results back within a few days.  Then the state was overrun.  “The next move was to send them to the Mayo Clinic,” Hart said. “Mayo quickly became overrun.”  Tests waiting to be completed were shuffled around to the University of Washington, then to Quest, which hit the backlog.  “We literally were waiting 12, 14, 16 days for test results,” Hart said.  Hart said Ochsner started doing testing in its own laboratory and has results within a day.  The private labs said things have changed. They have room to spare and turn results around quickly.  “Our current capacity is greater than the volume we are currently receiving, and we have no backlog,” said Mike Geller, spokesperson for LabCorp. “Based on current testing volumes, we are now able to deliver test results on average between one to two days from the date of specimen pick up.”  Louise Serio, a spokesperson for the American Clinical Laboratory Association, said the group’s members, which include Quest and LabCorp, reached out to hospitals and other health care providers to communicate the excess capacity.  She said member labs have enough testing supplies to meet demand, but if they are hit with double or triple the demand for testing, that would be an issue for them as well.  “What we’re focused on for expanding our capacity,” Serio said, “is making sure we have all of the supplies necessary and predictable access to those supplies.”  Shipment from South Korea  The dispute between Trump and the states over testing came to a head this week when the president criticized Hogan, the Maryland governor, for announcing that he had secured 500,000 coronavirus tests from South Korea.  “I don’t think he needed to go to South Korea," Trump told reporters at a White House briefing. "I think he needed to get a little knowledge. Would have been helpful.”  Trump then held up a list of what he said were 5,000 labs nationwide that are prepared to accept coronavirus tests.  Hogan tweeted that he was "grateful" to Trump for the list of labs and – in a jab at the president – added: "Accessing these federal labs will be critical for utilizing the 500,000 tests we have acquired from South Korea."  When asked by USA TODAY for a copy of the list of labs Trump had referenced at his briefing, the White House declined to provide it.  Fact Check:Coronavirus not man-made or engineered, but its origin remains unclear  Both Democratic and Republican governors urged the Trump administration to do more to help increase the availability of testing supplies.  “We have a worldwide shortage of some of the materials that go into this. We really need help,” Ohio Gov. Mike DeWine, a Republican, told “Meet the Press” on Sunday. “I could probably double – maybe even triple – testing in Ohio virtually overnight if the FDA would prioritize companies that are putting a slightly different formula together for the extraction reagent kit.”  Michigan Gov. Gretchen Whitmer, a Democrat, said her state could handle two or three times the amount of testing but lacks the swabs and reagents needed to process the tests.  “We could, if we had all the supplies we needed, do 11,300 tests a day working with our current capacity,” she said Monday. “The reality is that we’re about half of that.“  In a phone call between Vice President Mike Pence and governors Monday, Whitmer said the plea for the federal administration to use the Defense Production Act to compel production of the supplies was loud and clear.  “We talked quite a bit about the lack of the critical supplies for testing,” she said, adding that testing needs to be much broader for states to feel confident in lifting their stay-at-home orders.  “We’re all needing swabs. We’re all needing reagents,” Whitmer said.  Contributing: John Fritze, Kathleen Gray, Todd Spangler, Ken Alltucker, USA TODAY; The Associated Press
2020-04-21	Three months. That’s a full fiscal quarter. The full length of some couples' made-for-television engagements. The amount of time it takes to potty train a puppy (if you're lucky).  A lot can change in three months. Exhibit A: The first case of a "mysterious virus" from China was discovered in America exactly three months ago. Things sure have escalated since then, haven’t they?  It's Ashley with the news to know.  But first, over boring Zoom meetings? An appearance from a donkey could shake things up. You can "rent" an animal to virtually join your video call. (If anyone at USA TODAY is reading this, please bring alpaca to our next meeting.)  The Short List newsletter is a snappy USA TODAY news roundup. Subscribe here!  It's been 3 months since the US confirmed its first coronavirus case  Since the first U.S. COVID-19 case was discovered, there have been more than 2.5 million confirmed cases worldwide, and the USA reports more than any other country. If there's a silver lining to this suffering, it’s that the country is learning important lessons about dealing with this pandemic – and the ones that will inevitably come.  COVID-19 was not produced in lab, WHO says  Available evidence indicates that the coronavirus originated in animals in China and was not made in a lab as has been alleged, the World Health Organization said Tuesday. The announcement follows President Donald Trump's comments last week that U.S. intelligence officials were investigating whether the coronavirus began spreading after an accident at a Chinese high-security biomedical laboratory in Wuhan.  What are 'COVID toes'?  A new coronavirus symptom – mostly seen in kids – puzzles disease experts. Patients with the symptom, informally dubbed “COVID toes,” experience purple or blue lesions on their feet and toes.  Nurses protest outside White House  Registered nurses gathered outside the White House on Tuesday, calling attention to the tens of thousands of health care workers nationwide who have become infected with COVID-19 because of the lack of personal protective equipment. The nurses read aloud the names of U.S. nurses who died of COVID-19.  Are you a health care worker in the fight against COVID-19? I want to hear your story. Email me at ashley@usatoday.com.  You OK, Kim Jong Un?  South Korean officials say there’s no reason to think North Korean leader Kim Jong Un is seriously ill, despite a U.S. media report suggesting he was in “grave danger." CNN, citing unnamed U.S. officials, reported Monday that Kim had undergone heart surgery this month and intelligence suggested the leader might be seriously ill. South Korea's government says it has not detected any unusual signs about Kim's health and had no information to corroborate the report. However, North Korea is one of the world's most secretive nations, and information about its leader is extremely difficult to verify.  Kim's health is a mystery. These photos show his last known appearances.  What everyone’s talking about  This would be *quite* the reunion  Rob Gronkowski wants to play football again. More specifically, he wants to continue playing with Tom Brady. And it appears he'll get his wish. Gronkowski is set to come out of retirement in conjunction with a trade that will send his contractual rights from New England to the Tampa Bay Buccaneers, his agent confirmed. The Buccaneers signed Brady in March.  Speaking of Tom Brady, even he has to social distance: The six-time NFL champion quarterback was kicked out of a Tampa park while working out, Mayor Jane Castor revealed. Tampa parks are closed because of the coronavirus outbreak, but a park staffer spotted someone violating the rules. It was Tom Brady.  This is dirty  Nearly half of the nation’s population – about 150 million people – live with and breathe polluted air, "placing their health and lives at risk," according to a report released Tuesday by the American Lung Association. The report says climate change continues to make air pollution worse, and many Western cities saw record-breaking spikes in particle pollution because of wildfires. In fact, about 9 million more people are breathing dirty air than in last year's report.  Real quick  HBD, Queen Elizabeth! 94 years young  Queen Elizabeth II is getting a few royal birthday wishes for her big day. The British monarch turned 94 on Tuesday, which prompted her family of royals to take to social media to wish her well. Prince William and Duchess Kate posted a photo with the queen to their social media accounts. Prince Harry, Duchess Meghan and their son Archie called her with good wishes. Even the queen's Instagram account posted in celebration, sharing rare footage of the monarch when she was a child. That's as close as we'll get to a celebration – the queen asked that there be no gun salutes to mark her special day and chose not to celebrate.  Speaking of royals ... Prince Harry texted Thomas Markle about not talking to media, according to court documents.  A break from the news  This is a compilation of stories from across the USA TODAY Network.
2020-04-22	WASHINGTON – President Donald Trump said Tuesday that the United States' coronavirus mortality rate is "one of the lowest of any country in the world."  Dr. Deborah Birx, who leads the White House coronavirus task force, echoed the claim at a news briefing, saying the United States had "one of the lowest mortality rates in the entire world."  Neither Trump nor Birx cited a specific statistic or study to support their claims, but both used the mortality rate metric as evidence America is making progress in fighting coronavirus.  Here's where the U.S. ranks, according to data from John Hopkins University:  The U.S. has the 33rd-highest mortality rate, measured as deaths divided by total cases, out of the 134 countries tracked by Johns Hopkins. That means more than 100 countries have lower mortality rates than the U.S., although many of those countries reported comparatively few cases.  When compared only to the 10 countries with the most cases, the U.S. ranks as the second-lowest mortality rate as a percentage of total cases. That means eight of those countries hit hardest by the coronavirus have higher mortality rates than the U.S.  only to the 10 countries with the most cases, the U.S. ranks as the second-lowest mortality rate as a percentage of total cases. That means eight of those countries hit hardest by the coronavirus have higher mortality rates than the U.S. The U.S. ranks 12th-highest in the world when it comes to deaths per 100,000 people.  When mortality is measured per 100,000 people among the 10 countries with the most cases, the U.S. ranks seventh, with Iran, Germany, and China reporting lower numbers of deaths per 100,000 people.  Experts said Trump's comments glossed over the fact that under several metrics, the U.S. mortality rate is worse than that of many other countries. However, they cautioned that the lack of testing in the United States could lead to an undercounting of overall COVID-19 cases. If the total number of cases is actually higher, that would mean the current data might be overstating the death rate.  As of Wednesday, the United States had a 5.4% mortality rate based on a percentage of overall cases, according to the Johns Hopkins data.  With the 33rd-highest rate in the world, the U.S. rate exceeds countries like Canada (4.8%), Portugal (3.6%), and Germany (3.4%).Among those countries with higher death rates are Belgium (14.6%), Italy (13.4%) and the United Kingdom (13.4%).  Among those 10 countries hit hardest by the coronavirus, eight countries have a higher mortality rate based on a percentage of overall cases – with countries like Belgium (14.6%), Italy (13.4%), and France (13.1%) reporting higher mortality rates than the U.S., according to the Johns Hopkins data. Only Germany (3.4%) has a lower mortality rate among those 10 countries.  The White House declined to comment, but an administration official speaking on the condition of anonymity pointed to the per capita mortality rate in the United States as "lower than most major Western countries and China."  The Department of Health and Human Services did not respond to a request for comment from USA TODAY asking for clarification on the president's comments.  Trump made that point in Saturday's coronavirus task force briefing, when he said that "on a per capita basis, our mortality rate is far lower than other nations of Western Europe, with the lone exception of possibly Germany. This includes the UK, Switzerland, Belgium, the Netherlands, Italy, France."  The United States has about 13.71 deaths per 100,000 people, or the 12th-highest rate among the 134 in the Hopkins data, meaning only 11 countries have higher mortality measured on a per capita basis.  Here's what the Johns Hopkins data said Wednesday about the nations Trump mentioned in the Saturday briefing:  Germany: 6.07 deaths per 100,000 people  United States: 13.71 deaths per 100,000 people  Switzerland: 17.35 deaths per 100,000 people  Netherlands: 22.80 deaths per 100,000 people  United Kingdom: 26.14 deaths per 100,000 people  France: 31.09 deaths per 100,000 people  Italy: 40.79 deaths per 100,000 people  Belgium: 52.51 deaths per 100,000 people  Among those 10 countries hardest-hit, the U.S. ranks fourth-lowest in terms of deaths per 100,000 people. Just Germany (6.07), Iran (6.48), and China (0.33) have lower rates. Italy (40.79), Spain (45.55) and Belgium (52.51) have higher rates.  CDC Director Redfield:Second coronavirus wave could be 'more difficult,' hit same time as flu  Fact Check:Trump claims coronavirus tests are widely available. They are not  Johns Hopkins University researchers note that mortality statistics differ among countries in part because of differences in testing, the demographics of other countries, characteristics of health care systems, and other factors.  Why exactly death rates in some countries like Germany and South Korea have been lower is still a matter of debate, especially as efforts to address the pandemic are ongoing, said Michael Gunn, a professor in immunology at Duke University School of Medicine.  Countries like Germany had a "very aggressive testing program," which allowed them to detect coronavirus and institute therapies for patients "before things got bad," Gunn noted.  In the United States, "we may just be catching people much later in the disease course," he said, and as a result, the United States' "lack of testing" means "we don't know how many people are truly infected," Gunn said.  As a result, "no one can say" that the United States has one of the lowest rates in the world, he said.  Additionally, in countries like Italy, "where the number of patients requiring hospitalization or critical care has overwhelmed the medical system, we have seen marked increases in mortality," Gunn said.  USA TODAY investigation:Coronavirus at meat packing plants worse than first thought  University of California-Irvine Division of Infectious Diseases Chief Donald Forthal told USA TODAY that Trump's statement about the U.S. having one of the lowest mortality rates would be wrong based on current data, but the data was "raw and inaccurate" because of issues with the "availability of testing."  There were "lots of undocumented cases for every documented case," which would make the calculation of deaths as a percentage of total cases "difficult to ascertain."
2020-04-22	Coronavirus has radically altered life in the United States at mind-bending speed in the past three months and our understanding of the virus is changing just as quickly.  More than 2.5 million cases have been confirmed worldwide, and the U.S. has reported more than any other nation. A large portion of the country now lives under stay-at-home orders, plaguing the economy and causing millions of Americans to lose their jobs.  At the same time, public health officials are often adjusting policies as new research reveals more about the virus and its symptoms. It's happening at a pace that can be bewildering and confusing to the average person.  To help you keep up with all the changes, here’s a running list of what we know about the new coronavirus and the illness it causes, COVID-19:  Reports of new coronavirus symptoms: loss of taste or smell, 'COVID toes'  When the World Health Organization and the CDC first warned about the new coronavirus, they urged the public to be on the lookout for these three main symptoms: fever, dry cough and difficulty breathing.  There were some reports of gastrointestinal issues, such as diarrhea, but these symptoms appear to be rare.  Since then, doctors have been able to identify more symptoms in patients.  There are now six new symptoms that the CDC cautions could be signs of the coronavirus: chills, repeated shaking with chills, muscle pain, headache, sore throat and a loss of taste or smell.  Shortness of breath was tweaked to "shortness of breath or difficulty breathing" by the CDC. The CDC recommends seeking "medical attention immediately" for trouble breathing, persistent pain or pressure on chest, bluish lips or face, or a new confusion or inability to awaken.  The medical term for loss of smell is anosmia,while the term for an altered sense of taste is dysgeusia.  South Korea, China and Italy have all reported "significant numbers" of known COVID-19 patients with lost or reduced sense of smell, according to a joint statement by Claire Hopkins, president of the British Rhinological Society, and Nirmal Kumar, president of ENT UK.  "In Germany it is reported that more than 2 in 3 confirmed cases have anosmia. In South Korea, where testing has been more widespread, 30% of patients testing positive have had anosmia as their major presenting symptom in otherwise mild cases," they wrote.  Another more recent symptom accumulating more anecdotal evidence has been informally called “COVID toes.” It’s the presence of purple or blue lesions on a patient’s feet and toes, most commonly appearing in young adults.  While experts can’t pinpoint the condition, some have hypothesized that it could be excess inflammation or a micro-clotting of blood vessels.  US coronavirus deaths: First one took place 3 weeks earlier than previously reported  President Donald Trump announced the first coronavirus fatality Feb. 29, but California officials later announced coronavirus fatalities that occurred weeks earlier.  The medical examiner in Santa Clara County, southeast of San Francisco, said April 21 that autopsies on the bodies of two people who died Feb. 6 and Feb. 17 showed that they were positive for the virus.  The victims "died at home during a time when very limited testing was available only through the CDC," Dr. Michelle Jorden said in a statement. She said criteria set by the CDC at the time restricted testing only to individuals with a known travel history and who sought medical care for specific symptoms.  Should I wear face mask for coronavirus? CDC said no, then yes.  For months, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention urged the mass public not to wear a mask unless they were sick or caring for a COVID-19 patient, citing concerns about supply and effectiveness.  They reversed that guidance in early April.  Now, the CDC recommends people wear homemade or cloth masks in public. The agency says the mask should fit snugly against the face, be secured with ties or ear loops, include multiple layers of fabric and be laundered after every use.  The new guidance came after research suggested that presymptomatic and asymptomatic carriers were able to transmit the virus and infect healthy people.  Officials recommend wearing these masks in public settings where social distancing measures are difficult to maintain, such as grocery stores and pharmacies. Many cities and states require masks in public, including New York, New Jersey and Los Angeles.  Is the coronavirus deadlier than the flu?  Before the coronavirus was declared a pandemic, experts noted that coronavirus cases were incomparable to this season’s influenza impact.  "Everybody is being cautious because we’re still learning about it, but right now you’re sitting in the midst of an influenza seasonal busy-ness," said Dr. David Hooper, chief of the Infection Control Unit at Massachusetts General Hospital, in late January.  "The risk is much higher for influenza for people in the U.S. than this new coronavirus."  USA TODAY investigation: Coronavirus at meat packing plants worse than first thought  US reopening:What states are relaxing social distancing restrictions and moving away from lockdowns?  However, that quickly changed as COVID-19 spread rapidly and fatality rates surpassed those seen typically seen in the seasonal flu.  In a March 3 teleconference, WHO Director-General Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus said that globally, the seasonal flu kills far less than 1% of those infected while about 3.4% of reported COVID-19 cases have died.  Even that fatality rate is uncertain and varies between countries, although most nations report a death rate significantly higher than the flu. In the U.S., limited testing has made it difficult to determine an accurate number.  Contributing: John Bacon, Ryan Miller and Susan Miller, USA TODAY. Follow Adrianna Rodriguez on Twitter: @AdriannaUSAT.
2020-04-22	A dozen Iranian speed boats brazenly swarm U.S. warships in the Persian Gulf. A Russian fighter jet buzzes a U.S. Navy surveillance plane flying over the Mediterranean Sea. North Korea fires a barrage of missiles launched from the air and ground.  All the incidents took place in mid-April. All were mounted by some of America's top adversaries. As coronavirus stalks the globe, sapping attention, budgets and government personnel at home and abroad, U.S. adversaries from Moscow to Pyongyang are flexing their muscles and testing U.S. resolve.  U.S. defense and national security officials said that although America remains on guard for potential threats as it works to overcome the coronavirus in a world of unpredictability, they have not detected extraordinary reasons to sound the alarm.  Stay healthy:Top priority for nuclear forces amid coronavirus pandemic  President Donald Trump sent out a warning Wednesday on Twitter: "I have instructed the United States Navy to shoot down and destroy any and all Iranian gunboats if they harass our ships at sea." He offered no additional context.  Defense Secretary Mark Esper told NBC's "Today" last week that "it's hard to say" whether the Iranian and Russian episodes reflected efforts to probe for U.S. vulnerability amid the COVID-19 pandemic that has sickened more than 826,000 Americans.  The Defense Department, he said, considered "this a normal week."  No Americans were killed or injured as a result of the Iranian, Russian and North Korean actions. National security analysts said that the timing of these incidents may not be coincidental but that there is little evidence that America's global opponents are capitalizing on conditions created by the pandemic.  America's enemies "aren't necessarily doing anything different or unusual because of coronavirus," said Joseph Cirincione, president of Ploughshares Fund, a Washington-based global security foundation. "And this thing cuts both ways: All militaries are concerned about others' perception of them during a time of crisis.  "Is the timing suspicious? Maybe. Internal dynamics can also explain these incidents."  To be sure, provocations from U.S. foes and rivals are not new.  On April 15, when Iranian Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps Navy boats darted past U.S. warships conducting exercises in international waters in the northern Persian Gulf it was the latest example of routine Iranian harassment toward U.S. vessels that has intensified since the Trump administration exited a nuclear deal with Tehran.  Iran claims revenge for Qasem Soleimani. The US Navy is still a target  That same day, a Russian SU-35 fighter jet came within 25 feet of a U.S. Navy P-8A Poseidon surveillance plane flying in international airspace, putting the pilots and crew at risk, according to the U.S. Navy. Air Force Gen. Tod Wolters, NATO’s supreme allied commander in Europe, characterized the Russian pilot’s maneuver, including a pass in which he flew upside down, as unprofessional as opposed to incitement.  That, too, was just the most recent incident in a string of encounters between Russian and U.S. jets that raised concerns over the risk of midair collisions over European airspace. A report in 2014 from the European Leadership Network, a London-based think tank, found at least 40 examples that year of dangerous incidents involving Russian and Western militaries in "violations of national airspace, emergency scrambles, narrowly avoided mid-air collisions and close encounters at sea."  North Korea's salvo of suspected cruise missiles toward waters off Japan on April 14 was among the most high-profile missile tests Pyongyang has conducted since nuclear negotiations with the Trump administration stalled.  The tests came on the eve of a North Korean state anniversary and parliamentary elections in neighboring South Korea. Shea Cotton, a nuclear security expert at the James Martin Center for Nonproliferation Studies at the Middlebury Institute of International Studies, warned a week earlier in a column for Defense News that North Korea is "signaling this will be its busiest year of missile testing yet." Cotton noted that Kim Jong Un's regime conducted nine missile tests in March, the most in a single month recorded in his research institute's database.  Cirincione said he did not think the U.S. military was more at risk as the Pentagon responds domestically and overseas to the COVID-19 health crisis despite the idling of the USS Theodore Roosevelt, a nuclear-powered aircraft carrier docked in Guam, that has been sidelined because hundreds of its sailors tested positive for the disease.  "We have such an overcapacity of military," he said. "Bases all over the world and an alliance system like no other. Is anybody pressing us at the minute? China or the Russians or even the Islamic State terror group? I just don't see it."  About 3,500 active-duty U.S. military personnel, out of approximately 1.3 million, have tested positive for coronavirus, according to the Defense Department.  A U.S. State Department report published this month said China might be secretly pushing ahead with low-level underground nuclear tests despite its claims that it strictly adheres to an international moratorium on all nuclear tests.  Although Cirincione said unproven allegations that Beijing carries out low-intensity nuclear tests have been "percolating" for many years and nothing indicates China is exploiting a period of U.S. weakness. China, after all, is still grappling with COVID-19 – albeit at a later stage.  Trita Parsi, executive vice president of the Quincy Institute for Responsible Statecraft, a think tank in Washington, said that before coronavirus fully took hold in the USA, the Trump administration, not Iran, appeared to view the outbreak as an opportunity to gain advantage by "amplifying" its maximum pressure strategy – the view that crippling sanctions would force Tehran to choose between its own economic viability and its destabilizing activities around the region.  "Iran has all of these sanctions on it, and on top of it, you have an epidemic that makes it more likely Iran's regime will collapse. As a result, any sanctions relief would be counterproductive," Parsi said, summarizing how he said U.S. officials such as Secretary of State Mike Pompeo approached the Iran issue when Tehran was seeing hundreds of COVID-19 deaths a day and the USA had relatively few.  He said both sides viewed the outbreak as a potential battleground.  Parsi said the global spread of the virus could provide "an excuse and an opportunity for the Iranians to do something really drastic that may have less of a downside – I'm not saying there aren't risks – than under normal circumstances."  One example: In mid-March, the Pentagon launched airstrikes targeting an Iranian-backed Shiite militia group in Iraq suspected in a rocket attack that killed and wounded American and British troops stationed at a base north of Baghdad. At the time, the severity of the coronavirus outbreak was beginning to become clear to the Trump administration. It did not take the strike any further.  "The politics of the outbreak are churning against the backdrop of wider U.S.-Iran animosity that has grown steadily since Tehran decided in May 2019 to counter U.S. 'maximum pressure' with 'maximum resistance,' " the International Crisis Group, a Washington-based think tank, wrote in a research paper in early April.  Official:Pentagon launches airstrikes targeting Iran-backed militia  A Defense official characterized the Iranian and Russian incidents as "weird," noting that the Russians haven't made such a hazardous maneuver in some time and the exercises in the Persian Gulf had been underway for a week before the Iranians responded. Time will tell if the incidents are isolated or part of a pattern, said the defense official, who was not authorized to speak publicly about them.  Adding to the impression the U.S. is being challenged in some way amid the pandemic: On the same day that Moscow's fighter jet buzzed a U.S. Navy surveillance plane in the Mediterranean Sea, Russia's military tested a series of missiles that U.S. Space Command Gen. Jay Raymond said were capable of "destroying" U.S. satellites in low orbit. On April 22, Iran launched what it described as its first military satellite into orbit, a move that could support its long-range ballistic missile program. Tehran's missiles underpin part of the Trump administration's tensions with Iran because Washington is concerned they could carry nuclear weapons.  Gen. Hossein Salami, the head of Iran’s Revolutionary Guard, said its space program reflected Iran's membership of the "world's most powerful armies."  Analysis: Trump halts funding to WHO. Experts say we need it more than ever  The COVID-19 pandemic has forced the Pentagon to shift its footing to remain ready to fight, and troop rotations and some routine logistical operations have been paused.  On April 14, Army Gen. Mark Milley, the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, said sailors aboard the USS Harry Truman saw their deployment extended to account for the USS Theodore Roosevelt's unscheduled sick time in Guam.  The U.S. Air Force flexed its muscles with an "Elephant Walk" in which B-52 bombers and other jets taxied on the runway at Guam's Andersen Air Force base.  The “Elephant Walk" on April 13 was conducted with joint assets across Guam to showcase U.S. military readiness and "the ability to generate combat airpower at a moment's notice to ensure regional stability throughout the Indo-Pacific," Air Force Lt. Col. Megan Schafer, a spokeswoman for Pacific Air Forces, said in an email.  For various reasons, America's adversaries are also more potentially imperiled.  In North Korea, there are unconfirmed reports Kim Jong Un may be gravely ill after heart surgery. The North Korean leader's health has long been a focus of speculation. He's a heavy smoker and suffers from obesity. South Korea's government downplayed the reports. If Kim did die, it could put the nuclear-armed and isolated country in a fraught security posture with the United States as it dealt with a succession battle and perhaps COVID-19. North Korea has denied any infections.  More than 10% of Iran's lawmakers have fallen ill with coronavirus, far more than anywhere else. The disease has not spared top officials, including its senior vice president, Cabinet ministers, Revolutionary Guard members and Health Ministry officials.  Several Iran lawmakers died from COVID-19.  Public health 'superstar' or pro-China propagandist? WHO chief lands in crosshairs  One area where the COVID-19 field may be more level is terrorism, according to Colin Clarke, a security expert at the Soufan Center, a New York-based think tank.  Clarke said coronavirus led the United States, France and other countries to withdraw elite forces, mainly trainers, helping combat militant groups around the world, especially in West Africa. But "the militants themselves are also vulnerable. It's not like they can just continue life as usual while the security forces are hampered," he said. "They may use this period to be more reckless, but they are also going to get sick."  Clarke said the coronavirus outbreak highlighted that perhaps too much of America's military and security preoccupations have revolved around terrorism and more conventional military threats from well-known enemies.  "I teach a class where I ask my students to rank the five greatest threats to global security. Global pandemics is one of them. Every year it comes in at No. 5," he said.
2020-04-22	Liz Szabo and Hannah Recht  Kaiser Health News  It started with a headache in late March. Then came the body aches.  At first, Shalondra Rollins’ doctor thought it was the flu. By April 7, three days after she was finally diagnosed with COVID-19, the 38-year-old teaching assistant told her mom she was feeling winded. Within an hour, she was in an ambulance, conscious but struggling to breathe, bound for a hospital in Jackson, Mississippi.  An hour later, she was dead.  “I never in a million years thought I would get a call saying she was gone,” said her mother, Cassandra Rollins, 55. “I want the world to know she wasn’t just a statistic. She was a wonderful person. She was loved.”  Shalondra Rollins, a mother of two, had a number of factors that put her at higher risk of dying from COVID-19. Like her mother, she had diabetes. She was black, with a low-salary job.  And she lived in Mississippi, whose population is among the unhealthiest in the country.  She was one of 193 Mississippi residents who have died of COVID-19, and one of more than 4,800 with confirmed illnesses, according to state data.  USA TODAY investigation:Coronavirus at meatpacking plants worse than first thought  Like 'guided missiles' attacking the poor  Doctors know that people with underlying health conditions ― such as the 40% of Americans who live with diabetes, hypertension, asthma and other chronic diseases ― are more vulnerable to COVID-19. So are patients without access to intensive care or mechanical ventilators.  Yet some public health experts contend that social and economic conditions ― long overlooked by government leaders, policymakers and the public ― are even more powerful indicators of who will survive the pandemic. A toxic mix of racial, financial and geographic disadvantage can prove deadly.  “Most epidemics are guided missiles attacking those who are poor, disenfranchised and have underlying health problems,” said Dr. Thomas Frieden, a former director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.  Federal health officials have known for nearly a decade which communities are most likely to suffer devastating losses ― both in lives and jobs ― during a disease outbreak or other major disaster. In 2011, the CDC created the Social Vulnerability Index to rate all the nation’s counties on factors such as poverty, housing and access to vehicles that predict their ability to prepare, cope and recover from disasters.  Yet the country has neglected to respond to warning signs that these communities ― where people already live sicker and die younger than those in more affluent areas ― could be devastated by a pandemic, said Dr. Otis Brawley, a professor at Johns Hopkins University.  “This is a failure of American society to take care of the Americans who need help the most,” Brawley said. Although vulnerable counties are scattered throughout the country, they are concentrated across the South, in a belt of deprivation stretching from coastal North Carolina to the Mexican border and deserts of the Southwest.  Some of the most vulnerable communities are in Mississippi, which has the highest poverty rate of any state; Indian reservations in New Mexico, the second-poorest state, where thousands of households lack running water; and cities such as Memphis, Tennessee, a hot spot for asthma that recently ranked among the bottom 15 metro areas in offering safe, livable housing to its residents.  The first U.S. COVID-19 cases were detected in metropolitan areas, with Hispanics and blacks making up a disproportionate number of deaths in New York City. Outbreaks are now flaring in rural communities, the South and Upper Midwest. Both the New Orleans and Albany, Georgia, areas have infection rates above 1% of their populations. More than 1,600 people have been diagnosed with COVID-19 in the Sioux Falls, South Dakota, home to a meat-packing plant that employs immigrants and refugees from around the world.  Whether COVID-19 patients live or die probably depends more on their baseline health than whether they have access to an intensive care bed, Brawley said. Some hospitals report that only about 20% of COVID-19 patients on ventilators survive.  Many public health experts fear that COVID-19 will follow the same trajectory as HIV and AIDS, which began as a disease of big coastal cities ― New York, Los Angeles and San Francisco ― but quickly entrenched in the black community and in the South, which is considered the epicenter of the nation’s HIV/AIDS outbreak today.  Like HIV and AIDS, the first COVID-19 cases in the United States were diagnosed in “jet-setters and people who traveled to Europe and other places,” said Dr. Carlos del Rio, professor of infectious diseases at the Emory University Rollins School of Public Health. “As it settles in America, [COVID-19] is now disproportionately impacting minority populations, just like HIV.”  COVID-19:Tyson says it will close pork processing plant in Iowa indefinitely  Iran, North Korea, Russia:America's adversaries emboldened to flex their muscles amid coronavirus  Mississippi: The legacy of segregation  One in 5 Mississippi residents live in poverty.  It is also in the heart of the “Stroke Belt,” a band of 11 Southern states where obesity, hypertension and smoking contribute to an elevated rate of strokes. Blacks make up 38% of the state population ― but more than half of COVID-19 infections in which race is known. They also account for nearly two-thirds of deaths from the virus, according to the state health department.  Medical and socioeconomic conditions put Mississippians at higher risk of COVID-19 in several ways, said Frieden, now CEO of Resolve to Save Lives, a global public health initiative.  People in low-income or minority communities are more likely to work in jobs that expose them to the virus ― in factories or grocery stores and public transit, for example. They’re less likely to have paid sick leave and more likely to live in crowded housing. They have high rates of chronic illness. They also have less access to health care, especially routine preventive services. Mississippi is one of 14 states that have not expanded Medicaid.  “If they do have chronic conditions such as hypertension or diabetes,” Frieden said, “the health system doesn’t work as well for them, and they are less likely to have it under control.”  Minority communities suffer the legacy of segregation, which has trapped generations in a downward economic spiral, said Dr. Steven Woolf, a professor at Virginia Commonwealth University in Richmond.  “The fact that African Americans are more likely to die of heart disease is not an accident,” Woolf said. “COVID-19 is a very fresh, vivid example of an old problem.”  Research shows that “stress, economic disadvantage, economic deprivation not only affect the people experiencing it, but it’s passed on from one generation to another,” Woolf said.  Tonja Sesley-Baymon, president and CEO of the Memphis Urban League, noted that social distancing is a privilege of the affluent. Just getting to work can put people at risk if they ride the bus. “If you take public transportation, social distancing is not an option for you,” she said.  Dr. LouAnn Woodward, the University of Mississippi Medical Center’s top executive, has treated many people in the emergency room whose life-threatening crises could have been prevented with routine care. She’s seen diabetes patients with blood sugar levels high enough to put them in a coma.  Health insurance is only part of the problem, she said. When Woodward asked one woman why she waited so long to seek treatment for her breast tumor, the woman said, “I just got a ride.”  Cassandra Rollins, the youngest of 11 siblings, knows hardship. Two of her sisters were murdered. She helped raise their children, who are now grown.  She raised four of her own children as a single mother. Shalondra, the eldest, often acted as a second mom to her brother 18 years younger. Shalondra even attended her brother’s parent-teacher conferences when her mother couldn’t leave work.  In September, her brother died by suicide at age 20.  When her daughter was diagnosed with COVID-19, Cassandra Rollins said, “we had just gotten to a point where we didn’t cry every day.”  Opinion:During coronavirus isolation, treating mental health issues through telemedicine is vital  The Navajo: Health suffers in food deserts  The coronavirus is battering impoverished communities. More than 1,200 COVID-19 cases and 48 deaths have been diagnosed in the Navajo Nation, the country’s largest Indian reservation, located on 27,000 square miles at the junction of Arizona, New Mexico and Utah.  There are few hospitals in the region, an area the size of West Virginia, and most lack intensive care units.  The communities that make up the Navajo Nation have among the worst scores on the CDC’s Social Vulnerability Index. Thirty-nine percent of residents live in poverty.  With a shortage of adequate housing, many live in modest homes with up to 10 people under one roof, said Jonathan Nez, Navajo Nation president. That can make it harder to contain the virus.  “We’re social people,” Nez said. “We take care of our elders at home.”  The first residents tested positive in mid-March, and cases skyrocketed within weeks. In the eight counties comprising the Navajo, Hopi and Zuni nations, 1,930 residents have tested positive and 79 have died. That’s more cases per 100,000 residents than the Washington, D.C., area.  The Navajo Nation has taken aggressive steps to control the outbreak, including weekend curfews enforced by checkpoints and patrols.  But more than 30% of its households lack a toilet or running water, according to the Navajo Water Project, a nonprofit that installs plumbing in homes. Residents often drive long distances to fill containers with water, Nez said.  Having no running water makes it difficult to properly wash hands to prevent coronavirus infections.  Navajo patients with diabetes have long struggled to clean skin infections, said Dr. Valory Wangler, chief medical officer at Rehoboth McKinley Christian Health Care Services in Gallup, New Mexico.  Maintaining a healthy weight on the reservation is challenging, Nez said. Residents commonly spend hours daily traveling by car to and from work, leaving little time to exercise or cook. While the region has fast-food restaurants, far fewer stores sell fresh fruits and vegetables, he said, adding, “we’re in a food desert.”  Memphis: Childhood diseases take their toll  Most children with COVID-19 are at low risk of death. But many adults felled by the disease suffer the long-term effects of health damage they suffered as children, such as lead exposure or asthma, said Brawley of Johns Hopkins.  More than 208,000 homes in Memphis, Tennessee, pose potential lead hazards. Lead ― toxic at any level ― can cause brain damage and lead to hypertension and kidney disease, conditions that increase the risk of complications in COVID-19 patients.  Shelby County, which includes Memphis, is home to 937,000 residents, 14% of the state’s population. Its COVID-19 burden is outsized, representing one-quarter of the cases and deaths in Tennessee. Where race is known, most patients have been black.  The National Center for Healthy Housing ranked Memphis the worst metropolitan area for housing in 2013, although its rating has since improved slightly.  Memphis, with older housing stock and one of the poorest big U.S. cities, is a hot spot for asthma, which afflicts up to 13.5% of its children. The CDC has said that people with asthma may be at higher risk from COVID-19, although some hospitals haven’t seen higher death rates in this population.  Blacks are almost three times as likely to die of asthma as whites, according to the Health and Human Services' Office of Minority Health. Many children develop asthma after being exposed to tobacco smoke or substandard housing with dust mites, cockroaches, rodents and molds. Some suffer for a lifetime.  Many poor people can’t afford asthma medications and have no regular source of medical care to monitor their disease, said Dr. Robin Womeodu, chief medical officer at Methodist University Hospital.  Asthma patients often go through “a revolving door in and out of the emergency department,” with an increased risk of death, she said.  Health experts say these health risks could remain long after the pandemic passes.  “The question is, ‘Do we value all life equally?’” said Dr. James Hildreth, president and CEO of Meharry Medical College in Nashville, a historically black college. “If we do, we will find a way to address these things.”  KHN data editor Elizabeth Lucas contributed to this report.  Kaiser Health News (KHN) is a nonprofit news service covering health issues. It is an editorially independent program of the Kaiser Family Foundation that is not affiliated with Kaiser Permanente.  Methodology  Kaiser Health News analyzed COVID-19 case rates across the country and compared them to a number of demographic factors. KHN obtained COVID-19 data by county from The New York Times and populations from 2019 U.S. Census Bureau Population Estimates to calculate cases per 100,000 residents. The national map displays COVID-19 case rates per 100,000 by commuting zone, defined as a group of counties that approximate local economies and can cross state boundaries.  The charts comparing COVID-19 cases in Mississippi and Shelby County, Tennessee, by population and race are irrespective of Hispanic ethnicity because ethnicity is coded separately in the data.  Data sources  COVID-19 cases and deaths by county: The New York Times  Commuting zone definitions: Urban Institute, with adjustments for recent county boundary changes  Hospitals and ICU beds: Kaiser Health News analysis, Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services  Population: U.S. Census Bureau Population Estimates, 2019  Race, ethnicity and age: U.S. Census Bureau American Community Survey, 2018  Health insurance: U.S. Census Bureau Small Area Health Insurance Estimates, 2018  Poverty: U.S. Census Bureau Small Area Income and Poverty Estimates, 2018  Social Vulnerability: Centers for Disease Control and Prevention Social Vulnerability Index, 2018
2020-04-22	It was an epic day for baseball in South Korea: The pros got to compete against actual opponents in exhibitions.  And a date for real, live games was established.  On the field, scoreboards lit up with actual scores, beautiful in their symmetry, even if there were no fans to witness a pair of 4-2 games, a 6-3, a 5-2; hey, what's this, the Lotte Giants taking it to the NC Dinos, 8-0.  And on the calendar, a date players and fans alike can truly look forward to: May 5, when the Korea Baseball Organization will launch its 144-game season.  CORONAVIRUS & SPORTS: Get the latest news and information right in your inbox. Sign up here.  KBO teams have been playing intrasquad games for weeks — of late, the umpires, not the players, have worn masks — and Tuesday finally marked the dawn of what we might consider their abbreviated Cactus/Grapefruit league stretch. Then comes the regular season, with a full slate lined up but also the specter of a three-week shutdown looming should any player or coach test positive for COVID-19.  At this point, we'll now pivot to the statistics that matter most for fans hoping to see Major League Baseball, in full or at all, in 2020.  As of Wednesday morning, there were more than 825,000 confirmed cases of coronavirus in the United States, according to Johns Hopkins University's coronavirus resource center, and more than 45,000 deaths. In South Korea, more than 10,600 confirmed cases and 238 deaths.  The USA's population is just more than six times the size of South Korea's 51 million. And South Korea and the USA recorded their first cases of COVID-19 on the same day, Jan. 19.  It's clear the handling of the virus put both countries on different tracks, so while South Korea can implore its players to play ball, we are still reckoning with missteps.  Nothing can get back the three months that preceded our current fates. For now, we will have box scores to look at — even if Tyler Saladino is the most familiar name to American fans — and some highlights to peruse.  As for our stateside stars? All we can do is get better at this and hope there's still a window before autumn.  Sports video of the day  Feeling helpless? Perhaps a dose of Big Papi will help. It's been seven years since David Ortiz delivered his unforgettable "This is our (expletive) city" speech to a Fenway Park crowd still mourning the victims of the Boston Marathon bombing a week earlier.  NESN provides this nifty look-back at empowerment and civic pride.  Story time! Here's some of our best  JORDAN:Could have played in MLB if one former GM had his wish  OPINION:A-Rod and J.Lo owning the Mets? It's not impossible  OPINION:Gronk brings more star power to Buccaneers, but leaves one big question  COWBOYS OWNER:'Highly unlikely’ Dallas trades away first-round NFL draft pick  NFL DRAFT:Five big-name players could fall out of first round  OPINION:Uncertainty, not optimism, over 2021 Olympics takes hold in Japan  NUGGETS COACH:Canceling NBA season possible but games without fans more likely  ENDLESS DEBATE:Nuggets' Malone compares Michael Jordan and LeBron James  What we're watching  2008 NBA Finals: Lakers vs. Celtics Game 4 (8 p.m. ET) and Game 6 (10 ET).  2014 NFL Draft: Jadeveon Clowney, Johnny Manziel and many more. 8 ET, ESPN2.  2014 AL wild card game: Athletics at Royals, 7 ET, MLB Network.  Sports we're missing  NBA and NHL playoffs  MLB  Texas Rangers at Philadelphia Phillies  Cincinnati Reds at St. Louis Cardinals  Kansas City Royals at Chicago White Sox  Baltimore Orioles at Los Angeles Angels  Oakland Athletics at Cleveland Indians  New York Yankees at Detroit Tigers  Los Angeles Dodgers at Washington Nationals  Milwaukee Brewers at Pittsburgh Pirates  Miami Marlins at New York Mets  Toronto Blue Jays at Boston Red Sox  Arizona Diamondbacks at Atlanta Braves  San Diego Padres at Chicago Cubs  Seattle Mariners at Minnesota Twins  Tampa Bay Rays at Houston Astros  Colorado Rockies at San Francisco Giants  Follow Gabe Lacques on Twitter @GabeLacques.
2020-04-24	AP  SEOUL, South Korea (AP) — Players, coaches and fans have two weeks to get used to new rules around soccer in South Korea after the K-League announced Friday that the delayed season will kick off on May 8.  Jeonbuk Motors will take on Suwon Bluewings in the opening game, which was originally scheduled for Feb. 29.  The league was suspended when South Korea went into lockdown during the coronavirus pandemic, and players have recently returned to training and started playing practice games this week.  There have been more than 10,700 cases of COVID-19 in South Korea, and 240 deaths according to a tally compiled by Johns Hopkins University.  Restrictions are gradually being lifted and new daily cases of the coronavirus have dropped to single digits this week in South Korea after peaking in February, but not enough to allow fans to attend games at the start of the season.  The league is also imposing strict social-distancing regulations for players on and off the field. On the field, it apparently means players can't even converse with teammates or officials during games, and definitely no shaking hands.  “Things like not spitting during the game, we can do no problem but not talking to teammates is impossible,” Incheon United captain Kim Do-hyeok told reporters after a practice game. The interviews took place on the field rather than in the usual mixed zone inside the stadium. “If we can’t have conversations on the field, we may as well not play soccer at all.”  Kim is hoping spectators will be soon back in the stadiums cheering on the 10 teams in Asia’s oldest professional league. The Korean baseball league has also started pre-season games and is set for opening day on May 5, also in empty stadiums.  Sports leagues and events in most parts of the world have been shuttered during the pandemic.  “It would be great to play in front of fans, but if we all play our part in stopping the spread of the virus then they will soon be back in their seats," Kim said.  Coaches are having to adapt, too.  Suwon coach Kim Do-gyun had issues trying to communicate with his players while wearing a mask.  “It’s true that it is uncomfortable when you are trying to give instructions during the game,” Kim said. “At the moment, however, these are things that you have to do.”  __  More AP sports: https://apnews.com/apf-sports and https://twitter.com/AP_Sports
2020-04-24	As the nation's death toll from the coronavirus marked the grim milestone of more than 50,000 people, some businesses in Georgia were slowly reopening Friday despite backlash from the state's mayors and President Donald Trump.  Also drawing a strong reaction across the country were Trump's comments late Thursday, which suggested treating COVID-19 with disinfectants, perhaps by injection, or by treating patients with "light inside the body." Disinfectant manufacturer Lysol, Maryland emergency managers and other health officials were quick to warn people against ingesting or injecting disinfectants, saying the idea was potentially dangerous.  The FDA issued a warning Friday against the anti-malaria drugs Trump also has touted as possible COVID-19 cures. The agency said hydroxychloroquine and chloroquine should not be used outside of a hospital setting or clinical trial as they can cause serious complications related to heart rhythm problems.  Meanwhile, Friday also marks the beginning of Ramadan, Islam's holiest month. But some are worried that social distancing may affect its traditions such as daytime fasting, overnight festivity and communal prayer.  The virus has killed more than 194,000 people globally, according to Johns Hopkins University data. More than 2.7 million confirmed cases have been reported, including more than 890,000 in the U.S.  Our live blog is being updated throughout the day. Refresh for the latest news, and get updates in your inbox with The Daily Briefing. More headlines:  Trump touts sunlight study's impact on coronavirus, but officials urge caution  A federal study that indicates sunlight and humidity can weaken the coronavirus prompted Trump to float the idea of treating patients with "light inside the body." However, top administration officials warned against Americans changing their behavior based on the preliminary findings.  The Department of Homeland Security study, which the the agency described as "emerging," found the lifespan of the virus on a surface or in the air could be significantly reduced by exposure to sunlight and humidity.  Bill Bryan, an undersecretary of science and technology at the Department of Homeland Security, stressed that the findings were not so conclusive that Americans should abandon social distancing guidelines promoted by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and enforced by state orders across the country. It would be "irresponsible for us to say that we feel that the summer is just going to totally kill the virus," Bryan told reporters.  – John Fritze, David Jackson and Nicholas Wu  Maryland, Lysol say don't ingest disinfectant after Trump's comment  The makers of Lysol, one of the nation's largest cleaning and disinfecting brands, and emergency managers in Maryland have warned the public not to inject or ingest disinfectants as a coronavirus treatment a day after President Donald Trump speculated about another possible treatment for COVID-19: injecting disinfectants.  Parent company Reckitt Benckiser, the maker of Lysol and Dettol, said in a statement on its website Friday: "We must be clear that under no circumstance should our disinfectant products be administered into the human body (through injection, ingestion or any other route)."  The Maryland Emergency Management Agency also warned against dangerous disinfectant use in a Friday tweet after the agency received "several calls."  "This is a reminder that under no circumstances should any disinfectant product be administered into the body through injection, ingestion or any other route," the tweet says.  At Thursday's press briefing, Bill Bryan, an undersecretary of science and technology at the Department of Homeland Security, said preliminary findings show bleach and isopropyl alcohol as effective in killing the virus on surfaces. The finding prompted Trump to say later in the briefing, "I see the disinfectant, where it knocks it out in a minute. One minute. And is there a way we can do something like that, by injection inside or almost a cleaning."  – Dalvin Brown, Savannah Behrmann and Joel Shannon  Reaction:Twitter names Trump the 'Tide Pods' president after he suggests disinfectant injections  FDA: Don't use hydroxychloroquine or chloroquine for COVID-19 outside of hospital, clinical trial  The Food and Drug Administration issued a warning Friday against the use of anti-malaria drugs touted by President Donald Trump as a possible COVID-19 treatment outside of a hospital setting or clinical trial.  Hydroxychloroquine and chloroquine can cause serious problems related to patients' heart rhythms for COVID-19 cases, especially when used in combination with other medicines that have the effect of causing abnormal heart rhythms or a dangerously rapid heart rate, the FDA warned.  "Hydroxychloroquine and chloroquine have not been shown to be safe and effective for treating or preventing COVID-19," the FDA warning said. The agency has, however, temporarily authorized their use for treating the virus in hospitalized patients when a clinical trial is not available. Clinical trials testing the drugs efficacy and safety in COVID-19 patients are being studied, the FDA said.  Protests continue in Wisconsin  Thousands of people gathered on the steps of the Wisconsin State Capitol in Madison on Friday to protest Gov. Tony Evers' orders, rallying in close quarters on a day the state saw its highest daily increase in positive cases of coronavirus.  The crowd stood in defiance of the governor's order to keep businesses and schools closed, and people apart, in an effort to limit the spread of the virus for which there is no vaccine. Circulating among the crowd were petitions to recall Evers and signs that said "All Workers Are Essential" and "Death is preferable to communism." American flags were in abundance, and some participants openly carried rifles.  Nurses lined Wisconsin's capitol building steps with 1,300 candles Thursday night in tribute to those currently hospitalized with COVID-19 in the state. Hundreds of people crammed the steps of one of the capitol's entrances Friday.  – Ricardo Torres, Molly Beck and Bill Glauber, Milwaukee Journal Sentinel  Some Georgia businesses slowly reopen  Businesses in Georgia took their first steps toward a slow reopening of its economy Friday as the state's push to ease social distancing measures faced criticism from public health officials, mayors and President Donald Trump.  Republican Gov. Brian Kemp has assured businesses that Georgia's new cases and hospital visits have lowered enough for barbers, tattoo artists, massage therapists and personal trainers to return to work with restrictions.  Still, deaths and infections rise as many business owners plan to stay closed.  By 11 a.m. Friday, Good Look Barber Shop in Marietta, Ga. had serviced at least 20 clients, owner Y’Kheyo Underwood said. Shannon Stafford, owner of New Era Hair Salon in Savannah, said she scheduled only one client Friday as a test run for the reopening.  – Nicquel Terry Ellis  Trump signs $484 billion stimulus bill for small businesses, hospitals  President Donald Trump signed a nearly half-trillion dollar bill Friday that provides more funding for struggling hospitals and replenishes a loan program designed to help small businesses impacted by the pandemic.  The $484 billion legislation, which cleared the Senate on Tuesday and the House on Thursday, provides an additional $320 billion to the Paycheck Protection Program, which offers forgivable loans to small businesses. The program was created in March with an initial allocation of $349 billion, but it ran out of money last week and was forced to shut down.  The new law also includes about $75 billion in relief for hospitals that have been overwhelmed with treating coronavirus patients. Another $25 billion in the measure will go toward a new coronavirus testing program.  – Michael Collins  USDA let poultry plants crowd workers amid outbreak  As coronavirus cases mounted at meatpacking plants this month, the federal government granted 15 poultry processors waivers to cut chickens faster, usually by crowding more workers onto their production lines.  Overall, poultry plants with such waivers are at least 10 times more likely than the meatpacking industry as a whole to have coronavirus cases among workers, USA TODAY and the Midwest Center for Investigative Reporting found.  The U.S. Department of Agriculture granted more of those waivers in one week in April than it had in any previous month over the past eight years of the program’s existence. But an agency spokesperson wouldn’t explain why in an email responding to USA TODAY’s questions.  Three of the 15 poultry plants granted new waivers in April have reported outbreaks of COVID-19, the media outlets found. Another three plants that already had waivers also have outbreaks. Some 53 poultry plants nationwide have the waivers.  Read the full investigation here.  – Sky Chadde and Kyle Bagenstose  Cuomo: Trump 'right to ask the question' of WHO coronavirus response  New York Gov. Andrew Cuomo, a Democrat, suggested President Donald Trump was "right to ask the question" of the World Health Organization's response to the coronavirus pandemic.  "This was too little too late," Cuomo said at a Friday news conference. The governor criticized the global response to the pandemic as the virus began spreading in China late last year, and soon spread to Europe and the United States.  Cuomo said more than 13,000 flights carrying more than 2.2 million people from Europe came to the larger New York area after the virus started spreading. He said Trump was right to stop travel from China but that quicker action was needed to slow the spread from China to other countries sooner.  "Does anyone think the virus was still in China waiting for us to act two months later?" he said. "The horse had already left the barn by the time we moved."  – Joseph Spector  NY virus cases mostly didn't come from China:European travelers brought coronavirus to New York long before first case confirmed, studies suggest  More coronavirus news and information from USA TODAY:  Will there be a vaccine by 2021? Experts say that may be unrealistic  In a series of breathtaking multibillion-dollar bets, possible vaccine candidates to fight the new coronavirus are being prepared for production across the globe in one of the most dramatic examples of short cuts and streamlining aimed at meeting what many experts consider unrealistic U.S. target dates for a vaccine.  Dr. Anthony Fauci has repeatedly said a vaccine may be ready in 12 to 18 months, but that timeline would shatter all precedents for developing a new vaccine, which typically takes many years.  Manufacturing tens of millions of unproven vaccine doses on spec is unheard of, there is no certainty any will work, and if one does prove effective, getting it into the arms of people will require the Food and Drug Administration to speed up its approval process.  – Elizabeth Weise, David Heath and Joey Garrison  New York rapper dead at 35 from coronavirus complications  New York rapper Fred the Godson died Thursday after being diagnosed with COVID-19, his manager confirmed to USA TODAY. He was 35. "New York City, Hip-Hop and the world lost a really good one yesterday," the rapper's manager, David Evans, said in an emailed statement. "Fred left this world better than he found it."  The "Armageddon" artist revealed in a social media post earlier this month that he had contracted coronavirus. A few days after Fred's post, his wife LeeAnn Jemmott told XXL Magazine that her husband was in the intensive care unit.  – Rasha Ali  Report: Patients still test positive for virus month or more after recovery  A growing number of COVID-19 patients in China are still testing positive for the virus after having recovered and not showing symptoms, according to a report from Reuters. Doctors in Wuhan said that some patients have tested negative but then later tested positive again, some up to 70 days later.  Chinese health officials told the news agency that there have been no confirmed cases of these patients infecting someone else, but it still raises concerns of patients remaining positive and potentially infectious as countries around the world look to end lockdowns.  South Korea and Italy have also reported cases of patients testing positive for about a month, Reuters reported.  Contributing: The Associated Press
2020-04-26	The Editorial Board  USA TODAY  People in the United States like to believe in "American exceptionalism," the notion that the nation's military, economic and moral superiority make it an exception among the countries of the world. With nearly 55,000 confirmed lives lost in the United States so far and widespread economic disruption from the coronavirus, it is increasing apparent that America could learn a thing or two from how other democracies are managing the pandemic.  Taiwan, for example, never ordered a lockdown. Its baseball season is in full swing, if without crowds, and the country is so flush with pandemic supplies that it is exporting 10 million masks to America and elsewhere.  Under Iceland's "lockdown lite," kindergartens and elementary schools are on limited operations, allowing parents to work. South Korea's malls and restaurants are bustling.  Constraints are being eased in New Zealand and in Germany, which sits at the center of a European continent stricken with COVID-19.  USA 7th in pandemic death rates  The rate of coronavirus deaths in these five countries — three of which are led by women — is significantly less than that in the United States, which has lost more people to the virus than any nation and has the world's seventh highest COVID-19 mortality rate.  What are some of the lessons from afar for America?  ►Be prepared. South Korea and Taiwan learned from earlier outbreaks (the Middle East respiratory syndrome for South Korea in 2015 and the severe acute respiratory syndrome for Taiwan in 2003) and established pandemic preparedness offices that swung into action soon after the World Health Organization was notified Dec. 31 about pneumonia-like cases — later confirmed as a novel coronavirus — emerging in Wuhan, China. Taiwan began checking passengers from Wuhan for fever and other symptoms that same day, and South Korea started to screen and quarantine arriving Wuhan passengers three days later.  By contrast, the Obama administration set up a pandemic response office in the White House after the Ebola outbreak in 2014, but it was folded into a biodefense directorate in the Trump administration. The United States began a limited health screening of passengers from Wuhan in mid-January after an estimated 4,000 people from there had already come into the country, according to The New York Times.  USA 41st in per capita testing  ►Rapidly test and contain. Taiwan, South Korea, Iceland and Germany began stockpiling test kits even before their first coronavirus deaths. The United States, meanwhile, fumbled the creation of a COVID-19 test in February and has been behind ever since.  Other nations were innovative and aggressive on testing. Taiwan checked passengers disembarking from cruise ships and retested patients diagnosed with influenza or pneumonia to ensure no mistakes were made. South Korea launched drive-thru diagnostics on Feb. 26, weeks earlier than the United States.  Iceland leads the world in per capita testing, while America ranks 41st.  ►Communicate with authority, candor and science. German Chancellor Angela Merkel drove home the need for social distancing by delivering her only national address since taking office 2005, other than her annual New Year’s addresses; she declared coronavirus the most serious challenge Germany has faced since World War II. It certainly helped that she had once been a research scientist.  Merkel's signature style is sober, cautious and analytical. Equally clear and consistent in crisis communication during her Facebook live chats is New Zealand Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern. Both leaders showed success in earning the kind of trust necessary to fuel a unified public response.  Most Americans don't trust what President Donald Trump tells them about the coronavirus. He fumbled facts during an Oval Office address on the crisis, sometimes disputes his government's own scientists, and recently mused that COVID-19 might be treated by injecting people with disinfectant.  Five democracies eased the physical and economic damage wrought by COVID-19 through quick and informed leadership. Perhaps some of them will still stumble as this complex pandemic progresses. But Americans can rightly ask why, in this crisis, the United States has been exceptional in the wrong way.  If you can't see this reader poll, please refresh your page.
2020-04-26	Rob Pegoraro  Special to USA TODAY  Your pay-TV program grid no longer features live pro sports, but your pay-TV bill includes the same sports-network fees as always. That’s yet another consequence of the novel coronavirus pandemic – and, like most others, months may pass before any resolution.  The underlying reason may resonate with anybody shying away from clicking the “Cancel” button on summer-vacation flights: The sports leagues aren’t ready to admit that this year is a lost cause or even accept that a large fraction of games won’t be played in 2020.  And until Major League Baseball, the National Basketball Association, the National Hockey League and other pro sports organizations reach such a decision, the nation's sports network and other companies involved can’t accept the inevitable consequence.  Chrome, Edge, Safari or Firefox:Which browser won't crash your computer when working from home?  Working from home::The FCC is giving us a new Wi-Fi lane  “There is going to have to be some sort of a make-good,” said Daniel Cohen, senior vice president for media rights consulting at Octagon, a Stamford, Connecticut, sports and entertainment agency with a client list including NBA stars Stephen Curry and Giannis Antetokounmpo.  For now, customers are being told to keep watching for updates. A statement sent by Comcast, the largest TV provider in the U.S., captures this stay-tuned dynamic: “Any rebates will be determined once the NBA, NHL, and MLB announce the course of action for their seasons, including the number of games that will be played, and of course we will pass those rebates or other adjustments along to our customers.”  AT&T, the second-largest provider, offered a similar statement: “We are closely monitoring the situation and in contact with programmers and sports leagues as they plan their next steps. Any rebates we receive from programmers or leagues will be provided to our customers.”  That Dallas telecom giant is, however, now crediting back subscriber payments to MLB Extra Innings and MLS Direct Kick, baseball and soccer channels that carry out-of-market games.  Michael Nathanson, founding partner with the research firm Moffett Nathanson, said via email that he doesn’t expect this impasse to break until cable and satellite operators themselves start withholding payments to sports channels. “The longer that sports stay off the air, the higher the likelihood that sports networks will be paid less,” he said.  On the other hand, pay-TV providers may be leery of losing sports channels if they play hardball this year.  “At least for the first year, a lot of them will be afraid of losing the rights,” said Alan Wolk, co-founder and lead analyst at the research firm TV[R]EV. He cited the recent deal between Microsoft and the NBA to create an online platform including streamed games as one possible future: “When do the leagues start taking back the rights and just start selling it directly?”  Meanwhile, cash-strapped subscribers weary of paying for sports channels now padded with classic-game reruns can try demanding refunds directly. Phillip Dampier, president of the cable-complaints clearinghouse Stop the Cap, said steadfast threats to cancel service have yielded the usual retention offers of discounts or free channels.  Once seasons start getting canceled or radically scaled back, Octagon’s Cohen advised sports leagues and networks to think about providing pay-TV subscribers more than just refunds – tickets to games, online or in-person meet-and-greet opportunities with players, and other fan experiences.  “A financial piece can be part of it, in terms of a rebate, but there’s a lot more that we can do,” he said. “What are the leagues and the media companies going to be doing together to retain your trust, retain your dollars?”  Rob Pegoraro is a tech writer based out of Washington, D.C. To submit a tech question, email Rob at rob@robpegoraro.com. Follow him on Twitter at twitter.com/robpegoraro.
2020-04-26	Editors  USA TODAY  A plateau in new coronavirus cases  Just shy of 1 million confirmed cases of coronavirus in the United States, a leading health expert says the country is "near the end of the beginning." Tom Inglesby, director of the Johns Hopkins Center for Health Security, said Sunday the COVID-19 outbreak has reached a plateau in new cases but probably will not ease much before Memorial Day. This is in contrast to Vice President Mike Pence’s claim that the U.S. would "largely have this coronavirus epidemic behind us" by the holiday.  Six new coronavirus symptoms, CDC says  Chills, repeated shaking with chills, muscle pain, headache, sore throat and a new loss of taste or smell. Those are the six new symptoms the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention is cautioning could be signs of the coronavirus. The additions come as health experts' understanding of the deadly disease continues to evolve and confound. The CDC previously listed fever, cough and shortness of breath as symptoms.  There are more than 960,000 confirmed coronavirus cases in the U.S., according to the John Hopkins database, with the death toll surpassing 54,000. Globally, there are more than 2.9 million confirmed cases and 205,000 deaths.  Wary of reopening, country divided on next steps  Fractures in leadership between local, state and federal governments are creating an uncertain path toward reopening the country. Georgia has become a high-profile outlier after it set in motion aggressive plans to ease stay-at-home restrictions, over the objection of some local officials — even President Donald Trump. Mayor Van Johnson, of Savannah, Georgia, asked local churches to remain closed over the weekend, and Atlanta Mayor Keisha Lance Bottoms urged residents to stay home.  Most states have favored a slower, more gradual approach. Many announced in recent days a framework for reopening, often with tentative dates or benchmarks where restrictions may be relaxed.  In New York, one the states hit hardest by the coronavirus, the daily death toll dipped to 367 — the lowest one-day total in weeks, Gov. Andrew Cuomo said Sunday. He said hospitalization and testing numbers continue to show improvement and that the state agrees with federal guidelines for 14 days of declines before reopening begins.  Treasury Secretary Steven Mnuchin believes the U.S. economy will swiftly 'bounce back' from the coronavirus crisis over the summer.  Maryland Gov. Larry Hogan to Trump: Stick to the facts  Maryland Gov. Larry Hogan, a Republican who has butted heads with President Trump over his messages about the coronavirus, urged the nation's chief executive to use "fact-based'' information in his media briefings. On Thursday, Trump pondered the possibility of introducing disinfectants or ultraviolet light into the human body to kill the coronavirus, which Hogan said prompted hundreds of calls into his state's emergency hotline inquiring about ingesting Clorox or cleaning products as a treatment. "I think when misinformation comes out or you just say something that pops in your head, it does send a wrong message," Hogan said.  Real quick  What is going on with Kim Jong Un?  There has been lots of confusion around the health and whereabouts of North Korean leader Kim Jong Un. Last week, South Korea's government said it had no information to corroborate a media report suggesting Kim was gravely ill after he reportedly underwent heart surgery this month. On Sunday, the Associated Press reported a train likely belonging to Kim has been parked at his compound on the country’s east coast since last week, satellite imagery showed. The speculation about his health has been caused, in part, by a long period out of the public eye.  Chris Matthews says harassment allegation was 'highly justified'  In his first interview since resigning over inappropriate comments about a female reporter's appearance, former MSNBC anchor Chris Matthews said the reporter's complaint about him was "highly justified." Speaking to Vanity Fair's Inside the Hive podcast, Matthews, 74, acknowledged both that he made inappropriate workplace comments. “I accepted the credibility of the complaint in the article. I didn’t want to challenge the person that made the complaint and wrote the article. I thought it was very credible and certainly within the person’s rights to write that article, of course. That was highly justified."  NFL draft in the books  That's a wrap. The 2020 NFL draft has a bow on it. That means it's time for instant gratification: report cards for all 32 teams. Who got an A? Who got an F? We break it down here. And here is every pick from rounds 4 - 7. But also: the 13 biggest steals. And a team-by-team look at all of the 255 picks.  Patriots coach Bill Belichick said that not drafting a quarterback 'wasn't by design.'  These 8 undrafted free agents could catch on with teams.  P.S. Like this round up of stories? We send it to inboxes every afternoon. Sign up for "The Short List" newsletter here.  This is a compilation of stories from across the USA TODAY Network. Contributing: Associated Press.
2020-04-27	There are nearly a million cases of COVID-19 in the U.S. Many of us have no idea what’s going on with Kim Jong Un. And yes, we're still legitimately electing a president into office this year.  It's Ashley, and believe it or not, this isn't an alternate reality. It's the news.  But first, there's good happening out there: This 6-month-old left isolation amid cheers after beating the coronavirus.  The Short List newsletter is a snappy USA TODAY news roundup. Subscribe here!  Zero to a million cases quickly  The same day global coronavirus cases surged pass three million, the U.S. rapidly approached 1 million COVID-19 cases. That’s one out of every three reported cases – worldwide. The rise in cases comes as some U.S. states and cities prepare to gradually lift stay-at-home restrictions. But leaders around the country have expressed concern that opening too soon could allow for a deadly second wave of virus spread, causing further damage to the United States' already battered economy.  CVS stores to offer ‘self-swab’ coronavirus testing  Certain CVS Pharmacy stores will begin offering coronavirus testing in their parking lots and drive-through pharmacy lanes in May for individuals who meet the CDC criteria. The company said its goal is to process up to 1.5 million tests monthly.  Trump’s signature is causing quite a fuss  Senate Minority Leader Chuck Schumer is not pleased that President Donald Trump's name will appear on stimulus checks being sent out to millions of Americans – and he is planning to put forward legislation to stop it from happening again.  Give it to me straight  The virus has killed more than 208,000 people globally, according to Johns Hopkins. Three million confirmed cases have been reported, including over 980,000 in the U.S. More than 55,000 have died in the U.S. from the virus, a number approaching the 58,220 Americans killed in the Vietnam War from 1955 to 1975.  Friendly-ish check-in on Kim Jong Un  What’s really going on with the authoritarian leader of North Korea, Kim Jong Un? South Korea seems to think he’s A-OK. South Korean government officials tried to (again) quell persistent rumors that Kim is gravely ill on Monday, asserting they can “confidently” say there have been no unusual developments to make them assume his health is in danger. More directly: "Kim Jong Un is alive and well," said Chung-in Moon, foreign policy adviser to South Korean President Moon Jae-in on Sunday. I’d like to say "I’ll believe it when I see it," but North Korea is one of the world's most secretive nations and information about its repressive leader is extremely difficult to verify.  What everyone’s talking about  Biden leads Trump in USA TODAY poll  The coronavirus pandemic has done what impeachment did not: Cost Trump his national lead over Joe Biden in the 2020 campaign, a USA TODAY/Suffolk Poll shows. Biden leads Trump in the new poll by six percentage points nationwide, 44%-38%, a shift from Trump's three-point lead in the survey as he was being impeached by the House in December. The findings underscore the challenge that the deadly pandemic is posing to the president’s political standing, which has proved remarkably durable through investigations into Russian meddling in the 2016 election, an impeachment trial over the president's dealings with Ukraine and other controversies.  Did Congress cheat health insurers? The Supreme Court thinks so  The Supreme Court ruled Monday that Congress cheated health insurance companies out of billions by refusing to uphold a promise made under the Affordable Care Act, aka Obamacare. Because insurers took a big risk when they agreed to participate in Obamacare, the original law limited the amount of financial losses they could incur. But when the bill to cover some of those losses several years later was due, the government refused to pay. Now, the federal government could have to fork up billions to health insurers who attempt to collect the money they're owed.  Busy day for the SCOTUS: The Supreme Court sidestepped a major gun rights case, a big setback for the NRA.  Real quick  Arrest made in drive-by shooting at 'Duck Dynasty' star's estate  Authorities arrested a man in connection with a drive-by shooting involving the estate of "Duck Dynasty" star Willie Robertson. Eight to 10 shots were fired on Friday from the road into Robertson’s Louisiana estate, one of which went through the bedroom window of the home where Robertson's son lives with his wife and their infant child. Thankfully, nobody in the family was injured. “It looks like they were just spraying bullets across my property," Robertson said in an interview. Louisiana authorities charged a 38-year-old man with one count of aggravated assault by drive-by shooting and one count of criminal neglect of family.  A break from the news  Puzzles are selling out just about everywhere right now. Here's where you can still find them.  Thinking about cutting your bangs during quarantine? Do it. 😈  Meg the yellow lab found a baby bunny in her backyard. She loves it.  This is a compilation of stories from across the USA TODAY Network.
2020-04-27	WASHINGTON – South Korean government officials tried again to quell persistent rumors that Kim Jong Un, the authoritarian leader of North Korea, is in poor health.  On Monday, South Korea's unification minister, Kim Yeon-chul, told a closed-door forum in Seoul the government has “enough intelligence to confidently say that there are no unusual developments” in rival North Korea to corroborate speculation about Kim’s health.  "Kim Jong Un is alive and well," Chung-in Moon, foreign policy adviser to South Korean President Moon Jae-in, told Fox News on Sunday. "He has been staying in the Wonsan area since April 13. No suspicious movements have so far been detected."  President Donald Trump, when asked about Kim's health on Monday, said he couldn't discuss the matter.  “I do have a very good idea, but I can’t talk about it now. I just wish him well,” Trump said during a White House coronavirus task force briefing. "I hope he's fine."  North Korea is one of the world's most secretive nations in the world and information about its repressive leader is extremely difficult to verify.  "We know more about their nuclear weapons than we know about the health of the leadership," Victor Cha, a North Korea expert with the Center for Strategic and International Studies, said during a recent podcast on Kim's health. "And because it’s only one leader of course, that’s the most carefully guarded secret in the country.  Speculation about Kim's health began to swirl after the North Korea leader did not attend the April 15 celebration of his grandfather's birthday, an important national holiday that he had not previously missed since his rise to power in 2011.  Last week, a Seoul-based website called Daily NK reported that the North Korean leader had undergone heart surgery on April 12 and was recuperating at a villa outside the capital, Pyongyang. The Daily NK's story was based on a single source inside North Korea. Other media outlets, including CNN, have reported that Kim's health may be in "grave danger."  The state-controlled North Korean media has been silent about Kim's whereabouts in recent weeks. The state-run Korean Central News Agency released a photo of him, dated April 11, which it said shows Kim attending a politburo meeting of the ruling Workers' Party of Korea in Pyongyang. However, neither the content nor the date of the photo could be independently verified.  "Even if something were seriously wrong, we would not know that immediately," Sue Mi Terry, a former Korea analyst for the CIA, said during the CSIS podcast. The U.S. did not learn about the death of Kim's father until two days later and then only because North Korea announced it, she said.  Terry also said Kim is a heavy smoker who drinks heavily and has a family history of cardiac problems.  "He’s 5'7'' and reportedly about 300 pounds, so he’s clinically obese," she said, noting Kim's father and grandfather died of heart attacks.  The North Korean government has reported zero coronavirus cases, an assertion experts say is almost certainly false.  Both Cha and Terry said if Kim dies, it could create a power vacuum inside the country; he has not created a succession plan, although his sister, Kim Yo Jong, could rise to power.  Some media reports about North Korea and its leadership have previously turned out to be inaccurate. Last week, Trump said he thought the CNN story was "inaccurate," but he declined to comment further.  South Korea's unification minister did not reveal the specific intelligence behind his conclusion that Kim is not ill, but he said it was reached after a thorough analysis.  38 North, a website that tracks developments in North Korea, reported that a train likely belonging to Kim has been parked at a railway station that services the leader's Wonsan compound since at least April 21. North38 cited commercial satellite imagery and said the approximately 250-meter long train is reserved for use by the Kim family.  "The train’s presence does not prove the whereabouts of the North Korean leader or indicate anything about his health, but it does lend weight to reports that Kim is staying at an elite area on the country’s eastern coast," the website said.  Contributing: Michael Collins, Kim Hjelmgaard and the Associated Press
2020-04-28	USA TODAY  As the number of confirmed coronavirus cases in the United States topped 1 million and states began reopening, USA TODAY’s Editorial Board spoke on Tuesday with Dr. Tom Inglesby, a leading expert on pandemics and infectious diseases. Inglesby, 53, is director of the Center for Health Security at the Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health in Baltimore. Questions and answers have been edited for length and clarity:  Q. In recent days, we've seen Georgia and about a dozen other states start to reopen. Are they jumping the gun?  A. I am concerned about the speed of reopening in the last week. It would be good, in addition to the daily case counts for each of those states that are now beginning to reopen, to be able to see their hospitalization rates, their ICU bed usages and the number of deaths that are occurring on a daily basis.  Q. Where are we in the arc of this crisis?  A. I think we're past the first peak where we were kind of caught unawares and before we had our systems in place. We had shortages of PPE (personal protective equipment), which still exist, but they were even more dire. We didn't have diagnostic testing. We didn't have an awareness of how fast it was going to spread. In some places we're still at a plateau. I don't think we have really turned the corner. If you look at the number of states around the country, there's something like half of the country still has rising case numbers every day. So I think on average, we're probably at a plateau or maybe slightly past the first peak.  Q. Given that, is this the right time to start reopening?  A. It depends on the specifics. It's not an easy yes or no. How are they going about it? Are they going about it in a step-wise fashion, where they're thinking about things that are lowest risk first and then gauging how well they do over the coming two weeks? Or is it kind of a quick resumption to normal? That would concern me more, because I think if we recreate the conditions that we had in the beginning of March around the country, then we're going to have a higher risk of going back there again and having those kinds of peaks again.  Q. How important is diagnostic testing?  A. This epidemic is going to continue to be a major challenge for states until they have a relatively complete picture of the number of COVID cases that they have. Places in the world where we've seen greatest success — places like New Zealand and South Korea and Taiwan and Singapore — have all had a very good handle on the number of cases they have, including mild to moderate illness, and they've also had very strong contact tracing.  Q. Which states have seen sustained declines?  A. A very small number of states have had at least a couple of weeks of reduced transmission or lower daily case counts. Alaska, Hawaii, Vermont and Montana are really clear examples of that. Even there, though, it would be good to know what capacities are in place to be able to handle an outbreak.  Q. The virus doesn’t recognize state boundaries. Does it make sense to approach this on a state-by-state basis?  A. There is logic in approaching it on a state-by-state basis. We have a huge country, and the country is going through terrible economic consequences because of this. It's not going to be a perfect system. We are not going to reduce the epidemic, in any place, to zero before we have a vaccine and there's been widescale vaccination. So the country is going to have to tolerate a level of risk and spread in order to have any resumption of any of the functions that we had before. Even now, even with this level of lockdown, we're still seeing in the order of 25,000 to 30,000 new cases a day in the country, but it's not evenly distributed. It's definitely happening in some places, in a more intense way, than others.  Q. Isn’t travel between states a problem?  A. There will always be movement between states, and there will be importations (of disease) between states, and I don't think that's going to be possible to stop. I think the cost of trying to stop that would be too high. It's a trade-off. But given the size of the country, and given the distinctions between the places that have such intense disease and places that have relatively good control, it makes sense to have local decision-making around this.  Q. Every day when you turn on cable TV, you see the Johns Hopkins numbers displayed on the right-hand side of the screen. But do those numbers convey a misleading degree of precision?  A. The Hopkins map is created and managed by a person in a different department than mine. She's a colleague, and she's wonderful. I don't want to take any credit for it, because it was her idea, and she runs it with a team. I think what she would say if she were here would be that they don't intend to over-convey precision, but they do try to get every report of anyone who's sick or who has died from COVID and collect that basically a couple times a day. That's the method they use.  Q. How do the deaths and confirmed cases we see on the Hopkins map compare with what we think are the actual number of deaths and the actual number of infections?  A. I think if my colleagues were here, they would agree that the numbers that are being reported in terms of deaths and illnesses do not reflect the sum total in any way of what's happening in the country for many reasons. First, because in most places in the country, we don't have the bandwidth to be testing mild or moderate cases of COVID. So we know, at this point, there's been a very, very important undercounting of total cases.  Q. And deaths?  A. With deaths, because those people have been very sick (and most have) been hospitalized, there is probably less undercounting. But there still will be substantial undercounting of deaths as well, because many people either died at home or weren't able to get tested because of a decision in the city or lack of testing. I do think that we are undercounting cases substantially. We're undercounting deaths by some portion as well, which we don't yet know exactly what that is.  Q. So how many infections are there in the United States?  A. As a rough calculation, if we presume that the case fatality rate of COVID is 1%, and there have been 50,000 deaths in the United States, that would then mean that there had been something on the order of 5 million cases, and we've officially diagnosed something closer to 1 million.  Q. If you divide reported deaths by diagnosed cases, you get a case fatality rate of 5.8%.  A. I don't think any epidemiologists or scientists believe that to be the case, given the amount of undercounting going on. (Dr. Robert Redfield, director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention) has said that he thinks in the end (the fatality rate) might be more like 0.3% to 0.5% as opposed to 1%. If that were the case, then perhaps the number of people who've been infected in the country is closer to 10 million or 12 million.  Q. When do you see us getting back to normal, the way things were before everything shut down in March?  A. It's hard to know how we're going to. This is kind of a big, first ever attempt to go through this. We may have to go through some hard knocks along the way. I hope we can find a place that we get closer to normal than where we are. But I don't think we're going to have complete normal — no masks, fully back to social — before we have a vaccine.  Q. Where are we in terms of coming up with a vaccine?  A. The vaccine is crucial for the country and for the world. Right now, the three major funders of vaccines are the U.S. government, then the Chinese government, and an organization in Norway called CEPI, the Coalition for Epidemic Preparedness Innovations, that has become the default driver of vaccines in Europe. The World Health Organization is tracking about 83 or 84 vaccine candidates.  Q. Will a vaccine protect everyone?  A. Generally speaking, it's rare for any vaccine to be fully effective. Some vaccines are extraordinarily effective. The new shingles vaccine protects something like 99% of people who get it. But for the seasonal flu vaccine, the vaccine effectiveness is something like 40% to 60%. It’s not what we want, but it's a difficult vaccine. It's difficult to generate the immunity that we want. Hopefully, this (COVID-19) vaccine will be much higher and we'll get actual hard data around that.  Q. Does the public understand how long it will take to get a vaccine to them?  A. People say that a vaccine will take 12 months to 18 months. I think it would be useful (to have) a more detailed laying out of the schedule from the U.S. government. Developing a safe and effective vaccine is the first set of steps. It's quite complicated. It's obviously crucial, but it's not the entire process. Once we have the vaccine, it needs to be made on massive scale, and then it needs to be filled, finished into vials. Then it needs to be distributed, and we need to think about a whole allocation process. It's still early, but I think it's appropriate to start having more public discussion and transparency about the timelines.  Q. It sounds like a huge undertaking.  A. This whole process is definitely unprecedented. The scale of this will be unprecedented. Companies are never asked to make hundreds of millions or billions of doses of vaccine in the first year they've created a vaccine, so it's not just the technical difficulty of getting a safe and effective vaccine, but it is, as you say, the scale up, which will be massive, then the distribution challenges.  Q. While we’re waiting for a vaccine, what can the average person do?  A. If we can continue to wear masks when we're in indoor spaces in public, if we can continue to be mindful of being 6 feet away from each other, and if we can telecommute even if we're allowed to go to work, those things alone could make a big difference.  Q. And if we stop doing those things?  A. If we stopped everything, then numbers will go up. We don't know how quickly, but we would risk getting to a point where we couldn't care for people with COVID and potentially other people who have other life-threatening illnesses, because intensive care units in the United States are full on a normal day without COVID. People also have pneumonias, they have flu, they have strokes, they have heart attacks. They need intensive care units for lots of reasons, and if they become completely full with COVID patients, then we will be at risk of not being able to care for people from other, regular life-threatening illnesses.  Q. If I get the coronavirus and recover, will I be immune?  A. We have to make sure that we don't give people false reassurance that they're completely out of the woods. We hope they are. We hope that tests will show that they are, but it's too soon to say that.  Q. What if we let the disease run its course to build up herd immunity?  A. This pandemic doubles in size every five days in its natural state. It's not doing that anymore because countries around the world and states within the U.S. have put in unprecedented social distancing measures. The models consistently have shown around the world that if you do nothing to try to stop it, then, first of all, your epidemic peak goes up very quickly. But the overall mortality of 0.3% to 0.5% is only if you have access to the critical care you need.  Q. How much do we really know about social distancing?  A. We don't really have, at this point, best practices for social distancing. We don't really have any modern experience with it. We now have some experience over the last couple of months, and we've been able to observe the experience of countries and places within countries. So going forward, it's appropriate for states to start planning to lift social distancing measures when they have the right conditions in place. But we just have to be communicating clearly to people that their individual responsibilities haven't changed, and that we have to measure carefully to make sure that we're not reigniting a major epidemic.  Q. What should that communication sound like?  A. I don't think any governor is going to be able to say, or should say, that things are going back to normal. That's not correct. What they should say as they're reopening is: We're going to move ahead. There are risks to moving ahead, but there's certainly a risk to not, and we're going to be as careful as we can as we go ahead. We're going to measure carefully, and we expect everyone to make a full commitment to personal social distancing so that we can manage through this difficult time for the next year, or hopefully maybe less, until we have a vaccine.  Q. Is it reasonable to think that we will have a distributed vaccine by July 2021?  A. There are ways that there will be some vaccine possibly proven to be safe and effective by the end of this year. And then it would depend on how fast we can make it and distribute it. (But) it could be that none of them work, in which case, all timelines are off, and you're back to the drawing board.  Q. What lessons have we learned already?  A. For things that we're going to require to get through global or national emergencies, I think this pandemic has really created a strong argument for (domestic) production of certain critical goods. To have one or two or three suppliers for the world, for some essential products, just doesn't make sense.  Q. Do some people have natural immunity to COVID-19, meaning that because of genetics or some other factors they could be exposed to the virus but not get the disease?  A. It's possible we'll be able to sort that out with COVID, but at this point, there is no clear genetic protection. We haven't discovered that yet. We may discover it as numbers get larger and science proceeds.  Q. Is this going to have a permanent change on how we interact with each other going forward?  A. I hope not. On a normal year, I don't think we need to stop shaking hands, and I don't think we need to stop being close to each other. I hope that after we have a vaccine that we can get back to normal, that we can get back to where we were. I think we'll do things differently. Hopefully, we will transform, even further, our ability to make medicines and vaccines in a crisis. It's unacceptable for the world that it could take us 18 months to make a vaccine for this, but that's where we are. But with enough investment, maybe we can actually shrink that down to six months. Maybe we can shrink it further. I don't think we should accept where we are in terms of medicine and vaccine development.  Q. Is there the political will to do that?  A. We talk about NIMBY — not in my backyard. The other term that people have used is NIMTO — not in my term of office. If politicians think that they can get through and not pay attention to things, then no one claims responsibility for it. Hopefully, our national leaders will now see the need (to invest in public health).  Q. Vice President Mike Pence said recently that the epidemic could be largely behind us by Memorial Day weekend.  A. I don't know exactly what was intended by that statement, but we are not, at all, past the epidemic. I think there is a clear risk, in all states, of numbers going up again, depending on partly the nature of the virus, but also mostly about what we do and whether we can control it with our public health capacity and our diagnostics. We're going to have a risk of this pandemic throughout this year. Each state is going to have to be driving forward with eyes wide open.  Q. Will the hot, humid summer weather put a lid on the outbreak?  A. I don't think that any of us should think that there's going to be this quiet period between now and September or October. I think it all depends on what states individually do, and there isn't, yet, any persuasive evidence that there will be a summertime lull. Miami, for example, is a place in the country which is really suffering from COVID. It's sunny and humid there. Singapore has experienced disease, although they got good control of it. The World Health Organization does not believe there is any evidence of seasonality to this. And they're sitting, looking at data from around the world. The National Academy of Sciences in the U.S. has studied this and doesn't believe there's any evidence of seasonality yet. Maybe we'll be surprised. That would be a wonderful surprise, but I don't think we should bank on it.  MORE Q&As:Coronavirus experts on what to do and U.S. response to the pandemic  HOTLINE:Share your coronavirus story. We may publish your comments.
2020-04-28	Associated Press  SEOUL, South Korea (AP) — Samsung Electronics Co. said Wednesday its operating profit for the first three months of 2020 rose 3.4% from a year earlier driven by increasing demands for computer chips. However, the company predicted its profit would decline in the current quarter with the coronavirus pandemic eating into global sales of smartphones, TVs and other products.  The South Korean technology giant said it reported an operating profit of 6.4 trillion won ($5.2 billion) for the January-March quarter. The company's revenue rose 5.6% from a year earlier to 55.3 trillion won ($45.4 billion).  Samsung, which has dual strength in parts and finished products, has seen the demand for chips used in computers and servers increase as broadening outbreaks have force more people around the world to work from home.  More:Harley-Davidson takes steps to deal with sagging sales during pandemic  However, the company said its profit will likely decline in the April-June quarter with the pandemic pushing down the sales of mobile and household devices.  "Sales and profits of set products business, including smartphones and TVs, are expected to decline significantly as COVID-19 affects demand and leads to store and plant closures globally," the company said in a news release.  "Memory demand is expected to remain robust for servers and PCs as more people work from home, but it is possible the mobile market may soften. Earnings from OLED screens are likely to be weaker due to a stagnant smartphone market," it said.  More:Leaked memo details Simon plans to reopen 49 malls across 10 states over the weekend
2020-04-28	North Korean leader Kim Jong Un could be trying to avoid exposure to the coronavirus, a top South Korean official said Tuesday as Kim's absence from public events, including a celebration honoring his grandfather, has fueled speculation that he may be in ill health.  Though Kim has disappeared from the public eye for lengthy stretches in the past, many wondered if something was seriously wrong after he missed the April 15 holiday on the birthdate of Kim Il Sung, the country's founder. Known as "The Day of the Sun," the celebration is normally one of the country's grandest, featuring military parades, fireworks and huge public dances.  But South Korean Unification Minister Kim Yeon-chul pointed out that several traditional holiday events had been canceled in response to the pandemic and that Kim's absence was not "particularly unusual" in that context.  "It is true that he had never missed the anniversary for Kim Il Sung’s birthday since he took power, but many anniversary events including celebrations and a banquet had been canceled because of coronavirus concerns," he told the South Korean parliament's foreign affairs committee, according to a translation from Reuters.  Kim Jong Un 'alive and well':South Korean official disputes reports North Korean leader is ill  Kim Yeon-chul said the North Korean leader's decision to skip a visit last week to the Kumsusan Palace of the Sun, the masoleum for Kim Il Sung, fits with Pyongyang's general scaling down of commemorative events this year in response to the pandemic, South Korea's Yonhap News Agency reported.  The unification minister dismissed reports that Kim underwent a heart procedure as "fake news" and described rumors about the communist leader's health as an "infodemic," according to YNA.  Last week, CNN said U.S. intelligence officials were monitoring the situation after the Seoul-based Daily NK reported that Kim had heart surgery. But Kim Yeon-chul said that did not "make sense logically" because the Hyangsan Medical Center, where Daily NK claimed the operation took place, is just a clinic and "incapable of performing surgery or medical procedures."  The unification minister, who oversees relations with North Korea, said Kim has gone out of view for at least 20 days on two other occasions this year already. He repeated an assessment he shared on Monday, which said there was "enough intelligence to confidently say that there are no unusual developments" in North Korea and that a thorough analysis did not show any evidence Kim was seriously ill.  Other South Korean officials have also stressed that there are no signs of the activity that would be expected if Kim, who wields authority over the government, were in danger.  At the same hearing, Foreign Minister Kang Kyung-wha said, "Despite a series of recent media reports, no unusual signs have been detected inside North Korea," Yonhap News Agency reported.  "Kim Jong Un is alive and well," Chung-in Moon, foreign policy adviser to South Korean President Moon Jae-in, told Fox News on Sunday. "He has been staying in the Wonsan area since April 13. No suspicious movements have so far been detected."  Iran, North Korea, Russia:America's adversaries emboldened to flex their muscles amid coronavirus  The North Korean regime has claimed there are no COVID-19 cases within the country but experts highly doubt the claim that it has managed to entirely avoid the outbreak, which began in neighboring China. South Korea's foreign minister said she believes the country is focusing much of its attention and resources on the outbreak.  "While it maintains it has no coronavirus patients, it has put weight on beefing up its health and medical capabilities," Kang said, according to YNA. She cited reports that North Korea had expanded its health care budget and opened a new hospital in Pyongyang.  President Donald Trump told reporters at a White House briefing on Monday he has "a very good idea" about Kim's health and whereabouts but he "can’t talk about it now."  "I just wish him well,” Trump said. "I hope he's fine."  Contributing: Deirdre Shesgreen, USA TODAY; The Associated Press
2020-04-28	Patricia Murphy  Opinion contributor  You’re laughing at Georgia, again, aren’t you? It happens a lot. I know my uncle in Colorado got a kick out of Gov. Brian Kemp's announcement last week that the state would start to reopen businesses previously closed by COVID-19, starting with bowling alleys, gyms, tattoo parlors and salons. Give me a foot massage or give me death? Welcome to Georgia!  “Dying for cute toes” would be a hilarious state motto if the situation here weren’t also so serious. With 1,000 deaths and more than 24,000 confirmed cases as of Monday night, Georgia has not been the hardest hit state in the country. But we haven’t avoided our own tragedies, either. Dougherty County in rural Georgia has been one of the country’s most severe hot spots, with hospitals overwhelmed after two family funerals spawned hundreds more cases and deaths there.  And those are just the cases we know about. A shortage of supplies in Georgia restricted testing until the week of April 13 to just front-line workers, the medically fragile and people in long-term care facilities. Georgia still ranks 36th in the nation for the number of tests completed per capita, leaving leaders and the public with no way to know whether the spread of the virus is getting better, worse or staying the same since the governor issued a limited shelter-in-place order in March.  Conflicting guidance from leaders  That’s why it came as a shock to many, including mayors of Georgia’s largest cities, when Kemp said the state would begin a phased reopening, starting last Friday with the businesses he closed in March, including (yes) barbers, gyms and nail salons, with restaurants allowed to open for dine-in service starting Monday of this week.  Hotline: Share your coronavirus story  That decision drew rebukes across the political spectrum — from President Donald Trump, who made it clear that he was unhappy with Kemp, to Atlanta Mayor Keisha Lance Bottoms, who urged Atlantans to continue to stay home despite what the governor said.  The immediate result of having no consensus of leadership has been a dangerous lack of consensus on what to do next. Is it safe to run on a treadmill but not shop for groceries? Should you get a haircut but not a car wash? How can anyone get “socially distant” hair color? Nobody really knows.  That confusion also meant that on Friday, after the state reopened, many businesses stayed closed, especially in Atlanta. At Midtown Bowl, one of the city’s iconic institutions, the doors were locked behind a sign that read, “We’ll roll again soon.” Of the 10 nail salons I drove past, one was open for walk-ins, one by appointment only, and the rest still dark with signs they’d be back when it was safe for customers. Typically bustling business districts were so quiet that pedestrians stood in the drive-thru lines at Starbucks to get their morning coffee.  Coronavirus crisis: What America can learn from other nations in the war on COVID-19  But just an hour north it was a different story. The parking lot at the Tractor Supply outside of Rome, Georgia, was filled with pick-ups and bustling with shoppers. At the Tropical Nail Salon, customers sat shoulder to shoulder on a couch waiting for the next available manicure or pedicure. Three others sat so close under a nail dryer that they could share a magazine. The women weren’t 6 inches apart, let alone the 6 feet that Kemp prescribed in his list of safety measures businesses should observe to keep customers and employees safe.  All of the employees wore masks, as the governor’s executive order prescribed, but none of the customers did. With dozens of suggested and required criteria for reopening, but no real enforcement mechanism to make sure it’s happening, what’s “safe” in Georgia is being left up to shop owners who financially have to get back to work but have no medical training on how to do it in a pandemic.  We still don't have enough information  At the beginning of April, after Kemp announced a statewide shelter-in-place order, I pitched a column titled, “America, we’re not as dumb as we look.” The governor was being ridiculed for saying he had only just learned that coronavirus could spread before its symptoms appeared. In fairness to Kemp, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention had just released a new report that clearly confirmed asymptomatic spread, which many had long suspected.  The data that Kemp relied on then is still true today. We still don’t know who is spreading this terrible virus, how many cases we really have or what will happen as the state reopens in earnest. I hate to say it, Georgia, but on this one, we’re exactly as dumb as we look.  By Buzz Aldrin:My post-Apollo 11 quarantine lessons apply to coronavirus  I don’t think the governor is dumb. Far from it. To see him working up close is to see a man who cares about this state and its people. But that’s why this decision, at this time, makes so little sense.  It’s possible that history will show Kemp is making the right decision. Being the first state to reopen could save businesses from closing and keep people in jobs who desperately need them. But it’s also possible that reopening the state will spark a new spread, that people who don’t know they carry the virus will unknowingly spread it to others, and that people could die as a result.  We just don’t know, and that’s a scary place to be living, working and raising a family. I’ve got my box of at-home hair color ready to go until we know for sure.  Patricia Murphy is a political columnist and correspondent based in Atlanta. Follow her on Twitter: @1PatriciaMurphy
2020-04-29	Scott Duke Harris  Opinion contributor  HONG KONG — The man in the mask aimed the ray gun at my forehead and squeezed the trigger.  He checked the reading. No fever. I was cleared for coffee.  Temperature checks at cafes are now routine here in Hong Kong, a metropolis that might seem like an oasis of seminormalcy in a world locked down by plague. Last year, this semi-autonomous “special administrative region” of China was making news for massive, often militant protests against its Beijing-backed government. Today Hong Kong stands out for the way it is subduing the spread of a deadly virus that was first detected only 570 miles away, in Wuhan.  Hongkongers and expats like me can’t help but feel fortunate to be here, teleworking and teleschooling as we go about our non-locked-down lives. We’ve never had a blanket stay-at-home order, and most restaurants and shops remain open. Nobody talks about “reopening the economy” because it has never been closed, just slowed. We wash our hands, wear our masks and take heart in Hong Kong’s official COVID-19 website that showed, as of this month, just four deaths out of more than 1,000 confirmed cases in a city of 7.5 million souls. These are minuscule numbers when judged against the carnage and misery mounting in New York and much of the world.  VOICES:Coping like it's 1861: America finds comfort in tradition amid coronavirus crisis  The worry here now is complacency. "Coronavirus: Hong Kong records just three new cases, lowest in a month, but leader warns of complacency," declared a recent headline in the South China Morning Post.  Hong Kong is wary but still relatively sociable, in part because of the border control and social distancing measures first introduced relatively early and recalibrated frequently. On weekends, families still take to the hiking trails and the beaches, and stroll amid scootering kids along the seaside promenade and shopping plaza near our apartment.  Adherence to the suggested 1.5 meters (nearly 5 feet) of human separation is erratic; restaurants largely respect new regulations that reduce the capacity and limit parties to four. Only recently were temporary closure orders extended to include pubs, karaoke clubs, cinemas, gyms and mahjong and massage parlors. But for the ubiquitous masks, there is little outward sign of anxiety.  Perhaps no major city was so prepared for a pandemic. All of Asia, but especially Hong Kong, remembers the pain and peril of the severe acute respiratory syndrome outbreak 17 years ago. Hong Kong was an epicenter; the nearly 300 deaths included doctors and nurses. So when rumors of a mysterious illness in Wuhan reached Hong Kong in December, the city was quickly on high alert. On Dec. 31, the Post became one of the first English-language outlets to report on the outbreak.  HOTLINE:Share your coronavirus story  On Jan. 4, local authorities began implementing measures intended to identify and isolate potential infections, at first screening travelers from Wuhan and tracking down contacts of suspected cases. A quarantine area was designated. Masks quickly became a fashion trend, and authorities ordered the closure of schools as companies encouraged employees to work from home.  When COVID-19 cases began to surge, more than 3,000 hospital workers voted to organize a rolling strike to pressure authorities to further restrict travel.  I follow the news from America, Europe and elsewhere with a shudder, wondering how many tens of thousands will die as people flout social distancing and protest the shutdowns. To friends and family hunkering down in the USA, all I can offer is a postcard sentiment: Wish you were here — though if you did come, you’d face a compulsory 14-day quarantine with an electronic tracking bracelet on your wrist.  Even more so, I wish that President Donald Trump and other leaders had responded to the outbreak with the alacrity and effectiveness of Hong Kong and Taiwan, which has similarly kept much of COVID-19 at bay.  OUR VIEW:Taiwan, South Korea, New Zealand, Iceland and Germany lead the way on COVID-19  Hong Kong’s statistics are such that friends in America wonder whether this is some sort of propaganda, but Hongkongers wouldn’t tolerate that. Like their Taiwanese cousins, Hongkongers harbor a healthy distrust of Beijing. In early January, while some were playing down the risk of contagion, Hong Kong and Taiwan proved far more skeptical.  It’s fair to assume that Hong Kong’s statistics have missed many infections and deaths, but that seems true everywhere. Testing here is more targeted and not as widespread as it has been elsewhere — a weakness, some say, and one reason Hongkongers keep their guard up.  I remember the dismay when, during the Chinese New Year break, my wife and I learned that school would be shuttered and we’d have to learn something called Zoom. Schooling is a struggle, and social dilemmas are daunting. To what extent should our two younger children, ages 16 and 10, socialize with friends? What should we do about our 18-year-old son? Were it not for this plague he would be living in a dorm in Manhattan finishing his freshman year of college.  Luckily he was visiting Toronto when Gotham suddenly lurched into its grim spiral. We flew him to California to finish his semester online, and now he is hoping to come “home” to Hong Kong this summer — even with that 14-day quarantine. First, though, he hopes to visit New York to retrieve his belongings from his shuttered dorm. Will that be safe? When will it be safe to return to New York? Should he take a “gap semester”?  Maybe Hong Kong will prepare him for America’s new normal — masked and sanitized, with temperature checks at every cafe.  Scott Duke Harris is a former reporter for the Los Angeles Times and the San Jose Mercury News.
2020-04-29	Darragh O’Carroll  Opinion contributor  In the early morning hours a sweaty, blue and suffocating COVID-19 patient arrived unannounced and lay waiting outside my emergency room, spending precious life-saving moments on the cold concrete as my team and I hurriedly donned our personal protective equipment.  In the days before COVID-19, he would have been rushed into a room and within 30 seconds had cardiac monitors placed, oxygen delivered and two IVs coursing through his veins. But now, because of the danger he posed to everyone in my ER, and even to my family members awaiting me at home, and because we don’t yet have adequate treatments for COVID-19, he had to wait until the department was ready to see him. Sadly, he wasn’t the only sick and suffocating patient that day.  Like everyone in America, we wish that something would jolt us out of this never-ending medical and economic nightmare, but COVID-19 patients arriving unannounced at ERs across the country will remain the new normal until a vaccination arrives that eliminates or drastically reduces the global prevalence of SARS-CoV-2.  There is much talk about slowly obtaining herd immunity to protect our communities, but it is a false haven as studies show the human coronaviruses that cause roughly one third of common colds are able to reinfect patients a second time — despite having antibodies present. Additionally, those who had SARS in 2003, the most similar virus to the current pandemic, maintained antibodies for an average of only two years.  Even Middle Eastern Respiratory Syndrome, a far more fatal coronavirus transferred by dromedary camels that emerged in 2012, does not convey antibodies in 100% of those infected. Studies in South Korea show SARS-CoV-2 antibodies produced after being infected can be protective, but we don’t know for how long. The World Health Organization has even released a scientific brief cautioning against relying on antibodies for protection until more data is collected. Ultimately, how our immune systems will react to SARS-CoV-2 in the coming months and years is uncertain, so we need a vaccine, and we need it ASAP.  Vaccine is our best hope  Our best hope for long-term immunity is a vaccination that activates not just the humoral or antibody arm of our immune system, but conveys long-term immune system memory, as well as triggering immune responses from the soldier like T-lymphocyte and Macrophage cells that destroy anything recognized as foreign.  One of the key governmental agencies coordinating these vaccination efforts in the United States is BARDA, or the Biomedical Advanced Research and Development Authority, a branch of Health and Human Services.  Share your coronavirus story: Contact USA TODAY Opinion's hotline. We may publish your comments.  BARDA is a new agency, established in 2006 by the Pandemic and All Hazards Preparedness Act after SARS and H5N1 influenza emerged out of Asia in the early 2000s. It is the only federal agency dedicated to the advanced development of medical products for public health emergencies intended for civilian use.  BARDA’s main directives are the procurement and development of medical countermeasures against bioterrorism, chemical and nuclear threats, pandemic influenza and emergency diseases, as well as maintaining stockpiles of medical equipment. The agency directs heavy governmental investment into the most promising vaccinations, therapeutic medications, and many of the rapid diagnostic tests soon to be deployed throughout our country.  BARDA serves as a partner with the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Disease and the Department of Defense. Most people have now heard of NIAID, headed by the venerable Dr. Anthony Fauci, whose responsibility includes conducting and funding the early studies that many promising medications and therapeutics are built on.  But it’s up to BARDA, and its recently ousted director Dr. Rick Bright, to lead a multi-departmental federal task force to determine which contenders have the highest chance of efficacy, and according to Bright, “bring them home to success."  Bright, a self-described “farm grown Kansas boy,” has been devoted to vaccines since his days in a graduate school laboratory that had ample funding for HIV research, but when asked to study influenza was told "nobody cares about it."  After much pleading, he was given a small fund to investigate a universal influenza vaccination. During his time researching the 1918 Spanish flu, Bright came across a leading hypothesis: that the deadly flu may have arisen from his home state of Kansas. Ultimately we don’t know exactly where the “Spanish Flu” originated, but one thought kept motivating Dr. Bright: "Wouldn't it be something if a farm boy from Kansas was responsible for ending influenza?" Since then, Bright has been immersed in the world of influenza vaccine research and other viruses demanding pandemic preparedness.  I am baffled that in a time when we need our best, most experienced minds to direct our most promising therapeutics, diagnostic tests, vaccinations and funding, that Bright can — according to his whistleblower statement — be removed for speaking the truth against the use of hydroxychloroquine.  The data on hydroxychloroquine and chloroquine efficacy in COVID-19 was never convincing, and its high rate of arrhythmias places it in the “one pill can kill” club if accidentally ingested by children, making it a dangerous medication to give to anybody or have in any household.  President's suggestions are dangerous  We cannot tolerate the denigration of science in the United States any longer, which includes touting unsafe and unproven medications like hydroxychloroquine and the dangerous suggestion of disinfecting with ultraviolet lights and ingesting household cleaners.  As an ER physician, I see toxic ingestions regularly, just like the Arizona couple who overdosed on fish-food containing chloroquine in an attempt to protect themselves from COVID-19. People will try anything, especially if recommended by a leader like our president.  Before this pandemic I’ve cared for more than a few sane, but worried and scared patients who attempted to rid their bodies of lice, scabies or bed bugs by ingesting or anally suppositing insecticides and disinfectants. It is human nature that when people are worried or uncertain, they will try anything, especially as this pandemic drags on.  As we approach the several month mark of this pandemic, the initial adrenaline of our country's front line workers is fading, and we are left with the memory of thousands of dead at our feet. But now that the country is rightly clamoring for economic relief and the gradual reopening of the American way of life, we are bracing for even more suffering and the plausible reality of secondary curves.  In a time when we need solid scientific guidance in this global “two-minute drill," we just pulled one of our starting quarterbacks, for allegedly speaking up on what every doctor I know supports.  We on the front lines will continue to stand firm, but we need our leaders to make rational decisions. We also need our leaders to support science and those with proven experience. Dr. Rick Bright is our most experienced person to be at the helm of BARDA, and should not be removed during a crucial time of this biotechnological fight.  Dr. Darragh O’Carroll is an emergency room physician in Hawaii, a writer and a medical consultant for the Netflix documentary, "Pandemic: How to Prevent an Outbreak." Follow him on Twitter @dardager
2020-04-29	WASHINGTON – Dr. Anthony Fauci is cited most often as the official Americans rely on for information regarding the coronavirus pandemic, according to a new study.  The study released Wednesday found Fauci, the director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, was chosen by 45% of those surveyed, while participants' "own state's governor" was cited by 35%, and President Donald Trump by 20%.  The study was conducted by the Center for the Digital Future at the USC Annenberg School for Communication and Journalism and the Interactive Advertising Bureau.  'They're playing Russian roulette': As states reopen amid coronavirus, experts warn of risks  More:Trump plans to order meat processing plants to stay open during coronavirus  Fauci, a member of the White House's Coronavirus Task Force, has a long government career that spans back to the Lyndon Johnson administration. The 79-year-old doctor has been one of the most high-profile members of Trump's response to the coronavirus, earning praise and widespread recognition.  Jeffrey Cole, director of the Center for the Digital Future, said Americans trust in Fauci may very well come from this experience, as well as his "clear manner."  "If ever there was a crisis where we look to an expert, it is this one where literally our lives can be saved or lost by the need for good information," Cole said. "This is a situation where we need a medical expert, particularly one who has been a leader in infectious diseases for 40 years."  More:Trump calls for national parks to reopen. Advocates say it's too soon  The actions by local and state governments were rated higher at 54% than the federal response, which 39% of respondents rated as poor.  The White House has been criticized for its slow response to the pandemic, shortages in personal protective gear, and lack of widespread testing. The administration and governors have often clashed over the response to COVID-19.  Maryland Gov. Larry Hogan, a Republican, has implored the federal government to help states increase their capacity to test for the virus. His fellow governors have insisted they lack the kits and equipment needed to conduct the tests. He also announced Maryland had purchased 500,000 coronavirus tests from South Korea.  Govs. Andrew Cuomo of New York and Gretchen Whitmer of Michigan, both Democrats, have seen high approval ratings as their states have been particularly hard hit by the disease.  More:Former Sen. Jeff Flake won't vote for Trump, says GOP better off if he loses reelection  Under a blueprint unveiled Monday designed to help states expand testing and rapid response programs as governors weigh gradually lifting stay-at-home orders, the Trump administration said it would send each state enough tests to screen at least 2% of their residents. Critics say that is too low.  A new USA TODAY/Suffolk University Poll similarly found that Americans by double-digit margins said the federal government is doing too little to deal with the health and economic repercussions of coronavirus.  Additionally, Trump's frequent briefingshave often overshadowed the administration's daily coronavirus message. There have also been reports that the White House is looking to scale back the news conferences.  "It is clear to everyone, including leaders of the Republican Party, that after the first week or so, the president's press conferences have been counterproductive to his approval," said Cole, adding that what Americans "wanted was an engaged president demonstrating decisive leadership on the coronavirus. After a week or so, people saw that was not coming out of the briefings."  "Historians will look at the briefings with huge interest and a public stuck at home and hungry for information, as one of the greatest lost opportunities in the history of the Presidency," Cole continued.  More:Mike Pence appears to violate Mayo Clinic mask-wearing policy during visit  Poll respondents who identified politically as "very conservative" depended on Trump the most, by 53%, while less than a majority of those who identified as different political affiliations relied on the president.  Cole described how Trump could gain the trust of more American citizens, including allowing medical experts more camera time at the White House briefings, putting aside partisan rhetoric, and looking at the tone as some of his predecessors during crises, such as "Ronald Reagan after the Challenger crash."  "What is different with regard to the pandemic is the low number for trust for the president. In times of crisis, we have historically looked to the President, any President, as the leader to guide us through. Trump's number's are remarkably low," Cole continued.  The findings from this study are based on an online survey conducted during the week of April 6, using a sample of 1,000 respondents ages 18 and older from all 50 states and the District of Colombia from an online panel. The margin of error is plus or minus 3 percentage points.  Contributing: Michael Collins, Courtney Subramanian, David Jackson
2020-04-30	WASHINGTON – More than 200 countries and territories have reported coronavirus cases within their borders. One unlikely exception: North Korea, which claims to have had zero infections despite its 880-mile border with China, where the virus first emerged before spreading across the globe.  "It's a near impossibility for them not to have cases," said Jung H. Pak, a former CIA analyst and North Korea expert with the Brookings Institution, a Washington think tank.  China is North Korea's biggest trading partner, accounting for as much as 95% of the country's reported imports, according to 38 North, a website that tracks developments inside the so-called Hermit Kingdom.  "It is puzzling to see how a country that shares such close trading ties (albeit surreptitiously) with China, where the virus had its origin, has remained immune to such a pandemic," two Asia experts, Jagannath Panda and Jina Kim, wrote in an analysis Tuesday for 38 North.  Kim Jong Un:South Korean official says Kim Jong Un may be avoiding public due to 'coronavirus concerns'  Indeed, Pak and other experts say there's evidence of at least a small-scale COVID-19 outbreak in North Korea, a country where much of the population is already in poor health, the economy is crippled and the health system is abysmal.  North Korea's assertion that it is coronavirus-free comes amid growing speculation about the health of North Korea's leader Kim Jong Un, fueled by his absence from a major national celebration in April. South Korean officials have disputed reports that Kim is ill, and on Tuesday, one government minister said Kim may be isolating himself to avoid coronavirus infection.  The true picture of how widespread COVID-19 is inside North Korea will probably never be clear. North Korea is one of the world's most secretive, repressive and authoritarian countries in the world, and the regime's propaganda machine controls the flow of information.  State-controlled media have trumpeted an "emergency anti-epidemic" campaign and touted the complete lockdown of North Korea's borders.  But outside North Korea, there have been reports of infections, deaths, and "panic buying," from regional media outlets, defectors with connections inside the country, and other sources.  One Japanese newspaper reported on March 29 that more than 100 North Korean soldiers have died of suspected COVID-19 infection since February. In an April 22 story, NK News, which reports on North Korea, described "panic buying" in grocery stores, with a rush to snap up staples like flour and sugar.  Kim Jong Un:Kim Jong Un 'alive and well,' South Korean official says amid new reports North Korean leader is ill  An April 18 Radio Free Asia story said North Korean officials had informed local citizens of coronavirus cases in the capital city of Pyongyang, as well as in two provinces in the northeast and southwest parts of the country.  "It's hard to believe there weren’t cases in between" those three locations, said Bruce Klingner, an ex-CIA deputy division chief for Korea who is now with the Heritage Foundation, another Washington think tank.  But Klingner said the scope of infections may be limited – a conclusion he based in part on the lack of grisly indicators, such as satellite images of mass graves.  "We’re just not hearing, as we did during the great famine, of bodies being stacked like cordwood," Klingner said, referring to the mass starvation in North Korea in the 1990s that killed an estimated 2 million to 3.5 million people.  If the COVID-19 outbreak is limited, he said, it's probably because North Korea imposed very strict measures right after the disease began spreading in China. In late January, the North Korean government canceled all flights into and out of the country, sealed its border with China, and even stopped state-run smuggling operations – with the threat of severe punishment for those who failed to comply.  Pak agreed that North Korea took extreme and early steps to lock the country down, but she's not convinced that capped coronavirus infections.  "Infectious diseases sweep through North Korea all the time," said Pak, author of a just-released book on Kim Jong Un's rule. "When there's no testing, you don't know if this person is dying of tuberculosis or malaria or COVID."  Pak cited accounts from defectors with family still inside North Korea. The message, she said: "It's really bad here."  Iran, North Korea, Russia:America's adversaries emboldened to flex their muscles amid coronavirus  Meanwhile, American officials have started to worry about the possibility of a related catastrophe in North Korea: widespread starvation and increased economic deprivation stemming from North Korea's trade stoppage and border closures.  "There is a real risk that there will be a famine," Secretary of State Mike Pompeo said Wednesday during an appearance on Fox News.  Well before the pandemic hit, the United Nations warned in 2019 that more than 10 million North Koreans were suffering “severe food shortages” after the worst harvest in a decade.  The North Korean people rely heavily on cross-border smuggling to stock small private markets across the country. The regime also uses a state-sanctioned smuggling operation for supplies to evade UN sanctions.  With those sources now closed off, the supply of food and cash has been disrupted, Klingner and others say. On Tuesday, Reuters reported that North Korea planned to send a delegation to China to discuss food supplies and trade.
2020-04-30	Cali Williams Yost  Opinion contributor  Flexible work was made for times like these. Once seen solely as HR policy or perk, COVID-19 has finally revealed flexibility as both a business continuity and economic recovery strategy. It’s how we’ve kept most businesses and organizations running, creatively serving customers and clients while making sure people are safe and employed.  Flexible work is the way through and the way out of this crisis. It must be front and center of any comprehensive public health and economic recovery plan.  Narratives matter. The fact is, we have not shut down. We’ve slowed down. We don’t need to reopen the economy. We were never closed. Indeed, many businesses — including retailers, restaurants, gyms, movie theaters and other places where large crowds gather — had to shut their doors. But other industries remain open for business, albeit remotely and flexibly.  Yes, that more than 26 million U.S. workers have filed for unemployment during the past five weeks is staggering. But we cannot ignore the tens of millions of employees, both essential and nonessential, who figured out, in real time, how to work remotely and flexibly under extremely disruptive stay-at-home orders.  Like Rosie the Riveter in World War II, these workers rose to the occasion. They may have been shut out of their workplaces, but their work continued. That’s important to acknowledge as we consider what the changing new normal of work and life will look like during and beyond this phase of the pandemic.  Seismic shift in the way we work  This seismic shift in the way we work happened quickly with little time to plan. Practically overnight, more than a quarter of U.S. adults were working from home for the first time, according to Monmouth University. When you rapidly move an entire economy to remote and flexible work (and home-schooling), one cannot expect to maintain pre-COVID-19 levels of performance. The focus, rightly so, has been to keep everyone safe and healthy while maintaining as much productivity as possible. If there was ever a moment to not let the perfect be the enemy of the good, it is now.  University professor:Teaching for 50 years did not prepare me for the coronavirus  With entire families home, including the estimated 45 million U.S. children no longer in school, finding a separate, quiet space to work with few distractions has been nearly impossible. Further, many employees had limited experience, if any, with technology to support remote work and connect them with colleagues. Now’s the time to forgive the glitchy video chat, the screaming child, the barking dog or the hum of a video game in the background.  While it has been far from perfect, flexibility has allowed a large portion of the economy to keep working while we flatten the pandemic’s curve. It’s probably how we’ll do our jobs for some time going forward. We need to focus on doing it better and smarter rather than waiting and hoping to return to the way things were.  Our experience and research have found flexibility in how, when and where you work — including remote work — leads to innovation, productivity and engagement. And, as we’ve seen over the past month, operational resilience. Additional studies corroborate these findings. As we prepare to rebuild the U.S. and global economies, flexible work must be a cornerstone of these efforts in concert with COVID-19 testing, tracing and isolation.  An ongoing flexible work response to COVID-19 will combine remote work and flexible scheduling determined by the realities of an industry, job or person. That blend of flexible work would scale up or down based upon the goals of the business and the response required to manage the virus. As stay-at-home orders ease, there may be a transition period during which employees rotate working remotely two days a week and at the office three days a week as members of staggered A and B teams that allow for onsite social distancing.  Our 'Rosie the Riveter' moment  Even some of the shuttered industries can apply a flexible approach to work. Restaurants can use A and B team service and limited capacity seating in dining rooms modified to support greater social distancing combined with more robust takeout service. Gyms can stagger access to equipment and classes, combined with more online and on-demand offerings and supports. It’s not perfect. It’s not exactly how things were before the coronavirus, but it is something. It’s an operating foundation on which to rebuild economic momentum as we wait for increased COVID-19 testing and vaccine development.  Historically, flexible work has been misunderstood and undervalued. While it has been mentioned in recent economic and public health recovery discussions, few organizations have invested the time and resources required to execute flexible work as a part of their cultural and operational DNA. Sadly, those organizations were caught off guard and have struggled to respond rapidly as the way we work continues to transform.  Our view:Coronavirus crisis: What America can learn from other nations in the war on COVID-19  Until COVID-19 forced millions to work from home, many organizations and leaders saw flexibility as a nice-to-have policy or perk, usually meant to appease moms or millennials. There was also too much emphasis on rigid, one-size-fits-all solutions. Before COVID-19 shined the spotlight on remote work, the four-day work week was making headlines.  Lastly, there has likely been a misguided generational bias, too. Some leaders still think of work as a place you “go.” If you aren’t “going” to a place to work, then it’s closed for business — it’s shut down. During the past month, that outdated belief has proved wrong, but if left unchallenged, it potentially puts our economy at a grave risk.  Flexibility is not just about how, when or where we work. It’s a shifting blend of all three. Rebuilding our economy will require a collective redefinition of work as “what” we do and how, when and where we can do it best based on our unique jobs and businesses during the pandemic and beyond. This will foster the creativity to reimagine how we can do our jobs, run our organizations and manage our lives even when still feeling vulnerable about our health.  Hotline:Share your coronavirus story  COVID-19 may be our generation’s Pearl Harbor, but it’s also our Rosie the Riveter “We Can Do It!” moment. I picture Rosie flexing her bicep every time the tens of millions of people who wake up each morning, “commute” to the kitchen, living room or basement, power up their computers and start “work.” I picture her as workers still show up to workplaces reconfigured for social distancing because their jobs are essential. And I see her in the masked faces of grocery clerks, delivery drivers, first responders and health care professionals.  We’re still here. We’re still open. We’re still working.  Cali Williams Yost is a workplace futurist, strategistand author who has spent the past two decades working with organizations to transform how, whenand where work is done. Follow her on twitter: @caliyost
2020-05-01	WASHINGTON – President Donald Trump declined to comment on the health of Kim Jung Un Friday as North Korea's state news agency claimed the country's leader made his first public appearance in weeks.  North Korea's state-controlled news agency reported that Kim attended a public ceremony at a fertilizer plant on Saturday, North Korean time, amid rampant speculation that he was ill and possibly even near death.  Independent news agencies could not confirm the North Korean report. The news outlet later released photos from the event, but the images could not be independently verified.  Asked about Kim's health on Friday, Trump said: "I'd rather not comment on it yet. ... We'll have something to say about it at the appropriate time."  When asked if he knew whether Kim was alive, Trump responded: "I don't want to talk about it."  Pandemic related?:South Korean official says Kim Jong Un may be avoiding public due to 'coronavirus concerns'  Kim did not attend an April 15 celebration of his grandfather's birthday, an important national holiday that he had not previously missed since his rise to power in 2011.  Last week, a Seoul-based website called Daily NK reported that the North Korean leader had undergone heart surgery on April 12 and was recuperating at a villa outside the capital, Pyongyang. The Daily NK's story was based on a single source inside North Korea. Other media outlets, including CNN, have reported that Kim's health may be in "grave danger."​  South Korean government officials dismissed those accounts, and one minister suggested Kim might be isolating himself to avoid infection amid the coronavirus pandemic.  Other North Korea experts echoed that assessment amid the news of Kim's reported reemergence. ​​​​​​  "He most likely was taking steps to ensure his health or may have been impacted in some way personally by the virus," said Harry Kazianis, senior director of Korean studies at the Center for the National Interest, a foreign policy think tank.  Trump has teased reporters in recent weeks amid reports that Kim was near death, but has never publicly declared what his intelligence services are saying about the situation.  On Monday, Trump told reporters he knew how Kim was doing but couldn't divulge that information: "I do have a very good idea, but I can't talk about it now. I just wish him well."  'A near impossibility':Experts doubt North Korea's claim of zero coronavirus cases  Told by a reporter that Kim made some kind of statement last Saturday, Trump replied: "He didn't say anything last Saturday. Nobody knows where he is so he obviously couldn't have said it. This is breaking news that Kim Jong Un made a statement on Saturday. I don't think so."  Secretary of State Mike Pompeo has suggested the U.S. was preparing for a transition in case Kim's health was in jeopardy.  "We know we’ve not been able to identify a public appearance of his for now a little over two weeks – not unheard of, but unusual," Pompeo told a radio interviewer on Thursday. "But beyond that, I don’t have much that I can share. ... We are working to make sure we’re prepared for whatever eventuality there is."  Where is he?:Kim Jong Un 'alive and well,' South Korean official says amid new reports North Korean leader is ill  Contributing: Associated Press
2020-05-01	Dr. Howard P. Forman  Opinion contributor  In 2009, during the surge in the Tea Party movement’s prominence and the fight over what became known as Obamacare, Sarah Palin reemerged as a potent political force. The former Alaska governor and 2008 Republican vice presidential nominee told us that the federal government would use "death panels" to determine who would and who would not receive care under expanded coverage. She explicitly mentioned her own son and elderly parents as examples of individuals who would be threatened by the Affordable Care Act.  Put aside that her argument was provably false: It resonated with a large swath of America and almost tanked the chances of passing the ACA, and it certainly contributed to widespread electoral losses by Democrats in 2010 and beyond. In the years since passage, the ACA has provided coverage to millions of Americans and improved the fiscal sustainability of Medicare.  Fast-forward to today and we have numerous pundits, politicians and supposed experts coming up with an actual plan for what might as well be called “death panels.”  The most vulnerable among us  While the coronavirus continues to kill thousands of Americans every day, these pundits have focused on “surgically” protecting the most vulnerable segment of society while the rest are more quickly exposed. In the past week alone, David Katz, Avik Roy and others have rallied around the dangerous idea that we can carve out the most vulnerable among us and allow the remainder to resume full-time work, education and play.  Our view:In war on coronavirus, recruit army of contact tracers to guard against a counterattack  This approach rests on two premises: 1) We can readily identify the most vulnerable individuals since they are either old or have high-risk conditions and 2) We can protect those individuals from harm once they are identified.  While it is true that fatalities have disproportionately affected the oldest among us, the median age of hospitalized COVID-19 patients in one large study is 63, indicating that half or more of such patients are of working age.  And while it is also true that many of the sickest patients have additional chronic conditions, obesity, hypertension and diabetes are highly prevalent in the general population. In fact, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention reports that 42% of American adults are obese, with rates as high as 45% among Hispanics and 50% among black adults. Hypertension affects nearly half of adult Americans, 54% of blacks.  Even if we identify those who fit into these higher risk categories, how do we “surgically” protect them? How can we open up a municipality, university, entertainment venue if half or more of their workforce is at heightened risk? How do we protect vulnerable family members, even if the employee is healthy and young? How do we provide safe care to nursing homes, hospitals and other centers with vulnerable populations if we allow high rates of disease prevalence to circulate among our service workers?  A path to put people ahead of it  Those who think there is no alternative need only look to peer nations, such as South Korea, New Zealand, Taiwan and Germany. All took this very seriously from the beginning. All emphasized aggressive testing, contact tracing and isolation/quarantine, and all seemingly have been able to weather the outbreak during a finite period of time leading to reopening of their economies. None of this should be difficult for a nation that had a “Manhattan Project,” put a man on the moon and has laid claim to being the greatest on earth.  Penalties and rewards:How to get millions of people to take coronavirus tests and stay home if they're positive  The political success of Sarah Palin was not that she encouraged us to have a discussion about a topic of great importance. No such discussion about potential death panels happened then or since. Her success was that she convinced a large portion of America that there was a nefarious plot to allow the most vulnerable among us to die and then used the political power of this group to support a new Republican coalition.  Today, we have a real threat to our oldest and our most marginalized. Coronavirus is not just disproportionately affecting the old, it is also hitting communities of color, the disabled and those of limited means the hardest. And they are dying in vast numbers. We have a path forward that emphasizes testing, tracing and isolation: It minimizes harm, restarts our economy and puts people ahead of politics. Why would we want to pivot to death panels?  Dr. Howard P. Forman is a Yale professor of management, public health, economicsand radiology. Follow him on Twitter: @thehowie
2020-05-02	Hyung-Jin Kim  Associated Press  SEOUL, South Korea — North and South Korean troops exchanged fire along their tense border on Sunday, the South’s military said, blaming North Korean soldiers for targeting a guard post.  The Joint Chiefs of Staff in Seoul said in a statement that North Korean troops fired several bullets at a South Korean guard post inside the heavily fortified border. South Korea fired two rounds in response after issuing a warning broadcast, it said.  South Korea suffered no casualties, the military said. It’s unknown whether North Korea had any casualties. The North’s official Korean Central News Agency hasn’t reported about the incident.  It comes a day after North Korea broadcast images of leader Kim Jong Un reappearing in public after a 20-day absence amid intense speculation about his health.  KCNA said Kim attended Friday’s ceremony marking the completion of a fertilizer factory near Pyongyang along with senior officials. State TV showed Kim smiling and walking around factory facilities.  Kim earlier vanished from the public eye after presiding over a Politburo meeting of the ruling Workers’ Party on April 11 to discuss the coronavirus. Speculation about his health began swirling after he missed an April 15 event commemorating the birthday of his grandfather and state founder, Kim Il Sung, something he had never done since inheriting power upon his father Kim Jong Il’s death in late 2011.  The Koreas are split along the 248-kilometer (155-mile) -long, 4-kilometer (2.5-mile) -wide border called the Demilitarized Zone that was originally created as a buffer. But unlike its name, the DMZ is the world’s most heavily fortified border. An estimated 2 million mines are peppered inside and near the DMZ, which is also guarded by barbed wire fences, tank traps and combat troops on both sides.  In late 2018, the two Koreas began destroying some of their front-line guard posts and removing mines from the DMZ as part of steps to reduce tensions. But the efforts stalled amid a deadlock in nuclear negotiations between Kim and President Donald Trump meant to convince North Korea to give up its arsenal in exchange for lifting economic sanctions.  The last time there was gunfire along the border was in 2017, when North Korea sprayed bullets at a soldier fleeing to South Korea.
2020-05-03	Editors  USA TODAY  There's a new phrase emerging: 'Safer at Home'  Americans across the country are beginning to heed the warning of "safer at home" over "stay at home" as states begin to ease social distancing restrictions. At the height of restrictions in late March and early April, more than 310 million Americans were under various stay-at-home directives. But as businesses, beaches and parks begin to reopen, hints of normalcy are emerging. Still, leaders warn that restrictions could come back if coronavirus cases spike. There are more than 1.1 million confirmed cases of coronavirus in the United States, as of Sunday, with the death toll surpassing 67,000.  Not every reopening has gone smoothly. California authorities pleaded for beachgoers to follow social distancing rules this weekend after Gov. Gavin Newsom on Thursday temporarily shuttered Orange County’s coastline, a move he said was prompted by overcrowded beaches last weekend. But some aren't too happy about it. In Huntington Beach, police estimated 2,500 to 3,000 protesters gathered for May Day on a beachside street.  Coronavirus treatment drug to arrive in hospitals this week  Remdesivir, the first possible treatment for battling COVID-19, will become available for U.S. hospitals in the coming week. Daniel O'Day, CEO and chairman of Gilead Sciences, says his company aims to have more than 140,000 treatment courses by the end of May, more than 500,000 by October and more than 1 million by December. Early results from a global study conducted by the U.S. National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases found patients given the experimental drug recovered faster and may be less likely to die. While not a "knockout," White House coronavirus task force chief Dr. Anthony Fauci said the study results were "a very important proof of concept."  'Death is our greeter': Doctors, nurses struggle with mental health as coronavirus cases grow.  Lockdowns begin to lift globally  Spaniards flocked to the streets and parks Saturday, ending seven weeks of a strict coronavirus lockdown. Spanish authorities remained cautious, keeping beaches closed and requiring face masks on public transportation. Some small businesses will reopen Monday on a limited basis. Italy will begin lifting its nationwide lockdown Monday by allowing some key businesses — primarily construction and manufacturing — to reopen under strict social distancing rules. Meanwhile in France, kindergartens and primary and secondary schools will reopen May 11, followed by cafes, restaurants and bars.  Income and race create different COVID-19 realities  An exclusive look at ZIP code data show the coronavirus has run rampant through some neighborhoods, while leaving residents in adjoining areas much less impaired. In the poorest neighborhoods, where median household income is less than $35,000, the COVID-19 infection rate was twice as high as in the nation’s wealthiest ZIPs. Infection rates were five times higher in majority-minority ZIP codes than in ZIPs with less than 10% nonwhite population.  Real quick  Joe Biden, DNC chair address Tara Reade's sexual assault allegation  Democratic National Committee Chairman Tom Perez on Sunday dismissed calls to launch an investigation into Joe Biden, saying the former vice president was already an "open book." Tara Reade, a former Biden Senate staffer, has alleged that Biden sexually assaulted her 1993. The Democratic presidential candidate denied the accusations publicly for the first time Friday: "No, it is not true. I'm saying unequivocally it did not happen," he said. Political experts say Reade's allegation could complicate Biden's support among two crucial voting blocs – liberals who backed U.S. Sen. Bernie Sanders in the primary and independent women in suburbs.  'Murder Hornets' spotted in the US  A small number of Asian giant hornet sightings in the Pacific Northwest has raised alarms for its killer nickname: "Murder Hornet." While experts have been tracking the invasive species in the U.S. for months, a New York Times feature published Saturday brought the nickname to the national consciousness. hile officials are concerned — especially for local honeybee populations — the danger to the average person is low at this time, said Washington State Department of Agriculture entomologist Chris Looney.  P.S. Like this round up of stories? We send it to inboxes every afternoon. Sign up for "The Short List" newsletter here.  This is a compilation of stories from across the USA TODAY Network. Contributing: Associated Press.
2020-05-04	Jason Sattler  Opinion columnist  Small groups of protesters egged on by the president, along with governors in redder states, are eager to “reopen” America — as if you can turn off a pandemic by inviting people back into Hooters. But if Republicans actually want to get Americans back to work, what they have to do is simple: Get rid of Donald Trump now.  While it’s almost science fiction to imagine the Republican Party and its billionaire backers growing something resembling a spine and compelling Trump to resign or, at least, not seek reelection in 2020, it’s at least a scientific possibility, unlike any hope of having a fully tested vaccine in the next few months.  Lyndon Johnson decided to not run for president when the failure of the Vietnam War became undeniable. More Americans have died of COVID-19 in the last three months than perished in that war, which lasted most of two decades. And since life has decided to turn into science fiction, why shouldn’t we entertain the possibility that there is enough sense on the right to get rid of the one human being standing in the way of any hope of returning to normalcy soon?  His own interests are the priorities  More than anything, we are where we are now because Trump prioritized his own interests above the well-being of the United States. And our response will always be limited by his addictions to adulation and political gain.  We’ll never know what 2020 would have looked like if the most powerful man on earth hadn’t spent the beginning of this year echoing Chinese government propaganda and downplaying the threat of COVID-19.  In seeming hopes of cultivating the trade deal he so desperately wanted and preserving the stock market gains he was relying on for reelection, Trump on Feb. 10 was still spreading Chinese President Xi Jinping's fiction the heat could kill off the virus. The next day, Trump attacked his own Federal Reserve chair for warning about the potential economic impact of the novel coronavirus. And later that month he raged at his own expert at the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention for saying that a COVID-19 outbreak in the United States was likely and could lead to a “disruption to everyday life.”  The stock market, shocked by the sudden break in happy talk from the administration, lost nearly 2,000 points in two days. And instead of heeding the CDC warning, which echoed reports that had been in Trump’s intelligence briefings for weeks, the president and his advisers engaged in a “cover-up” for five days at the key moment of this crisis.  Two epidemiologists estimated that 90% of U.S. deaths in the first wave of the COVID-19 epidemic might have been prevented if social distancing policies had gone into effect March 2, instead of March 16.  When he could have been taking action that might have saved tens of thousands of lives, Trump was busy tweeting, holding rallies, golfing, partying at Mar-A-Lago and silencing the CDC.  Vietnam vet Tom Ridge:Selfish protests against stay-at-home orders dishonor America's veterans  The American public, however, has demonstrated the patience and foresight our president and the protesters lack.  Polls have found wide support for preventive measures such as social distancing and staying at home. In an ABC News/Ipsos poll, for instance, 86% called them “responsible” policies. Remarkably, about 80% said that if these restrictions were lifted tomorrow, they would be unlikely to go out into public places where people assemble.  Despite the economic hurt slamming the most vulnerable today, the horror of dying alone on a ventilator has been far more convincing than Trump’s sick tweets encouraging his fans to “liberate” their states.  Trump never gets better, only worse  Taiwan, South Korea, New Zealand, Iceland and Germany have already moved to reopen their economies, aided by strategic and effective testing. Trump, however, has taken almost every opportunity to make this crisis worse.  Rather than using the federal government’s massive power to alleviate a testing shortage that has lasted long after he said “anyone” could get a test, Trump has targeted medical equipment for political purposes. Rather than reassuring and consoling a suffering nation, he’s distracted us with his time-share salesman takes on unproven drugs and experimental treatments that may be encouraging Americans to inject bleach.  Coronavirus crisis Q&A: 'We are not, at all, past the epidemic'  Of course, all this talk about “reopening” is just code for forcing low-paid workers to choose between their lives and their paycheck. The right is happy to go along with Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell’s goal of using this crisis to bankrupt the states and rob teachers, firefighters and police officers of their pensions.  As long as Trump is punishing their enemies and propping up the stock market, his agenda is still the Republican agenda. That's why we can't imagine the party turning against him.  But you can only fool the Dow Jones for so long, as this president learned in late February. The horror of tens of millions out of work and the U.S. death toll heading toward six figures by summer is likely only to get worse, especially if Americans are forced back to work.  Then, at some point, even a right-wing billionaire’s conscience may force him to consider why he didn’t do anything to prevent what is now the only predictable thing left in this life: Trump getting worse.  Jason Sattler, a writer based in Ann Arbor, Michigan, is a member of USA TODAY’s Board of Contributors and host of "The GOTMFV Show" podcast. Follow him on Twitter: @LOLGOP
2020-05-04	ESPN announced plans to televise games from South Korea's top baseball league on Monday, as American professional sports remain shut down during the coronavirus pandemic.  The Korea Baseball Organization (KBO) has its 2020 opening day Tuesday and ESPN will begin its coverage by carrying six games a week. The deal is a partnership with Eclat Media Group. ESPN will be the only English-language network to cover the games, using its play-by-play voices, analysts and reporters for color commentary at their home quarantined studios.  KBO commissioner Un-Chan Chung said in a statement: "During this unprecedented and difficult time, I hope the KBO League can bring consolation to the communities and provide guidelines to the world of sports. I am pleased that the KBO League can be introduced globally and hope this can be an opportunity for the development of our league and the sport."  Most games will air on ESPN2 at 5:30 a.m. ET from Tuesdays through Fridays, 4 a.m. on Saturdays and 1 a.m. on Sundays. The season-opening game between the NC Dinos and Samsung Lions begins at 1 a.m. Tuesday on ESPN. Games will also be recapped on SportsCenter. The ESPN talent to cover the games includes Karl Ravech, Jon Sciambi, Eduardo Perez, Jessica Mendoza and Kyle Peterson.  "We're thrilled to become the exclusive English-language home to the KBO League and to showcase its compelling action and high-level of competition," said Burke Magnus, ESPN's executive vice president of programming, in a news release. "We have a long-standing history of documenting the game of baseball and we're excited to deliver these live events to sports fans."
2020-05-04	AP  BRISTOL, Conn. (AP) — ESPN will begin airing six regular-season games per week from South Korea's KBO baseball league.  The agreement with Eclat Media Group was announced Monday, the day before the league is scheduled to open its season.  The first game featuring the NC Dinos taking on the Samsung Lions will air at 1 a.m. EDT Tuesday. Games will air regularly Tuesday through Friday at 5:30 a.m. EDT, Saturday at 4 a.m. EDT, and Sunday at 1 a.m. EDT. Most will be on ESPN2.  The defending Korea Series champion Doosan Bears will be on Wednesday against the LG Twins while the 11-time league champion KIA Tigers take on the Lions on Friday.  The agreement includes the postseason and the Korea Series best-of-seven championship. The schedule and where ESPN airs them is subject to change pending the status of other leagues whose schedules have been affected by the coronavirus pandemic.  ESPN announcers will provide commentary in English from their home studios. Karl Ravech and Eduardo Perez will do three games this week, including the opener. Jon Sciambi, Jessica Mendoza and Kyle Peterson will also call games.  ___  More AP MLB: https://apnews.com/MLB and https://twitter.com/AP_Sports
2020-05-04	It may be taking place halfway around the world, but live regular-season baseball is about to begin.  After a five-week delay due to the coronavirus pandemic, the Korea Baseball Organization (KBO) is finally ready for opening day on Tuesday. Meanwhile, envious North Americans will be able to watch the games live — as long as they're willing to rise before the sun does.  ESPN has reached a deal with the KBO to air six live games per week — with the network getting the game feed from South Korea and using ESPN announcers to call the action remotely.  It may not be the optimal setup, but it's live baseball and that's what really matters.  CORONAVIRUS & SPORTS: Get the latest news and information right in your inbox. Sign up here.  'TOO PERFECT':Arizona State slugger likely No. 1 for Detroit Tigers in MLB draft  What is the KBO?  Professional baseball in South Korea is made up of 10 teams in eight cities, almost all of them owned by — and named after — a major corporation.  Doosan Bears (defending KBO champions)  Hanwha Eagles  Kia Tigers  Kiwoom Heroes  KT Wiz  LG Twins  Lotte Giants  NC Dinos  Samsung Lions  SK Wyverns  Despite the late start to the regular season, the KBO still hopes to complete a full 144-game schedule. Play will begin with no fans in the stands. The KBO's success or failure could be an indication of how MLB may look to proceed when it's ready to begin play, possibly by late June.  Baseball fans can expect plenty of offense, and yes ... bat flips are encouraged.  Are there any current Korean-born MLB players?  Three, in fact.  Texas Rangers OF Shin-Soo Choo has played 15 seasons in the majors, collecting 1,645 hits and earning All-Star honors for the first time in 2018.  Toronto Blue Jays LHP Hyun-Jin Ryu spent six seasons with the Los Angeles Dodgers before signing with the Jays as a free agent this offseason. He had a career year in 2019, going 14-5, leading the National League with a 2.32 ERA and finishing second to Jacob deGrom in the NL Cy Young voting.  Tampa Bay Rays 1B/DH Ji-Man Choi has played for four teams in four seasons, but seemed to find a home with the Rays last year, posting career-high totals in home runs (19) and RBI (63).  In addition, the St. Louis Cardinals signed left-hander Kwang-Hyun Kim this winter after 12 years in the KBO. He's expected to compete for a spot in the team's starting rotation.  Have American players been successful in the KBO?  Perhaps the most prominent example is current Washington Nationals first baseman Eric Thames. After two uneventful seasons in the majors with Toronto and Seattle, Thames became a star with the Dinos. He hit .381 with 47 home runs, 140 RBI and 40 stolen bases in 2015 to earn league MVP honors. The following season, he hit 40 homers and drove in 121 more to give him a springboard to signing with the Milwaukee Brewers in 2017.  Last season's KBO MVP was right-hander Josh Lindblom of the Bears, who went 20-3 with a 2.50 ERA. He was a former second-round pick of the Dodgers in 2008, who spent four seasons in the majors before heading to Korea. Lindblom, 32, signed a three-year, $9.1 million contract this offseason with the Brewers.  Are there any current KBO players MLB fans will recognize?  Perhaps the most recognizable figure isn't a player, but a manager. Five-time MLB All-Star and former Washington Nationals skipper Matt Williams was hired this offseason to lead the KBO's most storied franchise, the Kia Tigers.  As for the players, every KBO team is allowed a maximum of three foreigners, so there will be a few somewhat familiar names sprinkled throughout the league.  The Tigers, for example, have former Oakland A's pitcher Aaron Brooks and ex-Houston Astros outfielder Preston Tucker.  The LG Twins have former Boston Red Sox first-rounder Casey Kelly at the front of their pitching rotation.  Former Texas Rangers pitcher Adrian Sampson was supposed to be a cornerstone of the Lotte Giants rotation. However, he has been unable to travel to Korea due to the coronavirus outbreak. The Giants also have eight-year MLB veteran Dan Straily, who played last season with the Baltimore Orioles.  Who else is worth watching?  1B Byung-ho Park, Heroes. Minnesota Twins fans might remember Park for his less-than-stellar 2016 season (.191, 12 HR, 24 RBI in 215 AB), but he's been a star in the KBO. Park won the league's home run crown last season with 33.  LHP Hyeon-Jong Yang, Tigers. The 2017 KBO MVP went 16-8 on the mound and led the league last season with a 2.29 ERA.  SS Ha-Seong Kim, Heroes. One of the league's top all-around players, Kim hit .307 with 19 home runs and 33 stolen bases. He's also just 24.  C Eui-Ji Yang, Dinos. Yang led the KBO in batting average, on-base percentage and slugging last season (.354/.438/.574) and finished second in the MVP voting.  OF Baek-Ho Kang, Wiz. A budding star at age 20, Kang hit .336/.416/.495 and boasts one of the highest leg kicks of any batter in the league.  RHP Jong-Hoon Park, Wyverns. A true submariner, Park has a release point that's about six inches off the ground. At 28, he has designs on being posted to MLB after this season, according to veteran KBO observer Tim McLeod.  What's the TV schedule?  ESPN will broadcast six games per week, beginning on opening day, May 5.  Tuesday, May 5: NC Dinos vs. Samsung Lions, 1 a.m. ET (Karl Ravech, Eduardo Perez)  Wednesday, May 6: Doosan Bears vs. LG Twins, 5:30 a.m. ET (Karl Ravech, Eduardo Perez)  Thursday, May 7: NC Dinos vs. Samsung Lions, 5:30 a.m. ET (Karl Ravech, Eduardo Perez)  Friday, May 8: Kia Tigers vs. Samsung Lions, 5:30 a.m. ET (Jon Sciambi, Kyle Peterson)  Saturday, May 9: LG Twins vs. NC Dinos, 4:00 a.m. ET (Jon Sciambi, Jessica Mendoza)  Sunday, May 10: LG Twins vs. NC Dinos, 1:00 a.m. ET (Jon Sciambi, Jessica Mendoza)  Follow Gardner on Twitter @SteveAGardner
2020-05-05	U.S. stocks and oil prices advanced Tuesday as more states and countries eased restrictions on businesses, raising hopes for a recovery after the coronavirus pandemic rattled investors and pushed the economy into a historic plunge.  The Dow Jones industrial average climbed 133.33 points to close at 23,883.09. The Standard & Poor’s 500 rose 0.9% to end at 2,868.44, led by gains in health care and technology shares.  Moves toward restarting economies stalled by lockdowns have raised hopes for a recovery in demand for oil, boosting shares of energy companies as crude prices surged 20%. Dow component Chevron jumped 1.6%.  To be sure, crude's steep declines in recent months is crushing many American producers. Oil prices plunged last month as a price war between Russia and Saudi Arabia further roiled the market. At one point, U.S. benchmark crude was priced so low that producers would have been paying customers to take the oil away.  “Storage constraints and oversupply problems have not disappeared, while demand is only set to recover modestly,” Chris Beauchamp, chief market analyst at IG Group, an online trading provider, said in a note. “Buyers of oil now risk being very late to the party.”  A barrel of U.S. oil to be delivered in June jumped 20.5% to settle at $24.56 Tuesday, posting its fifth consecutive day of gains for the first time since July. It’s still well below the roughly $60 that it cost at the start of the year, after plunging on worries that the collapse in oil demand would lead to topped-out storage tanks.  Facing balloon payments on your mortgage?:Here's what to do  Get me out of here!:Americans flee crowded cities amid COVID-19, consider permanent moves  Technology stocks also continued their strong run, and Apple and Microsoft both rose at least 1%. That’s big for the S&P 500 because those two companies alone account for 11% of the entire index’s market value. Tech stocks in the S&P 500 have erased all their losses for 2020 so far, after earlier being down as much as 23%.  The U.S. is taking steps to lift some restrictions imposed amid its outbreaks, even as thousands of new cases are reported each day. California prepared for Stage 2 of its reopening plan, which will allow some retail businesses to begin curbside pickup on Friday. Arkansas, meanwhile, will permit barbershops, beauty salons, massage therapists and tattoo artists, among others, to open again on Wednesday.  In the U.S. there are almost 1.2 million confirmed cases, according to the John Hopkins University data dashboard. Worldwide, the virus has killed over 254,000 people and infected more than 3.6 million.  Many European countries that have seen new infections tapering off amid strict social distancing measures and nationwide lockdowns have begun relaxing some restrictions while watching to see whether numbers began to rise again. In Asia, China and South Korea were slowly resuming public events after months of containment efforts.  “We're not out of the woods yet, but any move in the direction of opening is a good thing, and as long as these measures can be taken while keeping the outbreak in check, additional steps to reopen can continue,” Paul Hickey, co-founder at Bespoke Investment Group, said in a note.  This is another busy week for markets, with a slew of corporate earnings reports due, including more than 150 companies in the S&P 500. On Friday, the government will also show how many jobs were lost during April.  "We will begin to get a true, month-long picture of just how economically debilitating the shutdown has been," David Joy, chief market strategist at Ameriprise Financial, said in a note.  The next two weeks will also give investors more insight about the experience of those communities slowly reopening their economies, analysts say.  "Questions as to how quickly consumers will re-engage socially, and whether a new frugality will emerge will begin to come into focus, as will the associated risk of an acceleration of infections as social distancing discipline eases," Joy said.  In other trading, the yield on the 10-year Treasury note ticked up to 0.65% from 0.63% late Monday. It‘s still well below the 1.90% it yielded at the start of the year. Yields tend to fall when investors are downgrading their expectations for the economy and inflation.  In Europe, Germany’s DAX rose 2.5% while the CAC 40 in Paris gained 2.4% Britain’s FTSE 100 advanced 1.7%. Hong Kong’s Hang Seng added 1.1%, as the government said it would relax some social distancing measures. In Australia, the S&P/ASX 200 climbed 1.6%.  Contributing: The Associated Press
2020-05-06	While countries including the United States struggle with the growing number of coronavirus cases, others have slowed them or haven’t reported a single one since the virus was first discovered in December.  New Zealand recorded its first day with no new coronavirus cases Monday, according to the country’s Ministry of Health. As of Wednesday, the country has 1,488 confirmed and probable cases and 21 deaths.  Meanwhile, the World Health Organization confirmed to USA TODAY that some countries haven’t reported any cases of COVID-19: Comoros, Lesotho, Turkmenistan, North Korea, Kiribati, Marshall Islands, Federated States of Micronesia, Samoa, Solomon Islands, Tonga, Tuvalu, Vanuatu, Cook Islands, Nauru, Niue and Palau.  Are these countries impervious to the coronavirus?  The majority of nations that haven't reported any cases of the coronavirus are isolated island chains in the Pacific.  Dr. Thomas Tsai, assistant professor of health policy at Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health, said these islands were mostly spared the coronavirus because countries in Asia were quickly locked down, preventing travel and tourism.  However, that isn't the case for North Korea, Turkmenistan and Lesotho, which all share borders with countries that have reported coronavirus cases.  North Korea  Despite its 880-mile border with China, North Korea still claims to have had zero infections. China is North Korea’s biggest trading partner, accounting for as much as 95% of the country’s reported imports, according to 38 North, a website that tracks the country’s developments.  “It’s a near impossibility for them not have cases,” said Jung H. Pak, a former CIA analyst and North Korea expert with the Brookings Institution, a Washington think tank.  Pak and other experts say there's evidence of at least a small-scale COVID-19 outbreak in North Korea, a country where much of the population is already in poor health, the economy is crippled and the health system is abysmal.  The true picture of how widespread COVID-19 is inside North Korea will probably never be clear. North Korea is one of the world's most secretive, repressive and authoritarian countries in the world, and the regime's propaganda machine controls the flow of information.  Turkmenistan  Turkmenistan leader Gurbanguly Berdimuhamedow vehemently insists that the country has miraculously avoided the coronavirus, while its neighbor Iran has confirmed over 100,000 cases as of Wednesday, according to the Johns Hopkins website.  Robert Saunders, professor of international relations at Farmingdale State College (SUNY), said one of the reasons why the country has no confirmed cases may be due to lack of testing.  "Willful ignorance can be framed as victory," he said.  'Bad economies are as hurtful to health as viruses’:US lurches toward reopening despite ominous coronavirus models  ‘All night, my eyes are open’::After mass job losses, Americans forced to choose: Pay bills or buy food?  United Nations resident coordinator Elena Panova told the BBC that Turkmenistan is testing everyone who arrives in the country exhibiting symptoms, relying strictly on official information.  However, experts agree that official information from Turkmenistan is notoriously unreliable. Saunders believes there are definitely coronavirus cases in the country and said the government could be working hard to suppress those test results by controlling social media and manipulating death certificates.  Panova also told the BBC Turkmen authorities are working with UN agencies to plan for a possible outbreak, closing most of its land border crossings and canceling flights.  Despite these measures, daily life in Turkmenistan appears as normal. In mid-April, hundreds of soccer fans crowded a stadium in the capital, Ashgabat, to watch its domestic teams play.  Lesotho  J. Stephen Morrison, who directs global work at the Center for Strategic and International Studies as the think tank’s senior vice president, said there are a couple of reasons why Lesotho could be successful in managing their case counts.  He said the mountainous country is mostly remote and difficult to access, making social distancing easier than other more populated countries. South Africa, which surrounds Lesotho, imposed a strict lockdown early in the pandemic, which kept its numbers low and may have inadvertently benefited its neighbor.  Lesotho, like many other African countries, also has experience managing pandemics. Methods such as social isolation and contact tracing are well established in parts of southern and eastern Africa.  “There’s something to be said for having those durable and resilient infrastructures and having had that political experience of going through an epidemic where at its peak 20 years ago was threatening to destabilize these societies,” Morrison said.  While all this may be true, he still believes there may be some unaccounted cases in the country.  Although Lesotho closed its borders March 10, Morrison said Lesotho’s economy is very dependent on South Africa and the history of migration between the two countries puts into question the lockdown’s effectiveness.  Lesotho is also in the midst of political turmoil as Prime Minister Thomas Thabane is charged with murdering his estranged wife, who was assassinated in 2017. According to Deutsche Welle, Thabane struggles to hold onto power deploying the country’s army while citizens demand his immediate resignation.  Morrison said this may have distracted the government from focusing on managing the pandemic.  “Lesotho is a country that has been prone to instability,” he said. “That sort of instability doesn’t speak well to control over a virus.”  America's Food Chain:‘Essential worker just means you’re on the death track’  'Dangerous dynamic':Coronavirus threatens new 'Cold War' between US and China  While experts question whether any of these countries are truly free of the coronavirus, Morrison said what's more important is to make sure they're prepared in case its residents do come in contact with the virus.  "They all have to play the long game," he said. "They may be successful up to a point for now, but their population doesn't have immunity from this."  He argues the international health community must ensure these countries have sufficient testing, PPE and the hospital capacity to successfully manage the pandemic if it somehow appears. Morrison said trade, migration and travel will certainly reintroduce the virus when the world begins to reopen its borders.  "If they want to preserve their low rates, remain relatively or largely free (of the virus), ultimately they have to create the capacity to detect, respond and control," he concluded.  Contributing: Deirdre Shesgreen, USA TODAY; Associated Press. Follow Adrianna Rodriguez on Twitter: @AdriannaUSAT.
2020-05-07	AP  LAS VEGAS (AP) — Las Vegas Aces center JiSu Park will sit out the 2020 WNBA season to train in her home country of South Korea this summer.  Park has started 11 of 57 games over two years with the Aces. The 21-year-old center averages 1.9 points and 2.4 rebounds. She was acquired from the Minnesota Lynx in a 2018 draft day trade.  The start of the WNBA season has been delayed because of the coronavirus pandemic.  Aces coach Bill Laimbeer says the team will welcome Park back for the 2021 season.  In two years with the Aces, the 21-year-old has played in 57 games, starting 11, while averaging 1.9 points and 2.4 rebounds per game.
2020-05-07	AP  SEOUL (AP) — South Korea’s soccer league will kick off the season Friday, three days after the first pitch was thrown in baseball, in yet another sign that life in the country is starting to return to normal after strenuous efforts to contain the coronavirus.  The K-League had been scheduled to start Feb.29 but on that day there were 909 infections of the virus, the country’s highest daily total. After weeks of extensive testing and tracing, that number has fallen to single figures since mid-April.  Soccer authorities have regularly consulted with medical experts and were advised that if the number of new cases fell below 30 for two weeks, then the league season could start.  And so the action begins with defending champion Jeonbuk Motors facing Suwon Bluewings on Friday night in the southwestern city of Jeonju.  “Thanks to the hard work of the South Korean medical workers and the population’s active participation in social distancing, the league can start,” K-League President Kwon Oh-gap told the Associated Press. “Also, we appreciate that clubs and players have fully cooperated in the preparation process.”  There are restrictions, however. No fans will be allowed in stadiums, many which were built for the 2002 World Cup and have capacities of over 40,000. Although K-League officials are hopeful that this will change within weeks rather than months.  Friday night’s curtain raiser will be followed by three games on Saturday as Ulsan Horangi, runner-up in 2019, hosts Sangju Sangmu, Incheon United faces Daegu FC and Gwangju takes on Seongnam. The first round concludes Sunday with Pohang Steelers playing Busan I’Park and FC Seoul traveling to Gangwon FC.  For all South Korea’s success in containing the virus — the country has reported 10,810 cases of COVID-19 and 256 deaths — there is a recognition that new cases could surface at any time. The 12-team league, which paid for 1,100 test on players and staff at the end of April that all came back negative, has already been shortened from 38 rounds to 27. That number could be reduced further to 22 games if necessary.  “Our goal is to keep a close eye on the situation and finish the season without a problem,” Kwon said. “If there is a case of the virus in a team during the season, that team and any team they played against will be suspended for at least two weeks.”  With soccer around the world virtually shuttered amid the pandemic, the K-League, has sold international broadcasting rights to more than 10 countries.  Hong Jeong-ho, the South Korea and Jeonbuk defender, said it sets the stage for international and local fans to see the caliber of the K-League.  “We have the chance to let football fans from around the world know that there are many good players in out country if we perform to our best on the pitch," Hong was quoted to say on the Asian Football Confederation's website. “I feel even more grateful that I can play football and I realize the importance of the game and of the fans."  TV viewers will be able to see for themselves how new safety measures will work. Players will not shake hands with each other, and spitting and conversations at close quarters on the field are prohibited with the K-League ready to impose sanctions on repeat offenders.  South Korea President Moon Jae-in has welcomed the return of sport to the country.  “The world will learn, with a close look, how to enjoy sports while making quarantine and everyday life coexist,” the president posted on social media. “I expect sports to give hope to the people desiring the recovery of their daily lives.  “To that end, the opening of the sports season should be well established in harmony with quarantine.”  ___  More AP soccer: https://apnews.com/Soccer and https://twitter.com/AP_Sports
2020-05-07	AP  SEOUL, South Korea (AP) — Tottenham forward Son Heung-min finished his three-week military training in South Korea on Friday and was right near the top of the class.  The 27-year-old Son entered the Marine Corps training camp on the southern island of Jeju on April 20 for a basic training period that he undertook while the Premier League was suspended in Britain because of the coronavirus pandemic.  Social distancing restrictions still in place in South Korea meant Son’s graduation ceremony was closed to the public. That didn’t stop dozens of fans waiting outside.  Local media reported that Son was presented with an award given to the top five performing trainees in the group of 157, and achieved a perfect record in shooting.  South Korea's Yonhap news agency cited a military official as saying Son received a “Pilsung" prize, which is one of five awards for top performers.  “All the courses were judged in a fair and strict manner, and his military training officers have said he went through the training faithfully,” the Marine Corps officer told Yonhap.  Son was fulfilling requirements of the military service exemption he earned by winning the gold medal for South Korea in the soccer tournament at the Asian Games in 2018. Without the exemption, he would have been required by law to serve 21 months.  After basic training, he still has community service obligations to finish by 2023 to complete all military duties.  Son is expected to return to London later this month. The Premier League is trying to find a way to resume in June but group practice sessions have not yet started.  South Korea's K-League was set to kick off later Friday with defending champion Jeonbuk Motors facing Suwon Bluewings in the southwestern city of Jeonju.  The K-League had been scheduled to start Feb.29 but had to be delayed because of the virus outbreak.  No fans will be allowed in stadiums, many which were built for the 2002 World Cup and have capacities of over 40,000, at least for the first few weeks of competition.  ___  More AP soccer: https://apnews.com/Soccer and https://twitter.com/AP_Sports
2020-05-08	Dr. M. Kit Delgado  Opinion contributor  Some politicians and pundits have set up a dichotomy: Either lock down the economy and prevent deaths from coronavirus, or loosen restrictions and prevent economic devastation and all the downstream consequences. This is false.  As an emergency physician working in an urban, low-income neighborhood of Philadelphia, I have treated several patients who lost jobs due to the coronavirus outbreak. For example, I treated a young cook who came in with palpitations and overwhelming anxiety not knowing how he will pay his rent, and a middle-age janitor who ran out of money to buy alcohol and came in by ambulance shaking in withdrawal, tearfully ashamed of his situation.  While the angry protesters carrying rifles in the news photos do not look like my patients, they have cause for being upset. The April unemployment rate shot up to 14.7% on Friday with 20.5 million jobs lost, wiping out the equivalent of every job gained over the past decade. While most are temporary layoffs, 42% may be permanent.  Job loss could increase deaths  Furthermore, as a researcher who works on preventing deaths from substance use and trauma, I am concerned about the effect this widespread income loss will have on these outcomes. Historically, in counties where factories permanently shut down, there are approximately nine additional deaths due to opioid overdoses per 100,000 residents.  It is estimated that individual-level poverty is associated with over 133,000 deaths per year in the United States. More job loss will lead to loss of health insurance and contribute to worsening of these numbers.  So, do we really have to pick our poison — to choose between saving lives from coronavirus and ruining the economy, or opening the economy and losing more lives to coronavirus? The answer is no.  First, history tells us that U.S. cities that were more aggressive with public health measures to get the 1918 flu pandemic under control grew faster economically after the pandemic was over and had fewer deaths. Today, check out South Korea: Despite being China’s neighbor, it has had only 256 deaths and has begun reopening its economy after aggressive testing, tracing and isolation of cases.  Second, reopening retail businesses only addresses the supply of services. For robust sales to occur, there will also need to be robust demand. Polls show that given current risks, most Americans are not ready to resume normal activities, even if restrictions are lifted. Reducing the risk of coronavirus is vital for stimulating shopping, dining, leisure and travel.  Those with fewest choices:On coronavirus, we know who will pay the price when states reopen before they should  Third, employers will have challenges bringing their employees back to work if they cannot keep them safe. This includes the same challenges health care employers have faced: maintaining physical distancing and providing personal protective equipment. The U.S. Occupational Safety and Health Administration has received thousands of complaints and is conducting hundreds of coronavirus related inspections to determine whether employers failed to adequately protect their workers.  Fourth, once workplaces open, it will be impossible to stay open without the robust ability to rapidly test employees, trace contacts of those who get infected, and isolate them. While I have taken care of bus drivers and airport workers who likely got infected on the job, this is particularly critical where employees are in tight proximity.  What the protesters should ask for  For example, among 130,000 U.S. workers in 115 meat processing facilities in 19 states, there were 4,913 cases of COVID-19 and 20 deaths this April. That's over twice as high as the monthly death rate of the most dangerous U.S. occupation, the fishing industry.  Testing challenges persist. Our well-resourced academic hospital just developed the capacity to get same day COVID-19 results for patients who can be discharged from the emergency department. Before that, it took five to eight days to get results, which is standard. Positive cases could infect hundreds of employees before getting their results and self-isolating.  Empathy:We need to mourn coronavirus losses, not just track the grim tally of deaths  Here are the four things protesters really should be demanding to reopen the economy: Widely available, reliable, rapid COVID-19 tests, a public health work force and tech solutions to rapidly trace contacts of new cases, business safeguards that include personal protective equipment, physical distancing, cleaning and disinfection, and personal adherence to physical distancing to reduce spread until testing ramps up and cases decrease. (Sadly, cases are increasing beyond New York, and packed protests without masks could spark more outbreaks.)  In the end, we don’t have to pick between the poisons of deaths from coronavirus, or income loss and resulting deaths of despair. More aggressive public health measures and buy-in will prevent both and get us back to normalcy faster.  Dr. M. Kit Delgado is an Assistant Professor of Emergency Medicine & Epidemiology in the Perelman School of Medicine and a Senior Fellow in the Leonard Davis Institute of Health Economics at the University of Pennsylvania. He is an attending physician in the Penn Presbyterian Medical Center Emergency Department. Follow him on Twitter: @kit_delgadoMD
2020-05-08	It doesn’t appear people who have had a confirmed case of COVID-19 can quickly become reinfected with the disease, a helpful finding for those worried that even once recovered they may not be safe.  But it remains unknown whether there's any real long-term or even short-term protection for those who've been sick.  Concern was initially raised following reports out of South Korea that some people were becoming reinfected with SARS-CoV-2, the virus that causes COVID-19.  The country’s Centers for Disease Control and Prevention reported more than 300 such cases. South Korea has one of the world’s most extensive COVID-19 testing programs, so its data is considered strong.  South Korean researchers now think they were seeing false positives, where the tests detected old particles of virus in patients no longer causing disease, Reuters reported.  “The South Koreans tried to grow the viruses (from those particles) and they didn’t grow,” said Dr. Ania Wajnberg, an internist at Mount Sinai Hospital in New York City who is medical director of its Serum Antibody Donor Identification program.  Virus strains:Many coronavirus mutations are circling the globe, but we don't know if any are more dangerous  Vaccine ethics:To find a coronavirus vaccine, can we ethically infect people with a disease with no cure?  It’s still not known whether having had COVID-19 gives long-term immunity to the virus, but immediate reinfection is now less of a worry.  Wajnberg’s group tested 624 patients who were positive for COVID-19 and recovered. They found all but three were producing antibodies to the virus, indicating their bodies had successfully fought off the infection.  What those antibodies mean in terms of long-term protection remains an unanswered question. But Wajnberg's seen at least one hopeful sign.  “So far, we don’t see any evidence of people being reinfected,” she said.  Confirmation in a large study that almost everyone with a symptomatic infection develops antibodies is promising, said Marc Jenkins, director of the Center for Immunology at the University of Minnesota Medical School.  "But it is still not clear that antibodies are protective and if so, what amount of antibodies are needed for protection," he said.  The differences between diseases can be enormous. Some illnesses, such as measles, give lifelong immunity. For others, such as the common cold, immunity wanes after only a few months.  We can't let our guard down, said Dr. Michael Mina, a professor of epidemiology at Harvard’s Chan School of Public Health.  “It could be two years, so you could get it now and then you could get it in two years and it’s a pretty severe infection,” he said in a call with reporters Friday.  With the SARS-CoV-2 virus having been active among humans for only the past six months, it’s too soon to know.  “It’s just going to take time," Mina said. "We have to follow people over time to see how likely people who’ve been infected are to get a second infection."
2020-05-09	AP  CURLING  Women’s world championships in Prince George, Canada from March 14-22 canceled.  Men’s world championships in Glasgow, Scotland from March 28-April 5 canceled.  World mixed doubles and senior championships in Kelowna, Canada from April 18-25 canceled.  CYCLING  Road  Tour de France from June 27-July 19 postponed to Aug. 29-Sept. 20.  Giro d’Italia in Hungary and Italy from May 9-31 postponed to Oct. 3-25.  Spanish Vuelta from Aug. 14-Sept. 6 postponed to Oct. 20-Nov. 8; Netherlands start canceled; Portugal stages dropped.  Tour of Hainan in China from Feb. 23-March 1 postponed.  UAE Tour from Feb. 23-29, after 5 of 7 stages cancelled.  Strade Bianche in Siena, Italy on March 7 postponed to Aug. 1.  Paris-Nice from March 8-15: Mitchelton-Scott, Ineos, Astana, UAE Team Emirates, CCC, Movistar, Jumbo-Visma teams withdrew. From Stage 2 of 8, no spectators. On March 14, Stage 7 of 8, canceled.  GP Larciano in Pistoia, Italy on March 8 canceled.  Tirreno-Adriatico in Italy from March 11-17 postponed to Sept. 7-14.  Istarsko Proljeće in Croatia from March 12-15 canceled.  Drentse Acht van Westerveld (women) in the Netherlands on March 13 canceled.  Bevrijdingsronde van Drenthe in the Netherlands on March 14-15 canceled.  Ronde van Drenthe (women) in the Netherlands on March 15 canceled.  Popolarissima in Italy on March 15 canceled.  Paris-Troyes on March 15 postponed.  Danilith Nokere Koerse in Belgium on March 18 canceled.  Volta ao Alentejo in Portugal from March 18-22 canceled.  Olympia’s Tour in the Netherlands from March 18-22 canceled.  Milan-San Remo on March 21 postponed to Aug. 8.  Omloop van de Westhoek (women) in Belgium on March 22 canceled.  Trofeo Alfredo Binda (women) in Cittiglio, Italy on March 22 postponed to June 2 canceled.  Tour de Normandie in France from March 23-27 canceled.  Volta a Catalunya in Spain from March 23-29 canceled.  AG Driedaagse Brugge-De Panne in Belgium from March 25-26 postponed to Oct. 20-21.  Settimana Coppi e Bartali in Italy from March 25-29 canceled.  E3 BinckBank Classic in Belgium on March 27 canceled.  Gent-Wevelgem in Belgium on March 29 postponed to Oct. 11.  Cholet-Pays de La Loir in France on March 29 canceled.  Dwars door Vlaanderen in Belgium on April 1 canceled.  Giro di Sicilia in Italy from April 1-4 canceled.  Joe Martin Stage Race in Arkansas from April 2-5 postponed.  Tour of Flanders in Belgium on April 5 postponed to Oct. 18.  Roue Tourangelle in France on April 5 canceled.  Tour of the Basque Country in Spain from April 6-11 canceled.  Sarthe-Pays de la Loire in France from April 7-10 canceled.  Scheldeprijs in Belgium on April 8 canceled.  Tour of Morocco from April 9-18 canceled.  Circuit des Ardennes in Belgium from April 10-12 canceled.  Paris-Roubaix on April 12 postponed to Oct. 25.  Tour of Turkey from April 12-19 postponed.  De Brabantse Pijl in Belgium on April 15 canceled.  Tour du Loir-et-Cher in France from April 15-19 canceled.  Amstel Gold Race in the Netherlands on April 19 postponed to Oct. 10.  Tour of the Alps in Italy and Austria from April 20-24 postponed.  Fleche Wallonne in Belgium on April 22 postponed to Sept. 30.  Tour de Bretagne in France from April 25-May 1 canceled.  Liege-Bastogne-Liege in Belgium on April 26 postponed to Oct. 4.  Tour de Romandie in Switzerland from April 28-May 3 canceled.  Tour of the Gila in New Mexico from April 29-May 3 canceled.  Tour de Yorkshire in England from April 30-May 3 postponed.  Eschborn–Frankfurt in Germany on May 1 canceled.  Vuelta Asturias in Spain from May 1-3 postponed.  4 Jours de Dunkerque in France from May 5-10 canceled.  Vuelta a la Comunidad de Madrid from May 7-10 postponed.  Tour of Chongming Island (women) in China from May 7-9 postponed to Oct. 23-25.  Festival Elsy Jacobs (women) in Luxembourg from May 8-10 canceled.  Trofee Maarten Wynants in Houthalen-Helchteren, Belgium from May 9-10 canceled.  Tour of Zhoushan Island in China from May 12-14 postponed.  Tour de Hongrie in Hungary from May 13-20 postponed.  La Classique Morbihan (women) in France on May 15 postponed.  Grand Prix de Plumelec Morbihan in France on May 16 postponed.  Boucles de l’Aulne in Châteaulin, France on May 17 canceled.  Tour of Japan from May 17-24 canceled.  Mercan’Tour Classic Alpes-Maritimes in Valberg, France on May 18 postponed.  Durango-Durango Emakumeen Saria (women) in Spain on May 20 postponed.  Circuit de Wallonie in Charleroi, Belgium on May 21 postponed.  Vuelta a Burgos Feminas (women) in Spain from May 21-24 postponed.  GP Marcel Kint in Zwevegem, Belgium on May 24 postponed.  Thüringen Ladies Tour in Germany from May 26-31 postponed.  ZLM Tour in the Netherlands from May 27-31 canceled.  Tour of Estonia from May 28-30 postponed.  Boucles de la Mayenne in France from May 28-31 postponed.  Ronde van Limburg in the Netherlands on May 30 canceled.  Tour of Taiyuan in China on May 31 postponed.  Critérium du Dauphiné in France from May 31-June 7 postponed to Aug. 12-16.  Tour de Gatineau (women) in Canada on June 4 postponed.  Chrono de la Gatineau in Canada on June 5 postponed.  Tour of Slovenia from June 6-14 canceled.  Tour de Suisse in Switzerland from June 6-14 canceled.  Elfstedenronde in Belgium on June 7 postponed.  Dwars door de Westhoek (women) in Belgium on June 7 canceled.  Women’s Tour in Britain from June 8-13 canceled.  Baloise Belgium Tour on June 10 canceled.  Tour de Korea in South Korea from June 10-14 canceled.  Vuelta Femenina a Guatemala from June 10-14 canceled.  Rund um Köln in Cologne, Germany on June 14 canceled.  Flanders Diamond Tour (women) in Nijlen, Belgium on June 14 canceled.  Adriatica Ionica Race in Italy from June 14-18 canceled.  Tour de Beauce in Canada from June 17-21 postponed.  IWT Jong Maar Moedig in Belgium on June 24 canceled.  Course Cycliste de Solidarnosc et des Champions Olympiques in Poland from June 24-27 postponed.  Tour de Serbie in Serbia from June 25-28 postponed.  Lotto Belgium Tour (women) from June 25-28 postponed.  Tour of Austria from June 26-July 3 canceled.  Giro Rosa (women) in Italy from June 26-July 5 postponed to Sept. 11-19.  Tour du Sénégal from June 27-July 4 postponed.  Gran Premio Città di Lugano in Switzerland on June 28 postponed.  Midden-Brabant Poort Omloop in Gilze, Netherlands on June 28 postponed.  Tour de Pologne in Poland from July 5-11 postponed to Aug. 5-9.  La Course (women) in Paris on July 19 postponed to Aug. 29.  Donostia Klasikoa in San Sebastián, Spain on July 25 canceled.  European championships in Trentino, Italy from Sept. 9-13 canceled.  Sea Otter Classic in Monterey, California from Oct. 1-4 postponed.  Track  Six Day Manchester in England from March 13-15 canceled.  Olympic test event in Tokyo from April 10-12 postponed.  Grand Prix Minsk in Belarus from May 18-21 postponed.  Grand Prix of Germany in Cottbus from May 22-23 postponed.  Grand Prix of Tula in Russia from May 27-29 postponed.  Pan American championships in Lima, Peru from May 27-31 postponed.  Bahnen-Tournee in Oerlikon, Switzerland on May 30 postponed.  Bahnen-Tournee in Singen, Germany from May 31-June 1 postponed.  Mountain Bike  Eliminator World Cup in Dubai on March 6 canceled.  Cape Epic in South Africa from March 15-22 canceled.  UCI World Cup in Lousa, Portugal on March 21-22 postponed.  Eliminator World Cup in Barcelona on March 28 canceled.  Cross-country World Cup in Ascona-Locarno, Switzerland from April 17-18 postponed.  UCI World Cup in Maribor, Slovenia from May 2-3 postponed.  UCI World Cup in Losinj, Croatia from May 9-10 canceled.  European championships in Graz, Austria from May 14-17 postponed.  UCI World Cup in Nove Mesto na Morave, Czech Republic from May 22-24 postponed.  Eliminator World Cup in Villard-De-Lans, France on June 5 postponed.  Cross-country World Cup in Bologna, Italy from June 5-6 postponed.  UCI World Cup in Fort William, Scotland from June 6-7 canceled.  World championships in Albstadt, Germany from June 25-28 canceled.  BMX  South American championships in San Juan, Argentina on March 22 postponed.  Oceania championships in Launceston, Australia on March 25 postponed.  Pan American championships in Lima, Peru on April 4 postponed.  Asian championships in Banyuwangi, Indonesia on May 11 postponed.  Supercross World Cup in Manchester, England from April 18-19 postponed.  Supercross World Cup in Papendal, Netherlands from May 2-3 postponed.  Supercross World Cup in Rock Hill, South Carolina from May 15-16 postponed.  World championships in Houston from May 26-31 canceled.  EQUESTRIAN  Longines Masters of Hong Kong from Feb. 14-16 canceled.  World Cup Finals in Las Vegas from April 15-19 canceled.  Kentucky Three-Day Event in Lexington from April 22-25 canceled.  Badminton Horse Trials in England from May 6-10 canceled.  Dressage Nations Cup in Compiegne, France from May 14-17 canceled.  World Equestrian Festival CHIO Aachen in Germany from May 29-June 7 postponed.  Dressage Nations Cup in Aachen, Germany from June 2-7 postponed.  Dressage Nations Cup in Rotterdam, Netherlands from June 18-21 canceled.  Longines Masters of Lausanne, Switzerland from June 18-21 canceled.  FENCING  Anaheim Grand Prix in California on March 13-15 postponed.  Men’s Saber World Cup in Budapest, Hungary on March 20-22 postponed.  Men’s Epee World Cup in Buenos Aires, Argentina on March 20-22 postponed.  Women’s Saber World Cup in Sint-Niklaas, Belgium on March 20-22, postponed.  Women’s Epee World Cup in Tashkent, Uzbekistan on March 20-22 postponed.  Junior world championships in Salt Lake City, Utah on April 3-11 postponed.  African Zonal Olympic qualifier in Cairo on April 15 postponed.  Asian Zonal Olympic qualifier in Seoul on April 15-16 postponed.  African championships in Cairo from April 16-20 postponed.  Asian championships in Seoul from April 17-22 postponed.  European Zonal Olympic qualifier in Madrid on April 18-19 postponed.  American Zonal Olympic qualifier in Panama City on April 18-19 postponed.  Saber Grand Prix in Seoul from April 24-26 canceled.  Epee Grand Prix in Cali, Colombia from May 1-3 canceled.  Men’s Foil World Cup in St. Petersburg, Russia from May 1-3 canceled.  Women’s Saber World Cup in Tunis, Tunisia from May 8-10 canceled.  Foil Grand Prix in Shanghai from May 15-17 canceled.  Women’s Epee World Cup in Dubai, United Arab Emirates from May 15-17 canceled.  Saber Grand Prix in Moscow from May 22-24 canceled.  European championships in Minsk, Belarus from June 16-21 postponed.  Pan American championships in Asuncion, Paraguay from June 16-21 postponed.  FIELD HOCKEY  Hockey Pro League: China vs. Belgium women from Feb. 8-9 postponed. League from March 13 suspended.  India women’s tour of China from March 14-25 canceled.  Ireland women’s tour of Malaysia in March-April canceled.  AMERICAN FOOTBALL  NFL: International Series in London and Mexico City from Sept. 27-Nov. 1 canceled.  Canadian Football League due to start on June 11 postponed.  GOLF  US PGA Tour  Players Championship in Ponte Vedra Beach, Florida on March 12, Day 1 of 4, canceled.  Valspar Championship in Palm Harbor, Florida from March 19-22 canceled.  WGC-Match Play in Austin, Texas from March 25-29 canceled.  Puntacana Championship in Punta Cana, Dominican Republic from March 26-29 postponed to Sept. 24-27.  Texas Open in San Antonio from April 2-5 canceled.  Masters in Augusta, Georgia from April 9-12 postponed to Nov. 12-15.  Heritage in Hilton Head, South Carolina from April 16-19 postponed to June 18-21, no spectators.  Zurich Classic in Avondale, Louisiana from April 23-26 canceled.  Wells Fargo Championship in Charlotte, North Carolina from April 30-May 3 canceled.  Byron Nelson in Dallas from May 7-10 canceled.  U.S. PGA Championship in San Francisco from May 14-17 postponed to Aug. 6-9.  Charles Schwab Challenge in Fort Worth, Texas from May 21-24 postponed to June 11-14, no spectators.  Rocket Mortgage Classic in Detroit from May 28-31 postponed to July 2-5, no spectators.  Memorial Tournament in Dublin, Ohio from June 4-7 postponed to July 16-19.  Canadian Open in Toronto from June 11-14 canceled.  U.S. Open in Mamaroneck, New York from June 18-21 postponed to Sept. 17-20.  Travelers Championship in Cromwell, Connecticut from June 25-28, no spectators.  WGC-St. Jude Invitational in Memphis, Tennessee from July 2-5 postponed to July 30-Aug. 2.  Barracuda Championship in Truckee, California from July 2-5 postponed to July 30-Aug. 2.  British Open in Sandwich, England from July 16-19 canceled.  Barbasol Championship in Nicholasville, Kentucky from July 16-19 canceled.  Wyndham Championship in Greensboro, North Carolina from Aug. 6-9 postponed to Aug. 13-16.  Northern Trust in Norton, Massachusetts from Aug. 13-16 postponed to Aug. 20-23.  BMW Championship in Olympia Fields, Illinois from Aug. 20-23 postponed to Aug. 27-30.  Tour Championship in Atlanta from Aug. 27-30 postponed to Sept. 3-7.  The Greenbrier in White Sulphur Springs, West Virginia from Sept. 10-13 canceled.  Safeway Open in Napa, California from Sept. 10-13 rescheduled to Sept. 17-20.  Houston Open in Texas from Nov. 12-15 rescheduled to Nov. 5-8.  US LPGA Tour  Honda LPGA Thailand in Pattaya from Feb. 20-23 canceled.  HSBC Women’s World Championship in Singapore from Feb. 27-March 1 canceled.  Blue Bay LPGA on Hainan Island from March 5-8 canceled.  Founders Cup in Phoenix, Arizona from March 19-22 canceled.  Kia Classic in Carlsbad, California from March 26-29 postponed to Sept. 24-27.  ANA Inspiration in Rancho Mirage, California from April 2-5 postponed to Sept. 10-13.  Lotte Championship in Hawaii from April 15-18 canceled.  LA Open in Los Angeles from April 23-26 canceled.  Mediheal Championship in Daly City, California from April 30-May 3 canceled.  Pelican Women’s Championship in Belleair, Florida from May 14-17 postponed to Nov. 12-15 postponed to Nov. 19-22.  Pure Silk Championship in Williamsburg, Virginia from May 21-24 canceled.  ShopRite Classic in Atlantic City, New Jersey from May 29-31 postponed to July 31-Aug. 2.  U.S. Women’s Open in Houston, Texas from June 4-7 postponed to Dec. 10-13.  Meijer Classic in Grand Rapids, Michigan from June 11-14 postponed to Oct. 1-4.  NW Arkansas Championship in Rogers from June 19-21 postponed to Aug. 28-30.  Women’s US PGA Championship in Newtown Square, Pennsylvania from June 25-28 postponed to Oct. 8-11.  Marathon Classic in Sylvania, Ohio from July 9-12 postponed to July 23-26.  Evian Championship in Evian-les-Bains, France from July 23-26 postponed to Aug. 6-9.  International Crown in St. Albans, England from Aug. 27-30 canceled.  Portland Classic in Oregon from Sept. 10-13 postponed to Sept. 17-20.  Volunteers of America Classic in The Colony, Texas from Oct. 1-4 postponed to Dec. 3-6.  Tour Championship in Naples, Florida from Nov. 19-22 postponed to Dec. 17-20.  European Tour  Kenya Open in Nairobi from March 12-15 canceled.  Indian Open in New Delhi from March 19-22 postponed.  Maybank Championship in Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia, from April 16-19 postponed.  China Open in Shenzhen from April 23-26 postponed.  Andalucia Masters in Sotogrande, Spain from April 30-May 3 postponed.  GolfSixes in Cascais, Portugal from May 9-10 canceled.  Made in Denmark in Farso from May 21-24 postponed.  Irish Open in Thomastown from May 28-31 postponed.  Trophée Hassan II in Rabat, Morocco from June 4-7 postponed.  Scandinavian Mixed in Stockholm from June 11-14 canceled.  BMW International Open in Munich from June 25-28 canceled.  Open de France in Paris from July 2-5 canceled.  Scottish Open in North Berwick from July 9-12 postponed.  Czech Masters in Prague on Aug. 20-23 canceled.  European Masters in Crans Montana, Switzerland from Aug. 27-30 canceled.  Asian Tour  Royal Cup in Pattaya, Thailand from March 12-15 postponed.  Bangabandhu Cup in Dhaka, Bangladesh from March 25-28 postponed.  Asia-Pacific Diamond Cup in Chiba, Japan from May 7-10 canceled.  Shinhan Donghae Open in Nara, Japan moved to Incheon, South Korea from Sept. 10-13.  Ladies European Tour  Saudi Ladies International in King Abdullah Economic City from March 19-22 postponed to Oct. 8-11.  Jabra Ladies Open in Evian-les-Bains, France from May 7-9 postponed to June 18-20.  La Reserva de Sotogrande Invitational in Spain from May 14-17 postponed.  Belgian Ladies Open in Wanxe from May 29-31 postponed.  Lalla Meryem Cup in Rabat, Morocco from June 4-7 postponed.  Scandinavian Mixed in Stockholm from June 11-14 canceled.  GYMNASTICS  Artistic World Cup in Melbourne, Australia, from Feb. 20-23: China team withdrew.  All-Around World Cup in Milwaukee on March 7: Russia team withdrew.  Artistic World Cup in Baku, Azerbaijan, from March 14, Day 3 of 4, canceled.  Artistic World Cup in Doha, Qatar on March 18-21 postponed to June 3-6, postponed.  All-Around World Cup in Stuttgart, Germany on March 20-22 canceled.  Aerobic World Cup in Cantanhede, Portugal on March 27-29 canceled.  All-Around World Cup in Birmingham, England on March 28 canceled.  Rhythmic World Cup in Pesaro, Italy on April 3-5 postponed to June 5-7, postponed.  Acrobatic World Cup in Sofia, Bulgaria on April 3-5 postponed.  All-Around World Cup in Tokyo on April 4-5 canceled.  Artistic Jesolo Cup in Italy on April 4-5 canceled.  Rhythmic World Cup in Sofia, Bulgaria on April 10-12 postponed to June 29-21, postponed.  Acrobatic World Cup in Puurs, Belgium on April 10-12 canceled.  Rhythmic World Cup in Tashkent, Uzbekistan on April 17-19 postponed.  Aerobic World Cup in Tokyo on April 18-19 canceled.  Trampoline World Cup in Brescia, Italy on April 24-25 postponed to June 19-20, postponed.  Rhythmic World Cup in Baku, Azerbaijan on April 24-26 postponed.  Artistic women’s European championships in Paris on April 30-May 3 canceled.  Artistic Asian championships in Tokyo on May 2-5 canceled.  Trampoline European championships in Gothenburg, Sweden on May 7-10 canceled.  Pan American championships in Utah Valley, United States on May 7-10 postponed.  Rhythmic Asian championships in Tokyo on May 8-10 canceled.  Rhythmic World Challenge Cup in Portimão, Portugal on May 8-10 postponed.  Aerobic world championships in Baku, Azerbaijan on May 14-16 postponed.  Artistic World Challenge Cup in Varna, Bulgaria on May 14-17 postponed.  Rhythmic European championships in Kyiv, Ukraine on May 21-24 canceled.  Trampoline African championships in Swakopmund Namibia, Namibia on May 27-29 postponed.  Artistic men’s European championships in Baku, Azerbaijan on May 27-31 canceled.  Acrobatic world championships in Geneva on May 29-31 canceled.  Artistic World Challenge Cup in Cairo on June 5-8 postponed.  Artistic World Challenge Cup in Koper, Slovenia on June 11-14 canceled.  Artistic World Challenge Cup in Osijek, Croatia on June 18-21 postponed.  Artistic World Challenge Cup in Mersin, Turkey on June 26-28 canceled.  Trampoline World Cup in Arosa, Switzerland on July 3-4 canceled.  Rhythmic World Challenge Cup in Minsk, Belarus on July 3-5 postponed.  Rhythmic World Challenge Cup in Moscow on July 10-12 postponed.  HANDBALL  Olympic women’s qualifying event in Podgorica, Montenegro from March 20-22 postponed to March 19-21, 2021.  Olympic women’s qualifying event in Lliria Spain from March 20-22 postponed to March 19-21, 2021.  Olympic women’s qualifying event in Györ, Hungary from March 20-22 postponed to March 19-21, 2021.  Olympic men’s qualifying event in Trondheim, Norway from April 17-19 postponed to March 12-14, 2021.  Olympic men’s qualifying event in Paris from April 17-19 postponed to March 12-14, 2021.  Olympic men’s qualifying event in Berlin from April 17-19 postponed to March 12-14, 2021.  HORSE RACING  Dubai World Cup on March 28 canceled.  Grand National in Liverpool, England on April 4 canceled.  Kentucky Derby in Louisville on May 2 postponed to Sept. 5.  1000 and 2000 Guineas Stakes in Newmarket, England on May 2-3 canceled.  Preakness Stakes in Baltimore on May 16 postponed.  Derby and Oaks in Epsom, England on June 5-6 canceled.  ICE HOCKEY  NHL from March 12 suspended.  KHL from March 17 suspended. From March 25 canceled.  Men’s world championship in Switzerland from May 8-24 canceled.  Women’s world championship in Nova Scotia, Canada from March 31-April 10 canceled.  Women’s world championship Division I Group A in Angers, France from April 12-18 canceled.  Women’s world championship Division I Group B in Katowice, Poland from March 28-April 3 canceled.  Women’s world championship Division II Group A in Jaca, Spain from March 29-April 3 canceled.  Men’s world championship Division I Group A in Ljubljana, Slovenia from April 27-May 3 canceled.  Men’s world championship Division I Group B in Katowice, Poland from April 27-May 3 canceled.  Men’s world championship Division IV in Bishkek, Kyrgyzstan from May 3-5 canceled.  Women’s Challenge Cup of Asia in Manila, Philippines from Feb. 23-28 canceled.  Women’s Challenge Cup of Asia Division I in Manila, Philippines from Feb. 23-28 canceled.  National League in Switzerland from March 2 suspended. From March 13 canceled.  Elite League in United Kingdom from March 13 canceled.  Men’s Olympic qualifiers in Bratislava, Slovakia; Riga, Latvia; Norway from Aug. 27-30 postponed to Aug. 26-29, 2021.  Champions Hockey League in Europe due to start on Sept. 3 postponed to Oct. 6.  US-Based Professional Women’s Hockey Players Association tour of Japan from March 4-7 canceled.  JUDO  Paris Grand Slam from Feb. 8-9: China team withdrew.  Dusseldorf Grand Slam in Germany from Feb. 21-23: China team withdrew.  Rabat Grand Prix in Morocco from March 6-8 canceled.  Winterthur European Cup in Switzerland from March 7-8 canceled.  Ekaterinburg Grand Slam in Russia from March 13-15 canceled.  Santiago Pan American Open in Chile from March 14-15 canceled.  Sarajevo European Cup in Bosnia and Herzegovina from March 21-22 canceled.  Lima Pan American Open in Peru from March 21-22 canceled.  Tbilisi Grand Prix in Georgia from March 27-29 canceled.  Antalya Grand Prix in Turkey from April 3-5 canceled.  Asian Oceania championships in Ulaanbaatar, Mongolia from April 17-18 canceled.  Nordic championships in Reykjavik, Iceland from April 25-26 postponed to Sept. 12-13.  Baku Grand Slam in Azerbaijan from May 8-10 canceled.  Orenburg European Cup in Russia from May 16-17 canceled.  Budapest Grand Slam in Hungary from June 12-14 canceled.  Celje-Podcetrtek European Cup in Slovenia from June 20-21 canceled.  Guayaquil Pan American Open in Ecuador from June 20-21 canceled.  African championships in Rabat, Morocco from June 25-27 canceled.  Hohhot Grand Prix in China from June 26-28 canceled.  Pan American championships in Montreal from June 26-28 canceled.  Potsdam European Cup in Germany from June 27-28 canceled.  European championships in Prague from Nov. 8-10 canceled.  KARATE  Karate 1 Premier League in Rabat, Morocco from March 13-15 canceled.  European championships in Baku, Azerbaijan from March 25-29 canceled.  Mediterranean Championships in Nicosia, Cyprus from April 3-5 postponed.  Karate 1 Premier League in Madrid from April 17-19 canceled.  Olympic qualifying tournament in Paris from May 8-10 postponed.  Pan American championships in San Jose, Costa Rica from May 25-30 canceled.  Oceania championships in Paita, New Caledonia from June 12-14 postponed.  Karate 1-Series A in Istanbul from June 19-21 canceled.  Asian championships in Bali, Indonesia from Sept. 4-6 suspended.  Karate 1-Series A Durban in South Africa from Sept. 11-13 canceled.  MODERN PENTATHLON  World Cups in Sofia, Bulgaria from March 25-29 and April 2-5 canceled.  World Cup in Budapest, Hungary from April 29-May 3 canceled.  World Cup Final in Seoul from May 14-17 canceled.  World championships moved from Xiamen, China to Cancun, Mexico on May 25-31 postponed.  World laser run championships moved from Xiamen, China on May 25-31 to Weiden, Germany on Aug. 20-23.  MOTORCYCLING  MotoGP  Qatar Grand Prix in Doha on March 8 canceled.  Thailand Grand Prix in Buriram on March 22 postponed to Oct. 4.  Americas Grand Prix in Austin, Texas on April 5 postponed to Nov. 15.  Argentina Grand Prix in Termas de Rio Hondo on April 19 postponed to Nov. 22.  Spanish Grand Prix in Jerez on May 3 postponed.  French Grand Prix in Le Mans on May 17 postponed.  German Grand Prix in Hohenstein-Ernstthal on June 21 canceled.  Dutch TT in Assen on June 28 canceled.  Finland Grand Prix in Iitti on July 12 canceled.  Aragon Grand Prix in Spain on Oct. 4 moved to Sept. 27.  Valencia Grand Prix in Spain on Nov. 15 moved to Nov. 29.  World Superbikes  Qatar Round in Lusail on March 15 postponed.  Spanish Round in Cadiz on March 29 postponed to Oct. 25.  Dutch Round in Assen on April 19 postponed to Aug. 23.  Italian Round in Imola on May 10 canceled.  Aragon Round in Alcañiz, Spain on May 24 postponed to Aug. 30.  Riviera di Rimini Round in Misano Adriatico, Italy on June 14 postponed to Nov. 8.  German Round in Oschersleben on Aug. 2 canceled.  French Round in Magny-Cours on Sept. 27 postponed to Oct. 4.  ROWING  Boat Race in London on March 29 canceled.  Americas Olympic qualification regatta in Rio de Janeiro from April 2-5 canceled.  World Cup I in Sabuadia, Italy from April 10-12 canceled.  Asia and Oceania Olympic qualifying regatta in Chungju, South Korea from April 27-30 canceled.  European Olympic qualifying regatta in Varese, Italy from April 27-29 canceled.  World Cup II in Varese, Italy from May 1-3 canceled.  Final Olympic qualification regatta in Lucerne, Switzerland from May 17-19 canceled.  World Cup III in Lucerne, Switzerland from May 22-24 canceled.  European championships in Poznan, Poland from June 5-7 postponed to Oct. 9-11.  Henley Royal Regatta in England from July 1-5 canceled.  World championships in Bled, Slovenia from Aug. 16-23 canceled.  RUGBY LEAGUE  Super League: Catalans vs. Leeds on March 14, postponed. Competition from March 16 suspended.  National Rugby League in Australia from March 19, no spectators. From March 23 suspended.  RUGBY UNION  Six Nations: Ireland vs. Italy in Dublin on March 7; Italy vs. England in Rome on March 14; France vs. Ireland in Paris on March 14; Wales vs. Scotland in Cardiff on March 14, postponed.  Women’s Six Nations: Italy vs. Scotland in Legnano on Feb. 23; Scotland vs. France in Glasgow on March 7; Ireland vs. Italy in Dublin on March 8; Italy vs. England in Padua on March 15; Wales vs. Scotland in Cardiff on March 15; France vs. Ireland in Villeneuve-d’Ascq on March 15, postponed.  European Rugby Championship: Georgia vs. Russia on March 14; Romania vs. Belgium on March 14; Switzerland vs. Netherlands on March 14; Spain vs. Portugal on March 15, postponed.  United States Women vs. Barbarians in San Diego on May 3 postponed.  Canada vs. French Barbarians in Montreal on July 4 canceled.  United States vs. French Barbarians in New York on July 11 canceled.  Euopean Rugby Women’s Championship: Spain vs. Russia on April 5; Spain vs. Netherlands on April 11, postponed.  Super Rugby: Sunwolves vs. ACT Brumbies on March 8 moved from Osaka, Japan to Canberra, Australia. Sunwolves vs. Crusaders on March 14 moved from Tokyo to Brisbane, Australia. Jaguares vs. Highlanders on March 14, no spectators. Competition from March 15 suspended.  European Champions Cup playoffs due to start on April 4 suspended.  European Challenge Cup playoffs due to start on April 3 suspended.  English Premiership from March 16 suspended.  Top 14 in France from March 13 suspended.  Pro14: Zebre vs. Ospreys on Feb. 29; Treviso vs. Ulster on Feb. 29, postponed. Competition from March 12 suspended.  Top League in Japan from Feb. 29 postponed. From March 14 suspended. From March 23 canceled.  Major League Rugby in the United States from March 13 suspended. From March 19 canceled.  Hong Kong Sevens from April 3-5 postponed to Oct. 16-18.  Singapore Sevens from April 11-12 postponed to Oct. 10-11.  Langford Sevens (women) in Canada from May 2-3 postponed.  London Sevens from May 23-24 postponed.  Paris Sevens from May 30-31 postponed.  Asia women’s championship in Hong Kong from March 14-22 postponed to May 8-16.  Olympic test event (Asia Sevens Invitational) in Tokyo from April 25-26 canceled.  MORE
2020-05-09	AP  AUSTRALIAN RULES  Round 1 from March 19-22, no spectators. Competition from March 22 suspended.  SAILING  Clipper Round the World Race in Subic Bay, Philippines; from March 16 suspended.  World 470 championships in Palma, Spain from March 13-21 postponed.  Asian championships in Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates from March 15-22 postponed.  Asian Nacra 17 Championship in Shanghai from March 1-6 moved to Genoa, Italy, from April 12-19. On March 12 canceled.  Asian 49erFX Championship in Hainan, China from March 20-29 moved to Genoa, Italy, from April 12-19. On March 12 canceled.  Trofeo Princesa Sofía Iberostar 470s in Mallorca, Spain from March 25-April 4 canceled.  World Cup Series in Genoa, Italy from April 11-19 canceled.  Semaine Olympique Francaise de Voile in Hyères, France from April 18-25 postponed.  Americas Cup World Series in Cagliari, Italy from April 23-26 canceled.  SailGP in San Francisco from May 2-3 canceled.  European windsurfing championships in Athens, Greece from May 10-16 postponed.  European 49er, 49erFX and Nacra 17 championships in Malcesine, Italy from May 11-17 postponed.  Medemblik Regatta in the Netherlands from June 4-7 canceled.  SailGP in New York from June 12-13 canceled.  Kieler Woche in Kiel, Germany from June 20-28 postponed to Sept. 5-13.  World Cup Series Final in Enoshima, Japan from June 14-21 canceled.  Tour Voile in France from July 3-9 canceled.  SailGP in Cowes, England from Aug. 14-15 canceled.  SailGP in Copenhagen, Denmark from Sept. 11-12 canceled.  SHOOTING  World Cup in New Delhi from March 15-26 postponed to May 5-12 and June 2-9.  Olympic test event in Tokyo from April 16-26 canceled.  European shotgun championships in Chateauroux, France from May 6-20 postponed.  Pan American championships in Lima, Peru from May 8-17 postponed.  European rifle/pistol qualification championships in Plzen, Czech Republic from May 18-25 canceled.  World Cup rifle/pistol in Munich from June 2-9 canceled.  World running target championships in Chateaurox, France from June 9-19 postponed.  SKATEBOARDING  Asian street championship in Singapore from March 17-21 canceled.  Street Pro Tour in Las Vegas from March 24-29 canceled.  Lima Open in Peru from March 16-22 postponed to April 5-11. From March 20 suspended.  Olympic qualifier in Yangcheng, China from April 6-12 postponed to April 13-19. From Feb. 14 suspended.  Olympic qualifier in Nanjing, China from April 14-19 suspended.  Ark League in Samukawa, Japan from April 22-26 suspended.  Street Pro Tour in Beijing from April 28-May 3 canceled.  Dew Tour in Long Beach, California from May 7-10 postponed.  World street championships in London from May 19-24 suspended.  World park championships in Nanjing, China from May 26-31 suspended.  SKATING  World short track speed skating championships in Seoul from March 13-15 postponed. From April 16 canceled.  World figure skating championships in Montreal from March 16-22 canceled.  World synchronized skating championships in Lake Placid, New York from April 3-4 canceled.  SKIING  Alpine World Cup Finals in Cortina d’Ampezzo, Italy from March 18-22 canceled.  Alpine World Cup in Yanqing, China from Feb. 15-16 canceled.  Nordic World Cup in Oslo, Norway from March 6-8, no spectators.  Engadin Skimarathon in Switzerland on March 8 canceled.  Snowboard World Cup in Livigno, Italy on March 10 canceled.  Ski Jumping World Cup in Trondheim, Norway on March 11-12, no spectators.  Alpine World Cup in Are, Sweden on March 12-14, canceled.  Ski Jumping World Cup in Nizhny Tagil, Russia on March 13-15, no spectators.  Ski Jumping World Cup in Vikersund, Norway on March 13-15, no spectators.  Ski Cross World Cup in Veysonnaz, Switzerland on March 14 canceled.  Snowboard World Cup in Winterberg, Germany on March 14-15 canceled.  Alpine World Cup in Kranjska Gora, Slovenia from March 14-15, canceled.  Alpine Europa Cup Finals in Saalbach and Reiteralm, Austria from March 16-22 canceled.  World ski flying championships in Planica, Slovenia from March 17-22 postponed to Dec. 11-13.  Ski jumping World Cup in Chaikovsky, Russia on March 18-20, no spectators.  Slopestyle World Cup in Silvaplana, Switzerland on March 21-22 canceled.  Junior ski cross and snowboard cross world championships in Saint-Lary, France from March 19-25 canceled.  Snowboard World Cup in Špindlerův Mlýn, Czech Republic on March 20-21 canceled.  SNOOKER  WPBSA Tour Championship in Llandudno, Wales from March 17-22 postponed to July 21-26.  China Open in Beijing from March 30-April 5 postponed.  Men’s world championship in Sheffield, England from April 18-May 4 postponed to July 31-Aug. 16.  Women’s world championship in Bangkok from June 22-27 postponed.  SOCCER  European Championship in 12 countries from June 12-July 12 postponed to June 11-July 11, 2021.  Copa America in Argentina and Colombia from June 12-July 12 postponed to June 11-July 11, 2021.  European Champions League: Valencia vs. Atalanta on March 10; Paris Saint-Germain vs. Borussia Dortmund on March 11, no spectators. Competition from March 13 suspended. Final in Istanbul on May 30 postponed.  Copa Libertadores from March 15 suspended.  Asian Champions League: Matches involving Chinese clubs Guangzhou Evergrande, Shanghai Shenhua and Shanghai SIPG postponed to April-May. Beijing FC allowed to play from Feb. 18. Matches involving South Korean clubs Jeonbuk Hyundai Motors, Suwon Samsung Bluewings and FC Seoul to be played with no spectators from March 3. Matches involving Iranian clubs Esteghlal, Persepolis, Shahr Khodro, Sepahan on March 2-3 postponed. All West Zone group matches from March 2 postponed. East Zone matches postponed to May 19-20 (Match Day 3), May 26-27, (Match Day 4), June 16-17 (Match Day 5), and June 23-24 (Match Day 6). Round of 16 postponed to Aug. 11-12 and 25-26, quarterfinals to Sept. 15-16 and 29-30, and the semifinals to Oct. 20-21 and 27-28.  Europa League: Inter Milan vs. Getafe on March 12; Sevilla vs. Roma on March 12, postponed. Inter Milan vs. Ludogorets on Feb. 27; Olympiakos vs. Wolverhampton on March 12; LASK vs. Manchester United on March 12; Wolfsburg vs. Shakhtar Donetsk on March 12; Eintracht Frankfurt vs. Basel on March 12, no spectators. Competition from March 13 suspended. Final in Gdansk, Poland on May 27 postponed.  CONCACAF Champions League from March 13 suspended.  CAF Champions League semifinals from May 1 postponed.  South America World Cup qualifying from March 23 postponed.  Asia World Cup qualifying: China vs. Maldives on March 26 and vs. Guam on March 31 moved to Buriram, Thailand, no spectators. Competition from March 23 postponed.  African Nations Championship in Cameroon from April 4-25 postponed.  European Championship qualifying playoffs from March 26-31 postponed to June 4-9. From April 1 postponed.  Africa Cup of Nations qualifying from March 25 postponed.  Gold Cup qualifying from March 13 suspended.  Women’s European Championship: Qualifying: Montenegro vs. Ireland in Budva on March 11, no spectators. Competition from March 13 suspended. Championship in England from July 7-Aug. 1, 2021 postponed to July 6-31, 2022.  Algarve Cup final in Portugal on March 11: Italy vs. Germany canceled.  CONCACAF Nations League semifinals in Houston and final in Arlington, Texas from June 4-7 postponed.  CONCACAF men’s Olympic qualifying in Mexico from March 13 suspended.  Asian women’s Olympic qualifying Group B tournament relocated from Wuhan to Sydney from Feb. 3-13. China vs. South Korea playoffs on March 6 and 11 postponed to April 9 and 14, and postponed to June 1-10; China home game in Sydney. Vietnam vs. Australia in Cẩm Phả on March 11, no spectators. From April 3 suspended.  English Premier League: Manchester City vs. Arsenal on March 11. Competition from March 13 suspended.  FA Cup quarterfinals on March 21-22 postponed.  La Liga from March 10, no spectators. Competition from March 12 suspended.  Copa del Rey final: Real Sociedad vs. Athletic Bilbao in Seville on April 18 postponed.  Serie A, B, C, D and Women’s Serie A matches in Lombardy and Veneto regions postponed from Feb. 22. Serie A: 6 matches on Feb. 29-March 2 postponed. All matches from March 4, no spectators. Competition from March 9 suspended.  Italian Cup semifinals: Juventus vs. AC Milan on March 4, Napoli vs. Inter Milan on March 5, postponed. Final moved from May 13 to May 20.  Bundesliga from March 11, no spectators. From March 13, suspended.  German Cup semifinals on April 21-22 postponed.  French Ligue 1: Strasbourg vs. Paris Saint-Germain on March 7 postponed. Competition from March 13 suspended. From April 28 canceled.  French Cup final: Paris Saint-Germain vs. Saint Etienne in Paris on April 25 postponed.  French League Cup final: Paris Saint-Germain vs. Lyon in Paris on April 4 postponed.  Chinese Super League, due to start on Feb. 22, delayed.  Iran Pro League from Feb. 24, no spectators. From March 4 suspended.  J.League in Japan from Feb. 25 postponed.  K League in South Korea, due to start on Feb. 29, delayed. On May 8 started, no spectators.  Swiss Super League from Feb. 28 postponed.  V.League in Vietnam from March 7, no spectators. From March 16 suspended.  First League in Bulgaria from March 8, no spectators. From March 13 suspended.  Liga I in Romanial from March 9, no spectators. From March 12 suspended.  Primeira Liga in Portugal from March 10, no spectators. From March 12 suspended.  Ekstraklasa in Poland from March 10, no spectators. From March 13 suspended.  Austrian Bundesliga from March 10 postponed.  Premier League in Egypt from March 10, no spectators. From March 16 suspended.  Superliga in Denmark from March 11 suspended.  Eredivisie in the Netherlands from March 12 suspended. From April 24 canceled.  Pro League in Belgium from March 12, no spectators. From March 20 suspended.  Belgian Cup final: Club Brugge vs. Antwerp in Brussels on March 22 postponed.  Premier Division in Ireland from March 12 suspended.  Major League Soccer in the United States from March 12 suspended.  Premiership in Scotland from March 13 suspended.  Copa Superliga in Argentina from March 13, no spectators. River Plate vs. Atletico Tucuman on March 14 abandoned. Competition from March 17 suspended. From April 28 canceled.  Liga MX in Mexico from March 14, no spectators. From March 15 suspended.  A League in Australia from March 16, no spectators. From March 24 suspended.  Premier Division in South Africa from March 16 suspended.  Premier League in Bangladesh from March 16 suspended.  Super Lig in Turkey from March 19 suspended.  Allsvenkan in Sweden due to start on April 3 delayed.  Higher League in Tajikistan from April 4, no spectators. From April 27 suspended.  Campeonato Brasileiro Série A in Brazil due to start on May 3 suspended.  European Women’s Champions League from March 13 suspended. Final in Vienna on May 24 postponed.  National Women’s Soccer League in United States, due to start on April 18, delayed.  Women’s Super League in England from March 13 postponed.  AFC Cup from March 18 suspended.  Caribbean club championship from April 3 suspended.  Asian men’s futsal championship in Ashgabat, Turkmenistan, from Feb. 26-March 8 postponed to Aug. 5-16.  CONCACAF futsal championship in Guatemala from May 1-10 postponed.  Qatar Airways International in Doha with Belgium, Croatia, Portugal, Switzerland from March 26-30 canceled.  SOFTBALL  Men’s World Cup in Auckland, New Zealand from Feb. 20-28, 2021 postponed.  SUMO  Spring Basho in Osaka from March 8-22, no spectators.  Summer Basho in Tokyo from May 10-24 postponed to May 24-June 7, canceled.  Nagoya Basho from July 5-19 moved to Tokyo from July 19-Aug. 2.  SURFING  World Surfing Games in El Salvador from May 9-17 postponed to June 6–14. From March 30 postponed.  TABLE TENNIS  World team championships in Busan, South Korea from March 22-29 postponed to June 21-28 postponed to Sept. 27-Oct. 4.  Asian Cup in Hainan, China from Feb. 28-March 1 postponed.  Polish Open in Gliwice from March 11-15, from March 13, Day 3 of 5, suspended.  Italian Open in Riccione from April 1-5 postponed.  Caribbean championships in Havana from April 3-8 suspended.  Asian Olympic qualifying tournament in Bangkok from April 6-12 postponed to 2021.  European Olympic qualifying tournament in Moscow from April 8-12 postponed to 2021.  Latin American Olympic qualifying tournament in Rosario, Argentina from April 15-19 postponed to 2021.  Oceania Olympic qualifying tournament in Brisbane, Australia from April 19-20 postponed to 2021.  Japan Open in Kitakyushu on April 21-26 postponed.  Slovenia Open in Otocec from April 22-26 postponed.  Hong Kong Open from May 5-10 postponed.  South American championships in Cucuta, Colombia from May 6-10 suspended.  Central American championships in San Jose, Costa Rica from May 12-16 suspended.  China Open in Shenzhen from May 12-17 postponed.  South Korea Open in Busan on June 16-21 suspended.  Australian Open in Geelong on June 23-28 suspended.  TAEKWONDO  Asian Championships in Beirut from March 4-6 postponed to May 13-15.  Asian Olympic qualifying tournament in Wuxi, China from April 10-11 moved to Amman, Jordan from June 5-7 postponed.  Pan American Grand Slam in Oregon, Washington from April 11-13 canceled.  European Olympic qualifying tournament in Milan from April 17-19 moved to Moscow from April 16-18. From March 12 postponed.  European Championships in Zagreb, Croatia from May 7-10 postponed.  Greece Open in Chalkida from May 15-17 postponed.  Presidents Cup in Spokane, Washington from May 21-24 canceled.  African Championships in Tunis, Tunisia from May 29-31 canceled.  Austrian Open in Innsbruck from May 30-31 postponed.  Carthage Open in Tunis, Tunisia from June 2-3 canceled.  Presidents Cup in Pape’ete, Tahiti on June 5 postponed.  Tahiti Open in Pape’ete from June 5-7 postponed.  Lux Open in Luxembourg from June 13-14 canceled.  European Small Countries Championships in San Marino from June 27-28 canceled.  World Championships in Wuxi, China in May 2021 postponed.  TENNIS  French Open in Paris from May 24-June 7 postponed to Sept. 20-Oct. 4.  Wimbledon in London from June 29-July 12 canceled.  ATP-WTA: BNP Paribas Open in Indian Wells, California from March 11-22 suspended.  ATP-WTA: Miami Open from March 24-April 5 suspended.  WTA: Zapopan Open in Guadalajara, Mexico from March 16-21 suspended.  ATP: US Men’s Clay Court Championships in Houston, Texas from April 6-12 suspended.  ATP: Grand Prix Hassan II in Marrakech, Morocco from April 6-12 suspended.  WTA: Charleston Open in South Carolina from April 6-12 suspended.  WTA: Copa Colsanitas in Bogota, Colombia from April 6-12 suspended.  ATP: Monte Carlo Masters from April 12-19 suspended.  ATP: Hungarian Open in Budapest from April 20-26 suspended.  WTA: Xi’an Open in China from April 13-19 suspended.  ATP: Barcelona Open from April 20-26 suspended.  ATP: Hungarian Open in Budapest from April 20-26 suspended.  WTA: Porsche Grand Prix in Stuttgart, Germany from April 20-26 suspended.  WTA: Istanbul Open from April 20-26 suspended.  WTA: Prague Open from April 27-May 2 suspended.  WTA: Kunming Open in Anning, China from April 27-May 3 suspended.  ATP: BMW Open in Munich from April 27-May 3 suspended.  ATP: Estoril Open in Portugal from April 27-May 3 suspended.  ATP-WTA: Madrid Open from May-2-10 suspended.  ATP-WTA: Italian Open in Rome from May 10-17 suspended.  WTA: Strasbourg International in France from May 17-23 suspended.  ATP: Geneva Open in Switzerland from May 17-23 suspended.  ATP: Lyon Open in France from May 17-23 suspended.  WTA: Grand Prix De SAR La Princesse Lalla Meryem in Rabat, Morocco from May 17-23 suspended.  WTA: Croatia Open in Bol from June 1-6 suspended.  ATP-WTA: Libema Open in ’s-Hertogenbosch, Netherlands from June 8-14 suspended.  ATP: MercedesCup in Stuttgart, Germany from June 8-14 suspended.  WTA: Nottingham Open in England from June 8-14 suspended.  ATP: Queen’s Club in London from June 15-21 suspended.  ATP: Halle Open in Germany from June 15-21 suspended.  WTA: Birmingham Classic in England from June 15-21 suspended.  WTA: Berlin Open from June 15-21 suspended.  ATP: Mallorca Championships in Spain from June 21-27 suspended.  ATP-WTA: Eastbourne International in England from June 21-27 suspended.  WTA: Bad Homburg Open in Germany from June 21-27 suspended.  WTA: Rogers Cup in Montreal from Aug. 10-16 canceled.  ITF events from March 12 suspended.  Davis Cup: China forfeited World Group I playoff vs. Romania in Piatra Neamt on March 6-7.  Davis Cup: Japan vs. Ecuador qualifier in Miki on March 6-7, no spectators.  Davis Cup: Italy vs. South Korea in Cagliari on March 6-7, no spectators.  Fed Cup Finals in Budapest, Hungary from April 14-19 (with France, Australia, United States, Czech Republic, Russia, Belarus, Spain, Germany, Hungary, Belgium, Slovakia, Switzerland) postponed.  Fed Cup playoffs on April 17-18 (Poland vs. Brazil, Mexico vs. Britain, Serbia vs. Canada, Latvia vs. India, Japan vs. Ukraine, Romania vs. Italy, Argentina vs. Kazakhstan, Netherlands vs. China), postponed:  Fed Cup Asia-Oceania Group I tournament moved from Dongguan, China to Dubai, United Arab Emirates from March 3-7.  Laver Cup exhibition in Boston from Sept. 25-27 canceled.  TRIATHLON  World Series in Abu Dhabi on March 7 postponed.  Asian Cup in Tainan, Taiwan on March 8 postponed.  World Cup in Sarasota-Bradenton, Florida on March 22 canceled.  World Cup in New Plymouth, New Zealand on March 28-29 canceled.  World Cup in Brasilia, Brazil on April 3-5 postponed.  Asian Cup in Beihai, China on April 5 postponed.  Asian Cup in Dexing, China on April 11 postponed.  World Series in Bermuda on April 18-19 postponed.  World Cup in Huatulco, Mexico on April 25-26 postponed.  Oceania Cup in Runaway Bay, Australia on May 1-3 postponed.  World Cup in Valencia, Spain on May 2 postponed.  African Cup in Yasmine Hammamet, Tunisia on May 2 postponed.  Asian Cup in Subic Bay, Philippines from May 2-3 postponed to Nov. 7-8.  Olympic mixed relay qualifier moved from Chengdu, China on May 9 to Valencia, Spain on May 1, postponed.  World Cup in Chengdu, China on May 10 postponed.  Pan American Cup in Ixtapa, Mexico on May 15-16 postponed to Nov. 28.  World Series in Yokohama, Japan on May 16 postponed.  Pan American middle distance championships in Formosa, Argentina on May 23 postponed to Aug. 16.  Asian Cup in Osaka, Japan on May 23 postponed.  World Cup in Arzachena, Italy on May 30 postponed.  European Cup in Olsztyn, Poland on May 30 postponed.  Asian Cup in Sokcho, South Korea on June 6 postponed.  World Series in Leeds, England on June 7 postponed.  Asian Cup in Lianyungang, China on June 13 postponed.  European Cup and Mediterranean Championships in Coimbra, Portugal on June 13 postponed.  African Cup in Lake Kivu, Rwanda on June 13 postponed.  Pan American championships in Santo Domingo, Dominican Republic on June 20 postponed.  European Cup in Holten, Netherlands on June 20 postponed.  European cross championships in Târgu Mures, Romania on June 20 postponed.  Asian Cup in Gamagori, Japan on June 21 postponed.  European cross duathlon championships in Târgu Mures, Romania on June 23 postponed.  African Cup in Larache, Morocco on June 27 postponed.  World Series in Montreal on June 28 postponed.  European middle distance championships in Walchsee, Austria on June 28 postponed.  European championships in Tartu, Estonia from July 3-5 postponed.  Asian Cup in Cholpon-Ata, Kyrgyzstan on July 5 canceled.  Asian Cup in Hualien, Taiwan on July 7 canceled.  Asian Cup in Jiayuguan, China on July 11 canceled.  World Series in Hamburg, Germany on July 11 postponed.  World mixed relay championships in Hamburg, Germany on July 12 postponed.  Oceania long distance championships in Lalomanu, Samoa on Aug. 1 canceled.  World Series Grand Final in Edmonton from Aug. 17-23 canceled.  European Cup in Szentendre, Hungary on Sept. 13 canceled.  VOLLEYBALL  Olympic test event in Tokyo from April 21-26 canceled.  Men’s Challenger Cup in Gondomar, Portugal from June 24-28 postponed.  Women’s Challenger Cup in Zadar, Croatia from June 24-28 postponed.  Nations League due to start on May 22 postponed.  Beach Volleyball  World Tour 3(asterisk) in Bandar Abbas, Iran from March 2-7 postponed.  World Tour 3(asterisk) in Gold Coast, Australia from March 17-22 postponed.  World Tour 4(asterisk) in Cancun, Mexico from March 24-29 postponed.  World Tour 1(asterisk) in Boracay, Philippines from March 26-29 canceled.  World Tour 1(asterisk) in Satun, Thailand from April 8-11 postponed.  World Tour 4(asterisk) in Singapore from April 15-19 canceled.  World Tour 4(asterisk) in Yangzhou, China from April 22-26 postponed.  World Tour 4(asterisk) in Siming, China from April 29-May 3 canceled.  World Tour 1(asterisk) in Tuan Chau Island, Vietnam from May 6-9 postponed.  World Tour 4(asterisk) in Itapema, Brazil from May 6-10 postponed.  World Tour 3(asterisk) in Jurmala, Latvia from May 6-10 postponed.  World Tour 3(asterisk) in Jinjiang, China from May 13-17 canceled.  World Tour 4(asterisk) in Ostrava, Czech Republic from May 20-24 postponed.  World Tour 4(asterisk) in Warsaw from May 27-31 canceled.  World Tour 4(asterisk) in Moscow from June 3-7 canceled.  World Tour 5(asterisk) in Rome from June 9-14 canceled.  World Tour 1(asterisk) in Miguel Pereira, Brazil from June 11-14 postponed.  World Tour 1(asterisk) in Raja Ampat, Indonesia from June 11-14 postponed.  World Tour 1(asterisk) in Ios, Greece from June 12-14 postponed.  World Tour 1(asterisk) in Ventiane, Laos from June 18-21 canceled.  World Tour 5(asterisk) in Gstaad, Switzerland from July 7-12 canceled.  World Tour 4(asterisk) in Espinho, Portugal from July 15-19 canceled.  World Tour 5(asterisk) in Vienna from Aug. 12-16 canceled.  World Tour 5(asterisk) in Hamburg, Germany from Aug. 19-23 canceled.  World championships in Rome in 2021 postponed to June 2022.  WEIGHTLIFTING  East Asian championships in Seoul from Feb. 26-March 3 postponed.  World junior championships in Bucharest, Romania from March 14-24 canceled.  South American championships in Cali, Colombia from March 19-22 postponed.  African championships in Vacoas, Mauritius from April 13-20 postponed to June 15-23. From April 1 postponed.  European championships in Moscow from April 13-21 postponed to June 13-21 postponed to Oct. 31-Nov. 8.  Pan American championships in Santo Domingo, Dominican Republic from April 14-24 postponed.  Asian championships in Nur-Sultan, Kazakhstan moved to Tashkent, Uzbekistan from April 16-25, postponed.  Oceania and Commonwealth championships in Nauru from April 21-25 postponed.  WRESTLING  Asian championships in New Delhi from Feb. 20-23: China, North Korea, Turkmenistan teams withdrew.  Pan American Olympic qualifier in Ottawa from March 13-15, no spectators.  African Oceania Olympic qualifier in El Jadida, Morocco from March 13-15 postponed.  European Olympic qualifier in Budapest, Hungary from March 19-22 postponed.  Asian Olympic qualifier from March 27-29 moved from Xi’an, China to Bishkek, Kyrgyzstan. Kyrgyzstan withdrew as host on Feb. 29, qualifier postponed.  United States Olympic trials in State College, Pennsylvania from April 4-5 postponed.  World Olympic qualifier in Sofia, Bulgaria from April 30-May 3 postponed.  Poland Open in Warsaw from June 3-7 postponed.  OTHERS  Tokyo Olympics from July 24-Aug. 9 postponed to July 23-Aug. 8, 2021.  Tokyo Paralympics from Aug. 25-Sept. 6 postponed to Aug. 24-Sept. 5, 2021.  Tokyo Olympics training of volunteers in Japan postponed from February to May, postponed to 2021.  Tokyo Olympics flame lighting dress rehearsal in Olympia, Greece on March 11; flame lighting on March 12, no spectators. Greek torch relay from March 13 canceled. Japan torch relay due to start March 26 canceled.  Court of Arbitration for Sport in-person hearings, from March 16 suspended.  X Games in Chongli, China from Feb. 21-23 postponed.  Singapore athlete of the year awards on Feb. 26 postponed.  International Boxing Association’s European Continental Forum in Assisi, Italy on Feb. 29 canceled.  International Boxing Association’s African Continental Forum in Casablanca, Morocco from March 13-15 postponed.  World Chess Federation’s presidential council meeting moved from China to United Arab Emirates on Feb. 28-29.  World University cross-country championships in Marrakech, Morocco on March 7 postponed.  NCAA in the United States, all sports from March 12 canceled.  International Weightlifting Federation Congress in Bucharest, Romania on March 13 canceled.  World Conference on Prevention of Injury and Illness in Sport in Monte Carlo from March 12-14 postponed to Feb. 11-13, 2021.  World Anti-Doping Agency Symposium in Lausanne, Switzerland on March 17-18 canceled.  FIFA Council meeting in Asuncion, Paraguay, on March 20 moved to Zurich in June-July.  Association of Southeast Asian Nations Para Games in the Philippines from March 20-28 postponed.  Hong Kong sports stars awards on March 24 postponed.  MCC world cricket committee meeting in Colombo, Sri Lanka on March 28-29 canceled.  XTERRA Asia-Pacific Championships (offroad triathlon, duathlon) in Taiwan from March 28-29 canceled.  Gulf Cooperation Council Games in Kuwait from April 3-14 postponed.  International Equestrian Federation Sports Forum in Lausanne, Switzerland on April 6-7 moved to online.  Asian Football Confederation Congress in Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia on April 16 postponed.  SportAccord summit in Beijing moved to Lausanne, Switzerland, on April 19-24 canceled.  World Sailing general meeting in London on May 2 canceled.  World Taekwondo Extraordinary Council meeting in Lausanne, Switzerland on May 12 moved to online.  International Ski Federation Congress in Pattaya, Thailand from May 17-23 postponed.  International Ice Hockey Federation Congress in Zurich from May 21-23 postponed.  International Gymnastics Federation executive committee in Swakopmund, Namibia from May 26-27 postponed.  International Gymnastics Federation council in Swakopmund, Namibia from May 28-29 postponed.  X Games in Shanghai from May 30-31 canceled.  FIFA Congress in Addis Ababa, Ethiopia on June 5 postponed to Sept. 18.  International Skating Union Congress in Phuket, Thailand from June 8-12 postponed to May 31-June 4, 2021.  International Bobsleigh and Skeleton Federation Congress on June 20 moved from Shanghai to Antwerp, Belgium.  World university triathlon championship in Kecskemét, Hungary from June 27-28 canceled.  X Games in Minneapolis, Minnesota from July 16-19 canceled.  International Volleyball Federation Congress in Phuket, Thailand from Oct. 15-17 postponed to Jan. 27-29.  Motorsport Games in Marseille, France from Oct. 23-25 postponed to Oct. 22-24, 2021.  International Hockey Federation Congress in New Delhi from Oct. 28-Nov. 1 postponed to May 2021.  Singapore bans spectators at National School Games from January-August.  University Athletic Association of the Philippines postponed all sports events.  Mediterranean Games in Oran, Algeria from June 25-July 5, 2021 postponed to June 25-July 5, 2022.  World Games in Birmingham, Alabama from July 15-25, 2021 postponed to July 7-17, 2022.  Francophonie Games in Kinshasa, Congo from July 23-Aug. 1, 2021 postponed to July 23-Aug. 8, 2022.  ___  More AP sports: https://apnews.com/apf-sports and https://twitter.com/AP_Sports
2020-05-10	Hours after the White House added safety precautions against the coronavirus for the president and his staff Sunday, Trump administration officials denied a report that Vice President Mike Pence is self-isolating. Meanwhile, Sen. Lamar Alexander of Tennessee announced he will self-quarantine for two weeks after an aide tested positive.  In a far-from-typical Mother's Day, social distancing measures kept many families from celebrating together in the U.S., which has recorded nearly one-third of the world's cases. However, unrest about lockdown restrictions had businesses in Pennsylvania and Ohio defying state orders.  Earlier in the day, a top economic adviser predicted unemployment levels could exceed 20%, and New York revealed new rules for nursing homes, where many of the coronavirus deaths in the state have occurred.  There were nearly 80,000 deaths and more than 1.3 million confirmed coronavirus cases in the U.S. as on Sunday, according to the John Hopkins University data dashboard. Worldwide, the virus has killed more than 282,000 people and infected almost 4.1 million.  Our live blog is being updated throughout the day. Refresh for the latest news, and get updates in your inbox with The Daily Briefing. Scroll down for more details.  Here are some of the most significant developments to know Sunday:  Predicting that the worst job losses would come in "May or June," White House economic adviser Kevin Hassett said the unemployment rate could rise above 20%.  The White House is taking extra precautions after aides to the president and vice president tested positive for the coronavirus last week.  New York state is instituting new rules for nursing homes in an effort to protect what Gov. Andrew Cuomo called "a congregation of vulnerable people.’’  Dr. Anthony Fauci is taking "appropriate precautions," and two other White House coronavirus task force members will self-quarantine for two weeks after being in contact with someone who tested positive for the virus.  What we're talking about today: It's Mother's Day, and it's easy to see what the pandemic has taken. But it has also brought grown children home.  Does wearing a mask weaken the immune system? We rate the claim "false," even though you may have heard it in a debunked viral video.  Spokesman denies report that Vice President Mike Pence is self-isolating  Vice President Mike Pence is not self-isolating and will be back at work in the White House on Monday, a Pence spokesman said, denying a published report.  The story by Bloomberg came two days after his press secretary tested positive for the virus. Earlier in the week, a valet for President Donald Trump also tested positive. In addition, three members of the White House coronavirus task force entered quarantine after being close to someone diagnosed with COVID-19. Both Trump and Pence have tested negative.  “Vice President Pence will continue to follow the advice of the White House Medical Unit and is not in quarantine,” spokesman Devin O’Malley said in a statement. “Additionally, Vice President Pence has tested negative every single day and plans to be at the White House tomorrow.”  As part of new protocols announced Sunday, Trump and Pence will be tested daily for the virus, as will every staff member in close proximity to them. White House guests will be tested, work spaces will undergo regular deep cleaning and staff will follow social distancing guidelines, undergo daily temperature checks and have their symptom histories reviewed.  – Michael Collins  Lamar Alexander will self-quarantine after staffer's positive COVID-19 test  Tennessee Sen. Lamar Alexander will self-quarantine for 14 days after a member of his staff tested positive for coronavirus.  The decision is considered precautionary. Alexander, 79, has not experienced any symptoms of the virus, according to his office. He also tested negative for COVID-19 last week.  "After discussing this with the Senate’s attending physician, Senator Alexander, out of an abundance of caution, has decided not to return to Washington, D.C., and will self-quarantine in Tennessee for 14 days," said David Clear, Alexander's chief of staff, in a statement.  Little information has been released about the staffer who tested positive. The senator's office said the person is recovering and doing well.  Signs of unrest in Pennsylvania, Ohio  Groups of residents defying state orders to stay at home in Pennsylvania and Ohio are the latest signs of growing unrest over the measures imposed to limit spread of the coronavirus, which have wrecked economies and social activities.  In York, Pennsylvania, more than 150 people attended a Saturday meeting organized by state Rep. Mike Jones to talk about reopening business in York County, in spite of Gov. Tom Wolf’s order forbidding large gatherings. The vast majority of those in attendance were not wearing masks, and many were shaking hands, hugging and sitting close together in violation of social distancing guidelines, the York Daily Record reported.  The newspaper also reported two locations of the Round the Clock Diner defied Wolf's order limiting restaurants to take-out only by opening for dine-in service Sunday.  Near the eastern Ohio town of Cambridge, pop. 10,000, the National Road Diner has remained open despite multiple visits from the Guernsey County sheriff’s and health departments.  “I believe it’s my constitutional right to open my business now,” owner Vicki Brearley told the Columbus Dispatch, even though Gov. Mike DeWine and Health Director Dr. Amy Acton decreed dine-in restaurants couldn’t reopen until May 21.  The restrictions to fight the virus have prompted protests in several parts of the country.  White House adviser says unemployment rate may pass 20%  White House economic adviser Kevin Hassett believes the unemployment rate could rise above 20% and the worst job losses would come in "May or June" because of the ongoing coronavirus pandemic.  When asked Sunday what the "bottom" of the country's unemployment pain would be, Hassett, who advises the Trump administration on economic policy and is the former chair of the Council of Economic Advisers, told CBS's "Face the Nation," "to get unemployment rates like the ones that we're about to see ... which I think will climb up toward 20% by next month, you have to really go back to the Great Depression to see that."  When asked about the "low point" in the unemployment rate, he said: "I'm looking for rates north of 20, sadly."  The U.S. lost 20.5 million jobs in April, and the unemployment rate rose to 14.7%, both record-high numbers as the nation felt the economic effects of the coronavirus. Social distancing measures have forced the closures of businesses across the country, leading to employee layoffs and furloughs.  – Nicholas Wu  New York sets new rules for nursing homes  As its rate of new infections and deaths from COVID-19 continues to slow, New York state is taking new measures to protect those most susceptible to the disease.  Nursing homes that can’t provide a prescribed level of care for patients for any reason will have to transfer them to another facility or contact the state department of health, Gov. Andrew Cuomo announced at his Sunday news briefing. In addition, nursing homes that can’t treat coronavirus-positive residents will have to do the same. Cuomo also said nursing home staffs will be required to get tested for the virus twice a week, and hospitals won’t be allowed to discharge patients to those facilities unless they have tested negative for COVID-19.  “This virus uses nursing homes. They are ground zero,’’ Cuomo said. “They are the vulnerable population in the vulnerable location. It’s a congregation of vulnerable people.’’  According to The Associated Press, New York has had one-fifth of the nation's coronavirus-related deaths in nursing homes -- 5,300 out of 26,000.  Cuomo also said the state is investigating up to 85 cases of COVID-related illnesses among children, from toddlers to those of elementary school age, who showed symptoms not typically associated with the coronavirus. At least three children have died of the disease, which manifests itself in inflammation similar to toxic-shock syndrome or Kawasaki disease instead of respiratory symptoms.  British PM Boris Johnson lays out 'conditional plan' for reopening  British Prime Minister Boris Johnson announced a slow easing of the country’s coronavirus lockdown Sunday and outlined his government’s road map for further lifting restrictions in the coming months.  In a televised address to the nation, Johnson said Brits who can’t work from home, such as those in construction or manufacturing jobs, “should be actively encouraged to go to work” this week. He suggested they avoid mass transit and either drive or preferably walk or bike to work.  Johnson said a restriction limiting outdoor exercise to once a day will be lifted Wednesday. The prime minister, who spent a week in the hospital receiving treatment for COVID-19, stressed that social distancing guidelines still will have to be observed and said it would be “madness” to allow a second spike in infections.  "This is not the time simply to end the lockdown this week,'' Johnson said. "Instead we are taking the first careful steps to modify our measures."  'Our life is in danger': Hawaii battles record unemployment amid coronavirus  Hawaii is facing its highest unemployment rate ever as strict stay-at-home orders and a virtual shutdown of the state's once-mighty tourism industry have left residents reeling, leaning on their savings or unable to pay rent and feed their families. Since March, the state's unemployment rate has soared from 3% to 34%, one of the highest in the nation.  Roughly 216,000 of the state's 660,000 workers were employed in jobs supported by tourism in 2019. Airline arrivals to Hawaii have nosedived from more than 30,000 passengers per day to 756. Food service workers, who make up roughly 13% of all employees in the state and earn a median annual income of about $30,000, lost wages as restaurants closed and hotels shuttered.  "Our life is in danger because, of course, we don't know what will happen," said Julie Gabot, a housekeeper at the Sheraton Waikiki. "There's no real hope for good things in the future."  LGBTQ community fears coronavirus will impact census outreach  For decades, LGBTQ people have battled for a seat at the census table.  Then in 2020, there came a beacon of hope when same-sex couples living together were included in the 10-year survey for the first time, even though sexual orientation and gender identity questions were absent. Advocates rallied the LGBTQ community, urging full participation.  Then in the midst of rollout this spring, a global health crisis erupted – upending lives and tangling census outreach efforts.  “Because of social distancing, people are not out there pushing the census,” said Glennda Testone, executive director of New York’s LGBT Community Center. “My fear is that the response numbers will go down.”  – Susan Miller  Top health officials to self-quarantine  Three top health officials and members on the White House's coronavirus task force -- Drs. Anthony Fauci, Robert Redfield and Stephen Hahn -- will self-quarantine for two weeks after exposure to a person with the virus, according to official statements and media reports.  Fauci, director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, will begin a "modified quarantine" after a low-risk exposure, according to CNN. He has tested negative and is taking "appropriate precautions," a NIAID spokesperson confirmed to USA TODAY.  Redfield, director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, will be “teleworking for the next two weeks" after it was determined he had a “low-risk exposure" to a person at the White House who tested positive, the CDC said in a statement Saturday.  The Food and Drug Administration said commissioner Hahn has tested negative but will self-quarantine.  – Joel Shannon  As new cases rise, South Korea's leader urges calm  After South Korea reported 34 new cases of the coronavirus Sunday, most of which were linked to club goers, President Moon Jae-in urged calm and said “there’s no reason to stand still out of fear.”  The Korea Centers for Disease Control and Prevention said 26 of the 34 new infections were locally transmitted; the others came from abroad. Sunday's surge marked the first time that the daily rate increased by more than 30 in about a month.  On Saturday, Seoul Mayor Park Won-soon ordered more than 2,100 nightclubs, hostess bars and discos to close.  According to the John Hopkins University data dashboard, South Korea reported 10,874 confirmed cases and 256 deaths as of Sunday morning.  – The Associated Press  More coronavirus news from USA TODAY  Trump congratulates Dana White for putting on UFC 249 during pandemic  President Donald Trump was featured in a taped video during Saturday’s UFC 249 preliminary broadcast on ESPN, congratulating UFC president Dana White and the UFC for resuming operations and hosting the card during the global coronavirus pandemic.  “They’re going to have a big match,” Trump said during the broadcast. “We love it. We think it’s important – get the sports leagues back. Let’s play. We do the social distancing and whatever else you have to do, but we need sports. We want our sports back, and congratulations to Dana White and the UFC.”  UFC 249 at VyStar Veterans Memorial Coliseum in Jacksonville, Fla., was not only the first UFC card in the U.S. since the outbreak of coronavirus forced stay-at-home orders in most of the country, but also the first major sporting event of any sort.  – Danny Segura  More COVID-19 headlines from USA TODAY  US cuts funding to group studying bat coronaviruses in China  The head of a research group that studies bat-borne coronaviruses in China similar to the COVID-19 strain that's ravaged the globe has warned that a U.S. government decision to cut funding to his organization imperils American public health.  EcoHealth Alliance's research grant was abruptly terminated last month by the National Institutes of Health, the primary agency of the U.S. government responsible for biomedical and public health research. EcoHealth Alliance's research in China is focused on identifying and warning about coronaviruses dangerous to human health.  "I'm really concerned about where this leaves us," Peter Daszak, director of the New York-based organization, said in a USA TODAY interview.  The NIH confirmed EcoHealth Alliance's $3.4 million grant, distributed over six years, was canceled on April 24, bBut it would not discuss details about how the decision was made.  – Kim Hjelmgaard  Contributing: The Associated Press
2020-05-11	As the Trump administration tries to prevent recent coronavirus cases among its personnel from growing into a cluster, Vice President Mike Pence returned to work Monday but at a distance from other staffers. Trump later announced the country is on track this week to pass 10 million coronavirus tests conducted and states would be receiving additional funding for testing.  Meanwhile in New York, Gov. Andrew Cuomo released more details about reopening, a day after revealing new rules for nursing homes, a hot spot for coronavirus deaths in the state. "It's an exciting new phase. We're all anxious to get back to work,'' Cuomo said.  There were more than 80,000 deaths and 1.3 million confirmed coronavirus cases in the U.S. on Monday evening, according to the John Hopkins University data dashboard. Worldwide, the virus has killed more than 285,000 people and surpassed 4.1 million infections.  Our live blog is being updated throughout the day. Refresh for the latest news, and get updates in your inbox with The Daily Briefing. Scroll down for more details.  Here are some of the most significant developments Monday:  The man identified as New York's coronavirus "patient zero" is home now and says he feels much better.  Foodborne illness investigations have slowed and food recalls have plummeted because of disruptions in the U.S. food safety system caused by the coronavirus, a USA TODAY investigation found.  Good news: Visitors in face masks streamed into Shanghai Disneyland as the theme park reopened Monday in a high-profile step toward reviving tourism.  What we're talking about today: A photo of a crowded flight posted on Twitter by a California cardiologist returning from the New York City area may hint at the difficulties of social distancing as air travel picks up again.  VP Pence keeps his distance in White House  Administration officials on Sunday denied a report that Vice President Mike Pence would self-isolate after his press secretary tested positive for the coronavirus Friday, saying he would be back in the White House on Monday.  Indeed he was, but Pence conducted a call with governors from an isolated room, The Associated Press reported, while Dr. Deborah Birx and other staffers participated as usual from a conference room in the Situation Room.  "We are taking the appropriate countermeasures to protect the president’s health,” Pence said of what he called a “slightly different circumstance,” according to a recording obtained by the AP.  Besides Pence's press secretary, a valet for President Donald Trump also tested positive for the virus last week. And three top health advisers, Drs. Anthony Fauci, Robert Redfield and Stephen Hahn, went into quarantine after being in contact with an infected staffer.  On Monday, members of the staff were told anyone going into the West Wing would have to wear a mask or facial covering, although they could remove them if they stayed six feet apart from their colleagues.  US closing in on 10 million coronavirus tests  The U.S. is on track this week to pass 10 million coronavirus tests conducted, said President Donald Trump, who announced Monday that states would receive $11 billion in additional funding for testing.  Trump also said daily tests nationwide would increase “substantially’’ from the current amount, which he pegged at about 300,000.  Harvard University researchers have concluded the country would need to conduct 500,000-700,000 daily tests to begin reopening safely, and would require 5 million daily tests by early June.  States will get the funding from the CARES Act to help governors meet their testing goals, the administration said. The money is going to states, territories and tribes, with the states hardest hit by the coronavirus receiving up to $500 million.  The 1.3 million-plus cases of COVID-19 in the U.S. represent one-third of the world total.  - Jeanine Santucci  New York, the US COVID-19 epicenter, to begin reopening Friday  Parts of New York state will allow a wide range of businesses, from construction and manufacturing to tennis courts and drive-in theaters, to reopen by week's end, Gov. Andrew Cuomo said Monday. Cuomo, speaking at his daily news conference, said the Finger Lakes, Southern Tier and Mohawk Valley regions of western and Upstate New York have met seven crucial criteria, including declining hospitalizations and ramped-up testing capacity. "We see all the arrows are pointed in the right direction,'' Cuomo said.  New York City was among areas not yet ready to reopen, he said. The state has been the epicenter of the U.S. outbreak, with more than 26,000 deaths. But the daily death toll has been dropping steadily, with 161 deaths Sunday the lowest total since March.  "It's been a crisis and a painful one, but we are coming out the other side," Cuomo said. "This is the next big step in this historic journey."  MLB hoping for games in July but labor issues loom  Major League Baseball is aiming to start its season in July after being sidelined in spring training by the coronavirus. Owners approved a proposal Monday requiring teams to share 50% of their revenue with the Major League Baseball Players Association should plans to play this year proceed, three people with direct knowledge of the proposal told USA TODAY Sports.  The people, who spoke on the condition of anonymity because they were unauthorized to discuss details, said the historic revenue-sharing plan is integral in order to to address revenue losses with an 82-game season being played without fans beginning in July.  However, the proposal faces obstacles. Player compensation has never been tied to club revenues, and the union is expected to reject the offer because players are fearful owners would then push to implement a salary cap during negotiations on a new collective bargaining agreement to replace the one that expires Dec. 1, 2021.  – Bob Nightengale  Americans' concerns over pandemic easing – but still strong, poll shows  Fewer Americans are now concerned that a family member could contract COVID-19 compared to a month ago, according to a new Monmouth University poll. Forty-two percent of the 808 U.S. adults polled said they were "very concerned" that someone in their family could become seriously ill from COVID-19, and 28% said they were "somewhat concerned." Those numbers were down from 50% and 33%, respectively, in Monmouth's April survey.  "Concern about covid seems to have returned to where it was in the early days of the public response to the pandemic," said Patrick Murray, director of the Monmouth University Polling Institute.  – William Cummings  WHO issues warning against 'blind driving' as nations begin to reopen  The World Health Organization warned Monday that nations should not reopen their economies without setting up strong contact tracing to combat possible surges in coronavirus cases. Health officials in the U.S. are monitoring for any resurgence two weeks after states began gradually reopening, and efforts to assemble contact-tracing teams are underway. WHO emergencies chief Michael Ryan said strong contact tracing measures adopted by Germany and South Korea provide hope for those countries. But he said the same is not true of other, unspecified nations.  “Shutting your eyes and trying to drive through this blind is about as silly an equation as I’ve seen,” Ryan said. “And I’m really concerned that certain countries are setting themselves up for some seriously blind driving over the next few months.”  England, Germany, France begin reopening schools, businesses  British Prime Minister Boris Johnson "actively encouraged" people who can't work from home to go to their jobs, while shops and elementary schools across Germany and France reopened Monday. In the Netherlands, libraries are also opening, and hairdressers, nail technicians, beauticians, masseuses and occupational therapists are back at work. Spain is keeping schools closed but is allowing churches and mosques to reopen at less than capacity.  Johnson's announcement Sunday night was met with widespread confusion Monday morning as some people raced back to work. His administration later suggested the true start date would be Wednesday. More details are forthcoming.  New York's 'patient zero' back home and feeling much better  The man identified as New York's coronavirus "patient zero" remembers going to the emergency room in February. The next thing he remembers is waking up from a coma. Lawrence Garbuz told NBC's Today show he thought he just had a cough. At that point, COVID-19 was not on his radar and New York had not yet taken strict measures to prevent its spread.  “I’m a lawyer. I sit at a desk all day,” he said. “I think at the time we were sort of focusing on individuals who had maybe traveled internationally, something that I had not done.”  But the outbreak in his town of New Rochelle prompted the governor to create a "containment zone," which shut down schools and places of worship before the rest of the state was under stay-at-home orders. Garbuz, 50, said he didn’t have any pre-existing conditions. He is home now and said he feels much better.  Parties divided over makeup of next bailout bill  Trump administration economic advisers will conduct a conference call Monday with senators from both sides of the aisle as leaders struggle to agree on a new economic stimulus plan. Trump wants a payroll tax cut that Democrats have flat-out opposed. Democrats are adamant about more funding for state and local governments. And some Republicans would rather wait and see how the nearly $3 trillion in already-approved relief pans out. Pressure for another package could intensify, however, amid predictions that unemployment could approach the 25% rate reached during the Great Depression.  “Before we take up any new bill, let's have hearings," House Minority Leader Kevin McCarthy told USA TODAY. "As states open up, there will be a difference of what's needed today than is needed tomorrow.”  – Christal Hayes and Michael Collins  Food safety investigations, recalls plummet  Foodborne illness investigations have slowed and food recalls have plummeted because of disruptions in the U.S. food safety system caused by the coronavirus, a USA TODAY investigation found. The pandemic struck the system at every level – from the federal agencies tasked with stopping contaminated food before it leaves farms and factories to the state health departments that test sick residents for foodborne illnesses such as E. coli. Experts say there is no evidence yet of resulting widespread health issues, but food safety advocates say Americans are now more at risk.  “We have so many different safeguards built into our system, and one by one COVID is knocking pieces out,” said Sarah Sorscher, deputy director of regulatory affairs at the Center for Science in the Public Interest.  – Kyle Bagenstose  NYC Mayor de Blasio unveils effort to combat form of Kawasaki disease  New York Mayor Bill de Blasio has announced a plan to test all kids with symptoms of a rare inflammatory condition for coronavirus and its antibodies. Thirty-eight city children are suffering from the symptoms and one has died, he said. Statewide, three young people have died and more than 80 have or are experiencing fever, rash, abdominal pain and vomiting linked to a form of Kawasaki disease, authorities say. Almost all have tested positive for coronavirus or the antibodies that reflect exposure to the virus.  A health alert was being sent to the city's public school parents, and child enrichment centers were being urged to increase enforcement of face coverings, masks and hand sanitizer, de Blasio said.  "To every parent out there: Early detection is the key to fighting this," de Blasio said. "It can be treated. If you see these symptoms, take them seriously and act immediately."  Trump administration reportedly to accuse China of hacking vaccine data  The Trump administration is reportedly planning to accuse China of attempting to hack information from U.S. researchers scrambling to develop a coronavirus vaccine. Federal officials believe hackers are exploiting the pandemic and searching for "valuable intellectual property and public health data through illicit means related to vaccines, treatments and testing," The New York Times reports. A draft of the warning expected to be released within the next few days by the FBI and Homeland Security delves into cybertheft and action by ]"'nontraditional actors" – researchers and students allegedly tapped to steal data from inside academic and private laboratories, the Times reports.. The Wall Street Journal published a similar report.  Blue Angels, Thunderbirds plan more flyovers to honor front-line workers  As part of a tribute to front-line workers fighting the coronavirus, the U.S. Navy Blue Angels and the Air Force Thunderbirds will fly over five cities this week.  The Blue Angels will visit the skies over Detroit, Chicago and Indianapolis on Tuesday, and the Thunderbirds will fly over Austin and San Antonio on Wednesday.  The flyovers are part of a Pentagon plan to fly over nearly three dozen major American cities. Both groups have already conducted joint and separate flyovers in cities including Miami, New York City, Philadelphia, New Orleans and Dallas.  States reopening: Alabama, Arizona, South Carolina to reopen restaurants  The start of the new week will bring significant steps toward normalcy across the U.S. Alabama, Arizona and South Carolina will permit dine-in service with occupancy restrictions at restaurants, New Hampshire will allow hair salons, barbershops, retail stores and drive-in movie theaters to open again for business, and Arkansas will allow dental offices to reopen.  Also, Minnesota will allow dentists, doctors and veterinarians to resume elective surgeries. Find out the latest news in your state.  National Park Service tests access in Utah, preps visitors for 'new normal'  After closing amid the coronavirus pandemic, the National Park Service is testing public access at several parks across the nation, including two in Utah, with limited offerings and services.  Visitor centers and campgrounds remain largely shuttered at Bryce Canyon and Capitol Reef national parks, but visitors are welcome at some of the sites.  Acting Park Service Director David Vela said visitors should steel themselves for a “new normal” that will not likely square with their last trip.  Tennessee Sen. Lamar Alexander to self-quarantine for 14 days  Tennessee Sen. Lamar Alexander will self-quarantine for 14 days after a member of his staff tested positive for COVID-19. The 79-year-old Republican is doing well and has no symptoms of the respiratory illness, according to a Sunday night statement from his office. He tested negative for COVID-19 last week.  – Anna Celia Gallegos, The Tennessean  More coronavirus news and information from USA TODAY  More COVID-19 headlines from USA TODAY  Contributing: The Associated Press
2020-05-11	John Fea  Opinion contributor  One day soon, students will read Donald Trump’s inaugural address. Good history teachers will understand the speech, as they do with all presidential rhetoric, in the larger context of the Trump presidency.  I recently revisited the speech amid this coronavirus pandemic. I imagined what kind of essay questions I would put on a future exam related to this period in American history. Here are a few:  Trump never had an approval rating over 50%. Considering this fact, how should we explain his calls for national unity? Other presidents saw their approval ratings soar in times of crisis. Why didn’t this happen to Trump?  Trump said that the “Bible tells us, how good and pleasant it is when God’s people live together in unity.” Did this kind of spiritual harmony exist during Trump presidency? Did the church speak truth to power with a united voice? Discuss the state of American Christianity in the age of Trump.  How did Trump help Americans face the “challenges” and confront the “hardships” he speaks of in his inaugural address? What role did governors, mayors and health care workers play in dealing with these challenges and hardships?  Define the real 'American carnage'  Did Trump’s populism — his claim that “government is controlled by the people” — help or hurt Americans in this pandemic? Why did Trump, at a time that called for strong national leadership, encourage his followers to storm state capital buildings and liberate local economies? How did anti-intellectualism, a common characteristic of populist movements, influence Trump’s response to the coronavirus?  Trump used the word “carnage” to describe the economic landscape at the time of his inauguration. How should we think about Trump’s use of this word in the context of closed businesses and record unemployment during the pandemic? Did this president reduce the number of “tombstones” scattered across the land?  Where did “America First” lead the United States during the Trump presidency? What could the country have learned from South Korea, New Zealand, Greece and Germany — all nations that succeeded in getting coronavirus under control? Did Trump deliver on his promise to cultivate “friendship and goodwill with the nations of the world?”  Trump threw millions of dollars into a wall that he promised will “bring back our borders.” Based on your reading this semester, did Trump prepare the country for a disease that knows no borders?  Trump’s speech promised new infrastructure — roads, bridges, and airports. Why did he fail to deliver on this promise? Connect these failures to the mass unemployment the United States experienced during the coronavirus pandemic. Consider whether infrastructure development might have provided American jobs.  Trump said Americans must discover our “loyalty to each other.” Did Trump's presidency, especially his public rhetoric and social media use, exacerbate the decline of civil society and the virtues essential to the survival of democratic societies?  Trump said Americans are “protected, and we will always be protected” by “the great men and women of our military and law enforcement.” But this was also a time when many Americans were afraid. Explain.  Trump said the United States “will shine for everyone to follow.” Did Trump fulfill his promise? Think about America’s reputation in the world in the context of President Ronald Reagan’s “shining city on a hill” speech in 1988.  Did some bleed more than others?  Trump claimed that black, brown and white Americans all “bleed the same red blood of patriots.” Consider this phrase in the context of the Trump administration and the coronavirus pandemic. Do some bleed more blood than others?  Did America’s response to the pandemic reveal us to be a “righteous people”? Your answer should address both presidential leadership and the labors of health care workers and other front-line responders.  Did Donald Trump “free the earth from the miseries of disease," as he promised?  Who were these politicians whom Trump described as “all talk and no action, constantly complaining but never doing anything about it”? After studying Trump's response to the coronavirus pandemic, compare his performance with the leaders he characterized as ineffective whiners.  As you answer these questions, please draw on primary sources from the Trump presidency, including rally speeches, press conferences, tweets and television appearances. Good luck on your exam.  John Fea, an American history professor at Messiah College, is the author of "Believe Me: The Evangelical Road to Donald Trump." Follow him on Twitter: @JohnFea1
2020-05-11	A high-profile infectious disease researcher warns COVID-19 is in the early stages of attacking the world, which makes it difficult to relax stay-at-home orders without putting most Americans at risk.  Dr. Michael Osterholm, director of the Center for Infectious Disease Research and Policy at the University of Minnesota, said the initial wave of outbreaks in cities such as New York City, where one in five people have been infected, represent a fraction of the illness and death yet to come.  "This damn virus is going to keep going until it infects everybody it possibly can," Osterholm said Monday during a meeting with the USA TODAY Editorial Board. "It surely won’t slow down until it hits 60 to 70%" of the population, the number that would create herd immunity and halt the spread of the virus.  Start the day smarter:Get USA TODAY's Daily Briefing in your inbox  Even if new cases begin to fade this summer, it might be an indicator that the new coronavirus is following a seasonal pattern similar to the flu.  During the 1918 flu pandemic that sickened one-third of the world's population, New York City and Chicago were hit hard in the first wave of illness that largely bypassed other cities such as Boston, Detroit, Minneapolis and Philadelphia. The second wave of illness was much more severe nationwide.  More:Antibody tests were supposed to help guide reopening plans. They've brought more confusion than clarity.  More:To find a coronavirus vaccine, can we ethically infect people with a disease with no cure?  If COVID-19 retreats only to return in the fall, the number of cases could peak and overwhelm hospitals that must deal with cases of flu and respiratory viruses. Furthermore, Asian nations such as South Korea and Singapore, lauded for strict controls and rapid testing to avoid damage during the first wave, might be vulnerable to a second wave of infections, he said.  "It’s the big peak that’s really going to do us in," he said. "As much pain, suffering, death and economic disruption we’ve had, there’s been 5 to 20% of the people infected, ... That’s a long ways to get to 60 to 70%."  Still, there are key differences between COVID-19 and the flu. The average incubation period for the new virus is five days, compared with just two days for the flu, according to a Center for Infectious Disease Research and Policy report comparing the pandemics.  The longer incubation period and a higher transmission rate suggest the COVID-19 virus spreads more easily than the flu.  There were nearly 80,000 deaths and more than 1.3 million confirmed novel coronavirus cases in the U.S. at noon Monday, according to the Johns Hopkins University data tracker. New York state has been hit the hardest with more than 26,000 deaths, and preliminary antibody testing suggests about 20% of New York City-area residents have been infected.  Worldwide, more than 283,000 people have died and 4.1 million have been infected.  Osterholm said only an effective vaccine can slow the virus before a large enough segment of the population becomes infected and develops some level of immunity. Even if a vaccine works, Osterholm said, it's unknown whether it would be durable enough to confer long-lasting protection from SARS CoV-2, the virus that causes COVID-19.  Most states are easing stay-at-home orders though patchwork measures that vary from one to the next. Georgia began opening in late April amid national criticism, allowing tattoo parlors, bowling alleys and hair and nail salons to reopen with restrictions. California has taken a slower, phased approach, allowing some retailers and manufacturers considered low-risk to resume operations.  Governors worry about the economic harm social distancing measures have caused with shuttered businesses and the growing ranks of jobless Americans. Unemployment has reached 15% nationwide, and a Trump administration economic adviser warned unemployment could soon reach 20%.  Osterholm acknowledges that the nation "can't lock down for 18 months" and said political and business leaders need to find a way to resume activities while adapting to a virus that won't soon disappear. He doesn't believe there has been enough of a frank assessment on the economic harm the virus will cause over coming months and its disruption to international supply chains.  "We all have to confront the fact there’s not a magic bullet, short of a vaccine, that’s going to make this go away," he said. "We’re going to be living with it. And we’re not having that discussion at all."
2020-05-11	Paul Wiseman  Associated Press  WASHINGTON – When the coronavirus erupted in the United States, it triggered quarantines, travel curbs and business shutdowns. Many economists predicted a V-shaped journey for the economy: A sharp drop, then a quick bounce-back as the virus faded and the economy regained health.  Others envisioned a slower, U-shaped course.  Now, as President Donald Trump and many Republicans press to reopen the economy, some experts see an ominous risk: That a too-hasty relaxation of social distancing could ignite a resurgence of COVID-19 cases by fall, sending the economy back into lockdown. The result: a W-shaped disaster in which a tentative recovery would sink back into a “double-dip” recession before rebounding eventually.  Economic issues:5 reasons why you shouldn't freak out about 20.5M job losses  Coronavirus updates:Unemployment could top 20%  “The push to reopen the economy is making a W-shaped recovery very much more likely,” said Jeffrey Frankel, professor of capital formation and growth at the Harvard Kennedy School.  In Frankel’s view, any widespread reopening should wait for a sustained drop in death rates and the broad availability of tests. No one is completely safe until an effective treatment or vaccine can be produced and widely distributed – a scenario that’s likely many months away.  Frankel said he also worries that the government might prematurely withdraw financial aid to the economy, thereby weakening the pillars of any tentative recovery.  “A W-shaped recovery is a distinct possibility,” said Yongseok Shin, an economist at Washington University in St. Louis and a research fellow at the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis. “Unless the reopening is carefully managed with extensive testing and voluntary social distancing, infections will rapidly rise in many localities.  “People will then hunker down for fear of infection, and local governments will re-impose lockdowns, quashing any economic recovery we will have had to that point.”  A double-dip recession would significantly heighten the risks for an already debilitated U.S. economy. Congress has provided roughly $3 trillion in aid – by far its largest rescue ever – to help households and companies survive the next few months. That short-term aid, though, assumes any recovery will last. If a second downturn were to flare up, it’s far from clear that Congress would be ready to offer trillions more to enable businesses to survive yet another round of months-long shutdowns.  Nor do many companies have the cash reserves to cushion against a second recession. And just as threatening, a double-tip downturn would sap the confidence of individuals and businesses that is essential to an economic bounce-back. If consumers don’t trust that a recovery will last, many won’t resume spending, and the economy would struggle to rebound.  On Monday, plastic spacing barriers and millions of masks appeared on the streets of Europe’s newly reopened cities as France and Belgium emerged from lockdowns, the Netherlands sent children back to school and Spain allowed people to eat outdoors. All faced the delicate balance of restarting battered economies without causing a second wave of coronavirus infections.  In the United States, Federal Reserve Chair Jerome Powell has urged caution in reopening the economy. Powell has warned against taking “too much risk of second and third waves” of the virus.  For now, the economy is essentially in free fall. It shed a record 20.5 million jobs in April. The unemployment rate surged to 14.7%, the highest since the Great Depression. The gross domestic product – the broadest measure of output – shrank at a 4.8% annual rate from January through March and is expected to post an astounding 40% annual collapse in the current quarter. That would be, by far, the worst on record dating to 1947.  Facing a catastrophe in an election year, Trump and many Republican allies are eager to ease restrictions and restart the economy. They say the use of masks and other protections should allow many businesses to safely reopen under certain guidelines. Trump has openly backed protests that are intended to compel governors to “liberate” their states from lockdowns.  But The Associated Press reported last week that many U.S. governors are disregarding White House guidelines. Seventeen states didn’t meet a key benchmark set by the White House for beginning to reopen businesses: A 14-day downward trajectory in new cases or positive test rates.  Texas’ Republican lieutenant governor, Dan Patrick, has gone so far as to suggest that restarting the economy might be worth the risk of some additional deaths.  “There are more important things than living,” Patrick said in an interview with Fox News. “I don’t want to die, nobody wants to die, but man, we got to take some risks and get back in the game and get this country back up and running.”  Most Americans say they’re wary of trying to return to business as normal now. A Pew Research Center survey found that 68% said they feared that state governments would lift restrictions too soon. Just 31% wanted restrictions lifted sooner.  “The idea that you just turn the spigot back on is just ridiculous,” said Diane Swonk, chief economist at the consulting firm Grant Thornton. ”It’s still a COVID-tainted spigot. No one wants water from a poisoned well.”  Many businesses are also tempering their optimism. The data firm Womply found that even in Texas and Florida, states that are being especially aggressive about reopening their economies, businesses are moving slowly. Womply found only a “small-to-negligible drop” in the share of Texas and Florida businesses that remain closed.  “This could signal that previously closed businesses may have trouble figuring out how to open with new guidelines, attracting patrons, or may be closed indefinitely,” Womply concluded.  At Big Buzz, a health care marketing consultancy in Denver, CEO Wendy Phillips is expecting “more a W-shaped than a V-shaped” rebound. Phillips has reduced her staff from eight to six, two of whom kept their full-time jobs only after the government delivered a $105,000 loan under a rescue program for small businesses.  “There’s so much unknown looking forward,” Phillips said. “I think it’s going to be a good two or three years, at a minimum, of recession.’’  Frankel at the Harvard Kennedy School and others worry that state and local governments, hemorrhaging tax revenue, will be forced to make growth-stunting cuts just as a recovery might be straining to gain traction.  Another threat is the prospect of bankruptcies and cash shortfalls for companies and households. Some have been able to defer rent and other payments but will eventually have to repay their landlords and other creditors in full.  Likewise, U.S. authorities declared premature victory over the 1918 Spanish flu outbreak, only to see it return, deadlier than before. In the current pandemic, South Korea eased restrictions as cases dropped. But on Saturday, Seoul had to shut down nightclubs, bars and discos after dozens of infections were linked to clubgoers.  Last week, researchers at the Columbia University Mailman School of Public Health warned that easing stay-at-home orders and allowing people to mingle more freely would mean that “new COVID-19 cases and deaths will rebound in late May.”  The Columbia researchers predict a resurgence of cases two to four weeks after states begin to reopen.  “The lag between infection acquisition and case confirmation, coupled with insufficient testing and contact tracing, will mask any rebound and exponential growth of COVID-19 until it is well underway,” said the lead researcher, Jeffrey Shaman.  AP Business Writers Anne D’Innocenzio and Joyce M. Rosenberg in New York and Dee-Ann Durbin in Detroit contributed to this report.
2020-05-11	Stan Choe  The Associated Press  Major stock indexes erased much of their early losses, leaving the market mixed at the end of trading Monday.  Companies whose fortunes are most closely linked to how well the economy is doing took the biggest losses, including banks, energy and basic materials companies.  The S&P 500 wound up with a gain of less than 1 point, having come back from early loss of 0.9%. Far more stocks fell than rose in the index. Technology companies continued their steady march higher, sending the Nasdaq up 0.8%.  The Dow Jones Industrial Average closed virtually flat at 24,221.99.  Health-care stocks also rose, and came closer to erasing their losses for the year.  Time and money:Looking to invest? Here's how to diversify your portfolio based on when you'll need money  What's happening with stocks:Here's why the market is better than the economy right now  Tech stocks helped lead the way, continuing their remarkably resilient run. Even with the coronavirus pandemic throwing the global economy into disarray, tech stocks in the S&P 500 are up 4.5% for 2020 as investors look for companies that can be winners in both a ”normal” and a stay-at-home economy.  Apple rose nearly 2%, Nvidia added 3.2% to return to a record and Advanced Micro Devices climbed 4.8% for one of the day’s biggest gains in the S&P 500.  This year’s second-best sector has been health care, which has trimmed its loss for 2020 to less than 1%. Biotech stocks were particularly strong Monday, with Vertex Pharmaceuticals up 5% and Biogen up 4.5%. Cardinal Health had the biggest gain in the S&P 500, up 6.7%, after reporting stronger earnings for its latest quarter than Wall Street expected.  Those gains helped to make up for most stocks in the market falling to losses, including roughly three of five in the S&P 500.  The sharpest drops were hitting companies whose profits are most closely tied to the strength of the economy, including banks and energy producers.  Stocks have been broadly rallying in recent weeks as some investors look ahead to the possibility of a strong economic recovery later this year, after governments reopen economies and lift business-shutdown orders meant to slow the spread of the coronavirus.  That optimistic view took some hits Monday, as worries rose about the possibility of new waves of infections hitting countries that are further ahead in lifting lockdown measures.  In South Korea, for example, one nightclub customer has been linked to dozens of new infections. That pushed authorities to reimpose restrictions on nightclubs and bars. Investors also pointed to small but disconcerting increases of infections in China and elsewhere.  Energy producers in the S&P 500 fell 1.5% for the biggest loss among the 11 sectors that make up the index. A weaker global economy wouldn’t need as much oil.  Financial stocks were also weaker than the rest of the market. They’ve been hit hard this year on worries that the recession will lead to a wave of households and businesses defaulting on their loans. Bank of America dropped 3.5%, and Citigroup lost 4.6%.  The data streaming in on the economy remain oppressively bad. After a report on Friday showed U.S. employers cut a record-setting 20.5 million jobs in April, Italy reported Monday its largest-ever drop in industrial production. More data reports this week include U.S. unemployment claims and retail sales and Australian jobs.  Companies remain uncertain about the future, with many opting to give no financial forecasts during their latest quarterly earnings reports. On Sunday, one of Latin America’s largest airlines, Chile’s Avianca, asked a New York City bankruptcy court for protection from creditors while the carrier reorganizes amid a travel slump it said has cut revenue 80%.  Even outside the possibility of a resurgence of infections, many analysts see other reasons for skepticism about the stock market’s 30% rally since late March. Strategists at Goldman Sachs said the market appears to be overlooking a drop-off in buybacks and dividends as companies look to preserve cash, the threat of more U.S.-China trade tensions and the possibility that the upcoming U.S. elections could lead to higher corporate tax rates.  Most of all, companies themselves are talking about how uncertain the recovery looks, which stands in stark relief to the quick, vigorous rebound that the stock market seems to be pricing in. The CEO of pump- and valve-maker Idex Corp. said last month he expects it to happen in fits and starts.  Earlier, Asian markets were supported somewhat by the Chinese central bank’s promise to use “more powerful” policies to support economic recovery and job creation.  Japan’s Nikkei 225 rose 1%, while stocks in Shanghai were close to flat. South Korean stocks fell 0.5%.  In Europe, the French CAC 40 fell 1.6%, and Germany’s DAX lost 0.9%. The FTSE 100 in London slipped 0.2%.  Investors hoping for reassurance were looking ahead to an appearance by U.S. Federal Reserve chairman Jerome Powell on Wednesday.  “He is certainly not going to walk back any of the Fed extraordinary stimulus measures,” said Stephen Inness of AxiTrader in a report. “If anything, he could lay it down even thicker.”  The yield on the 10-year Treasury held steady at 0.68%.  Benchmark U.S. crude rose 0.5% to $24.87 per barrel. Brent crude, the international standard, slipped 1.4%, to $30.52 per barrel.  AP Business Writer Joe McDonald contributed.
2020-05-12	WASHINGTON – Top public health officials, as well as a few Democratic and Republican senators, painted a much starker picture Tuesday of the coronavirus challenges still facing the nation than the rosier outlook offered by President Donald Trump.  A day after the president declared the nation has “met the moment, and we have prevailed,” top members of his coronavirus task force sent a different message at a Senate hearing on how the nation can safely reopen.  Dr. Anthony Fauci, the nation's top infectious disease specialist, said that while containment is moving in the right direction, the virus is not under control.  Easing restrictions too quickly will lead to “some suffering and death that could be avoided,” he warned, adding that it could also paradoxically set back attempts to recover the economy.  “It would almost run the clock back rather than going forward,” said Fauci, director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases. “That is my major concern.”  Takeaways from the hearing:Fauci says vaccine 'likely,' but not in time for school: 5 takeaways from the Senate coronavirus hearing  Fauci’s remarks to the committee came on the same day that the White House announced that Trump will travel Thursday to the politically pivotal state of Pennsylvania to spotlight his argument that the economy can be reopened safely and life can soon return to normal.  “We have met the moment, and we have prevailed,” Trump said Monday in a comment he later said meant the country prevailed on testing.  Trump has repeatedly taken aim at Democratic governors such as Michigan’s Gretchen Whitmer and Washington’s Jay Inslee, who he argues have been reluctant to reopen their states.  In a tweet on Monday, Trump said "the great people of Pennsylvania want their freedom now, and they are fully aware of what that entails. The Democrats are moving slowly, all over the USA, for political purposes."  One risk for Trump is the pandemic will become a political liability for him as he seeks reelection in November. Trump is betting that reopening the economy will boost his chances of winning another four years in office, but Democrats have excoriated him for what they see as his administration’s inadequate response to the virus threat.  Congressional Republicans up for reelection this fall are wrestling with whether to defend Trump’s response to coronavirus or to keep a distance so they aren’t weakened by political fallout if the virus is not contained.  Trump vs. Fauci:Messages and tone conflict in a long-distance COVID-19 debate  Fauci told senators the novel coronavirus is unlikely to simply disappear, as Trump has repeatedly suggested.  “This is going to go away without a vaccine,” Trump told Republican lawmakers on Friday. “It's going to go away, and it's – we're not going to see it again, hopefully, after a period of time.”  But Fauci dismissed that notion.  “That is just not going to happen because it’s such a highly transmissible virus,” Fauci said. “Even if we get better control over the summer months, it is likely that there will be virus somewhere on this planet that will eventually get back to us.”  But Fauci testified that the country should be better prepared to deal with a second wave of the virus in the fall, if it arrives.  Trump has called the drug remdesivir “promising” as a potential treatment for coronavirus.  But Fauci noted in his opening remarks that improvements some patients made on the drug – while statistically significant – were “really modest.”  HEROES Act:Democrats' $3 trillion coronavirus stimulus proposal includes more $1,200 checks, money for state and local governments  Trump has spoken optimistically about the possibility of a coronavirus vaccine, even predicting that a vaccine could be ready by the end of the year.“  Fauci called it “much more likely than not” that there will eventually be a vaccine. But while researchers are trying more than one approach and hope to have “multiple winners,” Fauci also cautioned that it’s possible a vaccine could actually “enhance the negative effect of the infection.”  “The big unknown is efficacy,” he said.  Largely in response to Democrats’ prodding, Fauci emphasized the importance of states and communities not getting ahead of checkpoints the government has established for easing restrictions  White House press secretary Kayleigh McEnany said Tuesday that Trump agrees with Fauci that states and cities should follow federal guidelines in deciding whether to reopen, and that it should be "phased in." She also said the president wants to reopen as soon as possible because the falling economy is generating health problems of its own, from substance abuse to people who put off doctor's visits and get sick as a result.  "We do want to reopen this country because there are consequences that run the other way when we stay closed down," McEnany said.  Economic impact:Recent grads hit with layoffs, furloughs worry returning home is 'the image of failure'  Democratic members of the Senate panel on Health, Education, Labor and Pensions, piled on their criticism of the president’s handling of the pandemic.  Washington state Sen. Patty Murray, the panel’s top Democrat, accused Trump of not telling the truth about what’s happening. She called the administration’s response a “disaster” full of missteps and delays that put the nation way behind on testing while “corruption and political interference” impeded efforts to secure enough personal protective equipment.  Sen. Chris Murphy, D-Conn., said the administration’s guidance to states on how to reopen has been “criminally vague.”  Portions of the plan have been leaked, but officials have said it remains under review.  Murphy pressed Robert Redfield, director of the Centers of Disease Control and Prevention, on the reason for the delay and whether the guidelines were blocked by the White House.  Redfield said the CDC is reviewing comments from other agencies about the guidance. He said it should be released “soon,” after approval from the White House task force headed by Vice President Mike Pence.  “Soon isn’t good enough,” Murphy responded.  Coronavirus lifespan:How long does the coronavirus live on surfaces?  Some Republican senators pressed health officials on the need to get children back to school and workers back to their jobs.  Maine Sen. Susan Collins, one of the most endangered Republicans up for reelection this year, homed in on how dentists could safely resume treatments.  Georgia Sen. Kelly Loeffler, another Republican facing a challenging general election, focused her criticism on China and what she called a “cover-up” at the outset of the pandemic.  The only GOP senator on the panel to push back hard against the administration was Utah’s Mitt Romney, who is also the only Republican senator Trump didn’t include in a White House task force focused on reopening.  Romney went after a top Health and Human Services official over Trump’s boasting that the country has conducted more tests than any other country.  The 9 million tests are “nothing to celebrate,” Romney said, “because the United States “treaded water” during the early stages of the pandemic while other countries such as South Korea tested people aggressively to curb the outbreak.  Romney said that while he understood why a politician would frame data for political gain, he didn’t expect that from an admiral such as Dr. Brett Giroir, assistant secretary of Health and Human Services for health.  Trump going to PA:Donald Trump to visit Allentown, Pennsylvania factory as he pushes message on reopening  The committee’s chairman, Sen. Lamar Alexander of Tennessee, opened the hearing by saying he hoped senators wouldn’t spend much of their time “finger pointing.”  But Alexander, who is retiring at the end of the year, repeated previous comments he’d made that schools and businesses can’t reopen until more Americans are being tested for the virus.  “What our country has done so far on testing is impressive,” Alexander said, “but not nearly enough.”  Contributing: Bart Jansen and David Jackson
2020-05-12	WASHINGTON – Dr. Anthony Fauci warned a Senate panel Tuesday that easing stay-at-home restrictions must be done carefully and treatments and vaccines are likely eventually, but not before school starts in the fall.  The director of the National Institute for Allergy and Infectious Diseases was one of four top health officials who described guidelines for reopening the economy for the Health, Education, Labor and Pensions Committee.  Social distancing restrictions meant some senators, Fauci and other witnesses participated by video conference from their homes and officers. Several senators attended the Washington hearing in person, but GOP Sen. Lamar Alexander led the meeting from his home in Tennessee.  Here are six key points from the hearing:  Fauci: Ignoring guidelines may lead to 'suffering and death'  Fauci said not following federal guidelines such as testing people for infection, tracing their contacts and isolating them to prevent the disease from spreading could lead to "some suffering and death” that could be avoided.  Guidelines to states include waiting until cases have declined for at least two weeks before easing restrictions. Communities also have to be capable of adequately responding when the virus inevitably returns, he said.  HEROES Act:Democrats' $3 trillion coronavirus stimulus proposal includes more $1,200 checks, money for state and local governments  But Fauci warned that if states reopen without precautions, it presents a “real risk that you will trigger an outbreak,” which could hurt the economy again.  “You can almost turn the clock back, rather than going forward,” he said. “That is my main concern.”  Fauci on coronavirus: 'We don’t have it completely under control'  Despite declines in infections and hospitalizations in some areas, Fauci warned about spikes and said the virus is nowhere near being contained.  “We don’t have it completely under control,” he told Sen. Elizabeth Warren, D-Mass.  Sen. Chris Murphy, D-Conn., criticized the contrast between health experts warning about the dangers of opening states too early mere hours after Trump said the country prevailed against the virus.  “This is infuriating to many of us because it comes hours after the president declared that we have prevailed over coronavirus, which I’m just going to tell you is going to make it harder on state leaders to keep social distancing restrictions in place,” he said.  Trump promoted the country’s testing Monday in a Rose Garden news conference, saying the 9 million tests so far made America a worldwide leader.  “We have met the moment, and we have prevailed,” said Trump, who later said he meant the country prevailed on testing.  Trump going to PA:Donald Trump to visit Allentown, Pennsylvania factory as he pushes message on reopening  Murphy also slammed the lack of detailed federal guidance as states begin to reopen. Robert Redfield, head of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, said state officials could contact his agency with their questions. He said nationwide recommendations are under review and would be released soon.  Murphy said soon wasn't good enough.  “You work for a president who is frankly undermining our efforts to comply with the guidance that you have given us,” Murphy said. “Then the guidance you have provided is criminally vague.”  Fauci: Finding a vaccine 'definitely not a long shot'  Fauci expressed optimism Tuesday that a vaccine will be found for the coronavirus within a year or two. His confidence stemmed from the fact that most people can fight off the virus themselves, offering scientists an opportunity to devise a way to get the body to combat it better.  “It’s definitely not a long shot,” Fauci said. “It is much more likely than not that we will get a vaccine.”  Fauci also dismissed the prospect that the virus might disappear without a vaccine, a claim trumpeted by President Donald Trump.  “That is just not going to happen because it’s such a highly transmissible virus,” Fauci said. “Even if we get better control over the summer months, it is likely that there will be virus somewhere on this planet that will eventually get back to us.”  Coronavirus:Pandemic protocols vary from the White House to the Supreme Court as Trump pushes states to reopen  Fauci said better testing will be available by fall to identify and trace who is sick and there will be time to stock up on emergency supplies.  “I hope that if we do have the threat of a second wave, we will be able to deal with it very effectively, to prevent it from becoming an outbreak not only worse than now, but much, much less,” Fauci said.  Vaccine, treatment unlikely by start of school year  While Fauci is optimistic about scientists developing a vaccine, he doesn't expect one in time for the start of school in August.  “In this case, the idea of having treatments available or a vaccine to facilitate the reentry of students into the fall term would be something that would be a bit of bridge too far,” Fauci said. “Even at top speed that we’re going, we don't see a vaccine playing in the ability of individuals to get back to school, this term. What they really want is to know if they are safe.”  Health officials said the key for students to feel safe in returning to school will be more widespread testing, to isolate students who get infected, and good health practices such as social distancing.  Adm. Brett Giroir, assistant secretary of Health and Human Services for health, said the current rate of 10 million tests per month could be expanded by 40 million or 50 million by September to provide more surveillance.  Romney: Testing ‘nothing to celebrate’  Sen. Mitt Romney, R-Utah, said U.S. testing for coronavirus is “nothing to celebrate” because the country “treaded water” during the early stages of the pandemic while other countries such as South Korea tested people aggressively to curb the outbreak.  Trump said Monday the U.S. prevailed in testing for the virus because it has conducted 9 million tests so far, which is the most of any country and more per capita than most countries.  But Romney said by March 6, the U.S. conducted only 2,000 tests while South Korea completed 140,000. Romney said more aggressive testing was part of the reason why South Korea has had 256 deaths, while the U.S. has more than 80,000.  'Classless':McConnell says Obama 'should have kept his mouth shut' on Trump's handling of coronavirus  But Romney said while he understood why a politician would frame data for political gain, he didn’t expect that from an admiral such as Giroir.  “Yesterday you celebrated that we had done more tests and more tests per capita even than South Korea. You ignored the fact that they accomplished theirs at the beginning of the outbreak, while we treaded water during February and March," Romney said. “I find our testing record nothing to celebrate whatsoever.”  How to address future pandemics  Alexander, the committee chairman, said more hearings are likely to learn from the current pandemic about how to prepare for the next one.  Future hearings will cover issues such as how to develop treatments and vaccines faster, he said. Lawmakers will study what ought to be part of the national stockpile of emergency supplies and who should manage it – and how to prevent states and hospitals from selling off emergency equipment between crises. He also said Congress should address how to avoid driving hospitals into bankruptcy and how lawmakers should fund its priorities.  “I want to make sure that we do that this year and our collective memory is short so while we are all worried about this we need to not only deal with this crisis but get ready for the next one,” Alexander said.
2020-05-12	WASHINGTON - Sen. Mitt Romney, R-Utah, said U.S. testing for coronavirus is “nothing to celebrate” because the country “treaded water” during the early stages of the pandemic while other countries such as South Korea tested people aggressively to curb the outbreak.  President Donald Trump said Monday the country prevailed in testing for the virus because it has conducted 9 million tests so far, which is the most of any country and more per capita than most countries.  But Romney said by March 6, the U.S. conducted only 2,000 tests while South Korea completed 140,000. Romney said more aggressive testing was part of the reason why South Korea has had 256 deaths, while the U.S. has more than 80,000.  But Romney said while he understood why a politician would frame data for political gain, he didn’t expect that from an admiral such as Dr. Brett Giroir, assistant secretary of Health and Human Services for health.  “Yesterday you celebrated that we had done more tests and more tests per capita even than South Korea. You ignored the fact that they accomplished theirs at the beginning of the outbreak, while we treaded water during February and March," Romney said. “I find our testing record nothing to celebrate whatsoever.”  - Bart Jansen  Fauci on finding a vaccine: 'It's definitely not a long shot'  Dr. Anthony Fauci, director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, expressed optimism Tuesday that a vaccine will eventually be found for the coronavirus.  “It’s definitely not a long shot,” Fauci told Sen. Mitt Romney during a hearing of the Senate Health, Education, Labor and Pensions Committee.  The Utah Republican asked how likely it is that there will be a vaccine in a year or two.  “It is much more likely than not that we will get a vaccine,” Fauci answered.  Because the overwhelming majority of people who get COVID-19 recover, he explained, the body is capable of clearing the virus. That means that scientists should be able to figure out how to stimulate the body with a vaccine to get the same response.  - Maureen Groppe  Fauci says 80,000 US coronavirus deaths is 'unacceptable'  Sen. Tim Kaine, D-Va., highlighted differences in how South Korea and the United States responded to the coronavirus during a Senate Health, Education, Labor and Pensions Committee hearing Tuesday.  While America tests more of its population now, South Korea was testing its population at 40 times the U.S. during March, Kaine said. Health officials said the country will have a capacity for 1.3 to 1.7 million tests per day in September, but tested 395,000 on Monday.  “We’ve got a long way to go,” Kaine said.  South Korea aggressively traced people who had contact with people who became infected, Kaine said. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention had a good system for contact tracing, but health officials said the U.S. system became overwhelmed by the number of cases.  “Unfortunately as the cases rose, it went beyond the capacity and we went to mitigation, so we lost the containment edge,” said Dr. Robert Redfield, the CDC director.  Kaine asked Dr. Anthony Fauci, director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, whether more than 80,000 U.S. deaths so far was unacceptable.  “Yes, of course,” Fauci said. “A death rate that high in any manner or form in my mind is unacceptable.”  - Bart Jansen  Fauci on coronavirus: 'We don’t have it completely under control'  Dr. Anthony Fauci, director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, said the nation is moving in the right direction on tackling the coronavirus but acknowledged that it is nowhere near being contained.  Infections and hospitalizations are declining in some areas while spiking in others, he said during a Tuesday hearing by the Senate Health, Education, Labor and Pensions Committee.  “We don’t have it completely under control,” he said in response to questions from Sen. Elizabeth Warren, D-Mass.  The former presidential candidate put the blame on President Donald Trump, saying he has to stop pretending that bad news will go away if he ignores it.  “We are running out of time to save lives and we need to act now,” she said.  - Maureen Groppe  Fauci says he doesn't have an 'easy answer' for children out of school  Sen. Bill Cassidy, R-La., raised concerns about the effects on children from the closed schools, during a Tuesday meeting of the Senate Health, Education, Labor and Pensions Committee.  They’re falling behind on brain development, may not have adequate nutrition and their parents might not be able to work with kids at home, he said. Cassidy asked whether the government has considered the costs, along with the benefits, of keeping schools closed.  “I don’t have an easy answer for that,” said Dr. Anthony Fauci, director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases. “I just don’t.”  Fauci said he appreciates the difficult unintended consequences of the restrictions in place to slow the spread of the virus.  The situation may be different in the fall, he added. And because the virus is affecting some areas of the country more than others, some communities may not need as many restrictions.  - Maureen Groppe  Murphy says White House guidance 'criminally vague'  Sen. Chris Murphy, D-Conn., criticized the Trump administration Tuesday for withholding detailed guidance from states about how to reopen their economies and asked when it would be released. Portions of the plan have been leaked, but officials have said it remains under review.  Murphy said Connecticut is scheduled to reopen within days, but is uncertain what technical rules to follow.  “You work for a president who is frankly undermining our efforts to comply with the guidance that you have given us,” Murphy said during a hearing of the Senate Health, Education, Labor and Pensions Committee. “Then the guidance you have provided is criminally vague.”  Redfield said the CDC is reviewing comments from other agencies about the guidance and that it must still be approved by the White House task force headed by Vice President Mike Pence.  “The CDC stands by to give technical assistance to your state or any state on any request,” said Redfield Dr. Robert Redfield, head of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, who said the guidance would be released “soon.”  “Soon isn’t good enough,” Murphy said.  - Bart Jansen  Murphy: 'Infuriating' that Trump says US 'prevailed' over coronavirus  Sen. Chris Murphy, D-Conn., called it infuriating that Dr. Anthony Fauci, director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, and Dr. Robert Redfield, head of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, warned about the dangers of opening states too early mere hours after President Donald Trump said the country prevailed against the virus.  “This is infuriating to many of us because it comes hours after the president declared that we have prevailed over coronavirus, which I’m just going to tell you is going to make it harder on state leaders to keep social distancing restrictions in place,” he said. “I worry that you’re trying to have it both ways.”  Trump promoted the country’s testing Monday in a Rose Garden news conference, saying the 9 million tests so far made America a worldwide leader.  “We have met the moment, and we have prevailed,” said Trump, who later said he meant the country prevailed on testing.  - Bart Jansen  Fauci says coronavirus unlikely to disappear  Dr. Anthony Fauci said the novel coronavirus is unlikely to simply disappear, as President Donald Trump has repeatedly suggested, but that the country should be better prepared to deal with a second wave of the virus in the fall, if it arrives.  At a hearing of the Senate Health, Education, Labor and Pensions Committee on Tuesday, Sen. Bernie Sanders, I-Vt., asked whether the virus was likely to return in the fall or winter, even if there is a summer lull, as happened with the 1918 flu pandemic.  “I think that possibility does exist,” said Fauci, director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases.  Trump has suggested the virus might just disappear.  “This is going to go away without a vaccine,” Trump told Republican lawmakers on Friday. “It's going to go away, and it's – we're not going to see it again, hopefully, after a period of time.”  But Fauci dismissed that notion.  “That is just not going to happen because it’s such a highly transmissible virus,” Fauci said. “Even if we get better control over the summer months, it is likely that there will be virus somewhere on this planet that will eventually get back to us.”  Fauci said better testing will be available by then to identify and trace who is sick and there will be time to stock up on emergency supplies.  “I hope that if we do have the threat of a second wave, we will be able to deal with it very effectively, to prevent it from becoming an outbreak not only worse than now, but much, much less,” Fauci said.  - Bart Jansen  Fauci: not following guidelines may lead to 'suffering and death'  Dr. Anthony Fauci told the Senate Health, Education, Labor and Pensions Committee Tuesday that not following guidelines to reopen the country amid coronavirus may lead to "some suffering and death."  Democrats finally got Fauci to repeat the warning, which he stated before the hearing, after Sen Patty Murray’s opening question failed to elicit those words.  Pennsylvania Sen. Robert Casey asked Fauci to restate his concern about how states are reopening. Not following the guidelines, Fauci said, presents a “real risk that you will trigger an outbreak.”  That would not only lead to “some suffering and death” that could be avoided, he added. It could also set back attempts to recover the economy.  “You can almost turn the clock back, rather than going forward,” he said. “That is my main concern.”  - Maureen Groppe  Fauci says consequences may be 'really serious' if guidelines ignored  The consequences for states and communities that don’t follow reopening guidelines “could be really serious,” Fauci told the Senate Health, Education, Labor and Pensions Committee on Tuesday.  He was responding to Democratic Sen. Patty Murray’s effort to get him to expand to his comment that he planned to warn there will be “needless suffering and death” if the country reopens too quickly.  Fauci’s comments at the committee's hearing on coronavirus were not as stark. But he emphasized that he’s repeatedly warned that if states skip over the various checkpoints the federal government has laid out, there will be new virus spikes that will lead to outbreaks.  In addition to waiting until cases have declined for at least two weeks before easing restrictions, communities also have to be capable of adequately responding when the virus inevitably returns, he said.  - Maureen Groppe  Fauci: Vaccine, treatment unlikely by start of school year  During a hearing on the coronavirus Tuesday, Sen. Lamar Alexander, R-Tenn., asked about the prospects for treatments or a vaccine to combat COVID-19 in time for colleges planning to start classes in August.  But Dr. Anthony Fauci, director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, said no vaccine is likely in that time frame and a possible treatment has only been tested in hospitals.  “In this case, the idea of having treatments available or a vaccine to facilitate the reentry of students into the fall term would be something that would be a bit of bridge too far,” Fauci said. “Even at top speed that we’re going, we don't see a vaccine playing in the ability of individuals to get back to school, this term. What they really want is to know if they are safe.”  Health officials said the key for students to feel safe in returning to school will be more widespread testing, to isolate students who get infected, and good health practices such as social distancing.  Adm. Brett Giroir, assistant secretary of Health and Human Services for health, said the current rate of 10 million tests per month could be expanded by 40 million or 50 million by September to provide more surveillance.  - Bart Jansen  Fauci says Remdesivir results 'significant, but really modest'  In his opening remarks during a Senate coronavirus hearing Tuesday, Dr. Anthony Fauci, director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, briefly described research being done on treatments and a vaccine for COVID-19.  While patients treated with Remdesivir recovered 31% faster, Fauci emphasized that the result was “statistically significant, but really modest.” The hope is to build on that modest success through a combination of drugs, he said during a meeting of the Senate Health, Education, Labor and Pensions Committee, which is considering how and when to reopen the U.S. economy during the coronavirus pandemic.  Researchers are also working on eight possible vaccines in an accelerated process that could lead to potential results by late fall or early winter. But Fauci also cautioned that vaccines being tested could make the virus worse.  “There's also the possibility of negative consequences, with certain vaccines can actually enhance the negative effect of the infection,” he said, adding that that’s only one of the potential problems.  - Maureen Groppe  Alexander: US testing is 'impressive, but not nearly enough'  Sen. Lamar Alexander opened a Senate hearing on reopening the economy during coronavirus by calling U.S. testing of 9 million people “impressive, but not nearly enough.”  His comments during a meeting of the Senate Health, Education, Labor and Pensions Committee stood in contrast to President Donald Trump’s message at a news conference Monday, when he played down concerns about testing and said America was leading the world on it.  Alexander, R-Tenn., said the U.S. has tested twice as many people as any other country and more per capita than most countries including South Korea. But Alexander said more widespread testing that brings faster results, probably through new technologies, would be needed before schools could reopen in the fall.  “What our country has done so far on testing is impressive, but not nearly enough,” Alexander said. “All roads back to work and back school lead through testing, tracking, isolation, treatment and vaccines. This requires widespread testing, millions more tests created mostly from new technologies to identify and quarantine the infected, rather than the entire population.”  Alexander also said most experts and countries underestimated the virus, which is more contagious than first expected, travels silently in people who don’t exhibit symptoms and is especially deadly for people who are elderly or suffering chronic illness.  “Almost all of us – the United States and almost every country, so far as I can tell – underestimated this virus,” Alexander said.  - Bart Jansen  Murray goes after Trump  Washington state Sen. Patty Murray immediately went after President Donald Trump during a Tuesday hearing about how and when to reopen the economy during the coronavirus pandemic.  Murrary, the top Democrat on the Senate Health, Education, Labor and Pensions Committee, accused him of lying and calling the administration’s response a disaster that’s been hampered by corruption and political interference.  “Trump has been more focused on fighting against the truth than fighting the virus,” Murray said.  Her barbed comments came despite committee Chairman Lamar Alexander’s opening plea that senators not spend time finger pointing. Alexander suggested that all countries, not just the United States, underestimated the virus.  Murray said the nation is nowhere close to where it needs to be to reopen safely. She called it unacceptable that there’s no national plan for testing to be free, fast and available everywhere.  - Maureen Groppe  Officials warn of possibility coronavirus will spread  The Senate hearing featuring Dr. Anthony Fauci, a top official of the White House coronavirus task force, about how and when to reopen the economy has begun.  The Senate Health, Education, Labor and Pensions Committee will hear from Fauci: Dr. Anne Schuchat, principal deputy director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention; Dr. Robert Kadlec, assistant secretary of Health and Human Services for preparedness and response; and Dr. Stephen Hahn, commissioner of the Food and Drug Administration.  This morning ,the four officials submitted a 25-page joint statement describing the government’s efforts to contain the spread of the virus that has infected 1.3 million Americans and killed more than 80,000, according to tracking by Johns Hopkins University. The government has also partnered with private companies to develop therapies and vaccines to combat the virus, although none is yet approved by the FDA.  “All of our efforts now are to prevent the sustained spread of this virus in our communities, but we need to be prepared for the possibility that it will spread,” the statement said.  - Bart Jansen  Some committee members appearing via video conference  The chairman, GOP Sen. Lamar Alexander, gaveled the hearing to order from his home in Tennessee because he is self-isolating after a staffer tested positive Sunday for the virus. Alexander thanked the Rules Committee, Senate Sergeant at Arms Office and other officials for organizing the unusual setup, which occurred under a one-time exception to Senate rules. Alexander said senators and staffers in the hearing room in Washington would be separated by at least 6 feet. Some senators and witnesses are attending by video conference.  Alexander noted that the number of reporters in the room were limited.  Mask-wearing senators, spaced at wide intervals around the room, were told they can remove their masks when it’s their turn to speak as long as they’re six-feet apart.  - Bart Jansen and Maureen Groppe  Fauci warns of 'needless suffering' if US fumbles reopening procedures  Dr. Anthony Fauci, a top member of the White House coronavirus task force, plans to warn a panel of Senators on Tuesday about the danger of new COVID-19 outbreaks if states start to reopen their economies too quickly amid the pandemic.  In a hearing, which senators are forced to hold by videoconference rather than in person because of newly discovered cases within the White House, Fauci, director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, plans to stress "the danger of trying to open the country prematurely."  "If we skip over the checkpoints in the guidelines to 'Open America Again,' then we risk the danger of multiple outbreaks throughout the country. This will not only result in needless suffering and death, but would actually set us back on our quest to return to normal," Fauci said in an email to The New York Times that outlined what he planned to say at the hearing.  That grim warning contrasts with President Donald Trump's enthusiastic calls for states to reopen, despite the risks.  Trump tweeted Monday that "the great people of Pennsylvania want their freedom now, and they are fully aware of what that entails. The Democrats are moving slowly, all over the USA, for political purposes."  A member of the committee, Sen. Rand Paul, R-Ky., tweeted Monday that it’s “time to safely reopen and start rebuilding the economy!"  The Health, Education, Labor and Pensions Committee hearing titled, "safely getting back to work and back to school," could be contentious, as Republicans have tended to back Trump's call to reopen the economy faster while Democrats have argued for more testing and contact tracing first.  Two of the four government witnesses have changed from what the committee announced in scheduling the hearing. Robert Redfield, director of the Centers of Disease Control and Prevention, and Brett Giroir, assistant secretary of Health and Human Services for health, has been scheduled to join Fauci and Stephen Hahn, commissioner of the Food and Drug Administration. But they were replaced Tuesday by Anne Schuchat, principal deputy director for CDC, and Robert Kadlec, assistant secretary of Health and Human Services for preparedness and response.  In a joint statement, Schuchat, Fauci, Kadlec and Hahn said the government has taken unprecedented steps to prevent the spread of the virus and to protect Americans. The 25-page statement gave updates on the development of treatments and vaccines against the virus, although none have been approved yet by the FDA.  The hearing comes after the White House announced last week that a valet to Trump and an aide to Vice President Mike Pence both tested positive for the virus.  Three top health officials who serve on Pence’s task force – Fauci, Redfield and Hahn – are each isolating themselves after coming into contact with someone who tested positive.  And the committee chairman, Republican Sen. Lamar Alexander, announced Sunday he wouldn’t return to Washington from Tennessee for the hearing as he isolates himself for two weeks because one of his staffers tested positive.  The hearing will explore the balance that state and federal officials must strike between the health of citizens and the economy.  Dr. William Schaffner, a professor of preventive medicine in the Department of Health Policy at Vanderbilt University who won’t be testifying at the hearing, said the keys to reopening society are to adapt to new behaviors to prevent the spread of disease, such as wearing masks, keeping six feet apart and washing hands regularly. Testing and tracing the contacts of infected people are also important to corral the virus, he said.  "The virus knows no bounds. The Secret Service couldn’t keep the virus out of the White House," Schaffner said. "There are going to be some illnesses. The trick is to keep that at the lowest possible levels."  Pamela Aaltonen, a former president of the American Public Health Association and professor emerita at Purdue University who isn't testifying at the hearing, said the country would be well-served by a comprehensive, science-based set of national standards that could be modified for different areas of the country. For example, the rules could be different between grade schools and colleges.  "The race to reopen has resulted in much of this work not being done or if done, not communicated," she said. "Of course, challenging because still learning about this virus and how to inactivate it."  The decisions will be based on hospitalization rates, death rates, infection rates – and where there are shortages of emergency supplies. The reasons for reopening and the risks must all be explained or the decisions might not be sustainable, Aaltonen said.  "Plans that vary wildly among states, regions, cities may suggest to the public that there is no strong rationale for actions," she said.  But the top Democrat on the committee, Sen. Patty Murray of Washington, joined 40 Senate Democrats in a letter urging Trump to develop a national strategy by May 24 for reliably and consistently testing patients nationwide.  Alexander said testing has been “very impressive,” with more than 8 million completed in the U.S., which is more than any other country and more for its population than most countries. But he said faster testing will be needed for schools to reopen in the fall.  “Well, what we have done is very impressive,” Alexander told NBC’s “Meet the Press” on Sunday. “It's enough to do what we need to do today to reopen but it's not enough, for example, when 35,000 kids and faculty show up on the University of Tennessee campus in August.”  The hearing of federal officials will provide guidance to state-level officials who will determine how and when to reopen. For example, the CDC has recommended limiting gatherings 10 people, to curb the spread of disease. But state governors began issuing orders in mid-March to close businesses, and now governors are beginning to ease those restrictions.  Pence visited Iowa Friday, after Gov. Kim Reynolds allowed the resumption of dental services last week, while keeping restrictions on other businesses. She plans to announce Tuesday more changes scheduled for Friday.  But Reynolds had visited the White House on Wednesday and has been under a modified isolation like Fauci as a precaution. She is getting tested daily, has her temperature taken repeatedly and wears a mask when interacting with staffers.  Reynolds told reporters Monday that even as restrictions are lifted, the most vulnerable people who are at least 65 years old or who have chronic conditions such as diabetes or high blood pressure will need to continue staying home and minimizing travel when possible.  “We could never guarantee that Iowans wouldn’t get it,” Reynolds said. “I believe that we can and will be able to contain and manage the virus, and balance the health of Iowans with the health of our economy.”  Lawmakers are expected to challenge the witnesses about how and when it will be safe for states to reopen, after Trump disputed earlier claims by Fauci and Redfield.  Fauci told the House Oversight and Reform Committee hearing March 12 that the lack of testing has been a failing.  “It’s a failing. Let’s admit it,” Fauci said. “The idea of anybody getting it easily the way people in other countries are doing it is – we are not set up for that. Do I think we should be? Yes, but we are not.”  At a Rose Garden news conference the next day, Trump denied he was responsible for the lag in testing.  “I don’t take responsibility at all because we were given a set of circumstances and we were given rules, regulations and specifications from a different time,” Trump said. “It wasn’t meant for this kind of an event with the kind of numbers that we’re talking about.”  Former Vice President Joe Biden’s presidential campaign tweeted out Trump’s reply two days later, saying Trump should have taken responsibility.  Trump has also argued that Redfield was misquoted last month in an interview with the Washington Post that was then covered by CNN.  “There’s a possibility that the assault of the virus on our nation next winter will actually be even more difficult than the one we just went through,” Redfield told the Post. “We’re going to have the flu epidemic and the coronavirus epidemic at the same time."  Redfield acknowledged at a White House news conference that the story quoted him accurately.
2020-05-12	Stan Choe, Damian J. Troise and Alex Veiga  The Associated Press  Worries about the downside of reopening the economy too soon are weighing on markets, and Wall Street fell Tuesday to its biggest loss since the start of the month.  The S&P 500 dropped 2.1% after spending much of the day drifting between small gains and losses, as investors debate whether the lifting of lockdowns across U.S. states and the world will drive an economic rebound or just more coronavirus infections.  The concerns were summed up in straightforward testimony from the top U.S. infectious diseases expert. Dr. Anthony Fauci told Congress that if the country reopens too soon, it could not only cause “some suffering and death that could be avoided, but could even set you back on the road to try to get economic recovery.”  The S&P 500 fell 60.20 points to 2,870.12, with the losses accelerating sharply in the last hour of trading. Stocks of companies whose profits are most closely tied to the strength of the economy had some of the market’s sharpest drops. Treasury yields also fell in a sign of increased caution.  The Dow Jones Industrial Average fell 457.21 points, or 1.9%, to 23,764.78, and the Nasdaq composite lost 189.79, or 2.1%, to 9,002.55.  Stimulus checks:IRS issues deadline for direct deposit info  "Printing" money during pandemic:How far can US go amid coronavirus?  Governments around the world and in many U.S. states have already begun gradually lifting restrictions on businesses, which were meant to slow the spread of the coronavirus outbreak but have also caused a severe recession. Expectations that growth will resume following the reopenings have helped drive the S&P 500 up 28% since late March.  But South Korea and other countries further ahead in removing restrictions have also seen small but notable increases in infections recently. That’s raising worries about possible second waves of infections.  “What we’re dealing with, both today and the last couple of weeks, is the optimism behind the reopening and asking: Are we going to be reopening too soon?” said Bill Northey, senior investment director at U.S. Bank Wealth Management.  ”We’re in an unknowable scenario at this point in time,” he said.  The market will essentially be in wait-and-see mode for the next two to four weeks as investors gauge how the reopenings underway in several states are going, said Sal Bruno, chief investment officer at IndexIQ.  “It all stems from the number of new cases and the number of reported cases,” he said. “If we slow that to a trickle, that’s going to be hugely positive for the market because it will give people more confidence that the unemployment rate will go down quicker.”  After dropping by roughly a third from February into late March on worries about the coming recession, the S&P 500 began recovering after the Federal Reserve and Capitol Hill flooded the economy with trillions of dollars in aid. The latest implementation of that came Tuesday, when the New York Fed began buying funds to support the corporate bond market.  With all that unprecedented support in place, markets are now focusing much more on when the economy can resume growing and less on reports coming in daily that show how badly the economy has been hurt by the pandemic. Inflation in the United States was just 0.3% last month from a year earlier, for example, but the report caused barely a ripple in markets.  Treasurys were some of the first investments to signal the economic devastation coming from the pandemic. The yield on the 10-year Treasury fell to 0.66% from 0.72% late Monday. It tends to fall when investors are downgrading their expectations for the economy and inflation.  Financial stocks and other companies whose profits are very dependent on the strength of the economy had some of the sharpest losses. Smaller stocks also fell more than the rest of the market, as they usually do when worries are on the rise. The Russell 2000 index of small-cap stocks lost 45.70, or 2.5%, to 1,275.54.  Many companies are opting to give no financial forecasts as they release their latest quarterly earnings reports, due to the overwhelming uncertainty over what lies ahead. That was true of Toyota, whose shares fell 2% Tuesday as it reported its net profit dropped nearly 90% in the January-March quarter from a year earlier.  In the United States, Simon Property Group likewise said it’s currently impossible to predict future results amid the pandemic, and it withdrew its financial forecast for 2020. But it also said it plans to have about half of its U.S. shopping malls reopened within the next week, and its stock wavered before falling 1%.  Uber rose 2.4% after analysts said news reports of a possible takeover attempt of food delivery company Grubhub, which saw its shares jump 29.1%.  A barrel of U.S. oil to be delivered in June rose 6.8% to $25.78 per barrel. Brent crude, the international standard, added 0.9% to $29.91.  In Europe, Germany’s DAX was down 0.1%, while France’s CAC 40 was down 0.4%. The FTSE 100 in London was up 0.9%. In Asia, Japan’s Nikkei 225 slipped 0.1%, Hong Kong’s Hang Seng fell 1.4% and South Korea’s Kospi lost 0.7%.  AP Business Writer Elaine Kurtenbach contributed.
2020-05-12	AP  AUSTRALIAN RULES  Round 1 from March 19-22, no spectators. Competition from March 22 suspended.  SAILING  Clipper Round the World Race in Subic Bay, Philippines; from March 16 suspended.  World 470 championships in Palma, Spain from March 13-21 postponed.  Asian championships in Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates from March 15-22 postponed.  Asian Nacra 17 Championship in Shanghai from March 1-6 moved to Genoa, Italy, from April 12-19. On March 12 canceled.  Asian 49erFX Championship in Hainan, China from March 20-29 moved to Genoa, Italy, from April 12-19. On March 12 canceled.  Trofeo Princesa Sofía Iberostar 470s in Mallorca, Spain from March 25-April 4 canceled.  World Cup Series in Genoa, Italy from April 11-19 canceled.  Semaine Olympique Francaise de Voile in Hyères, France from April 18-25 postponed.  Americas Cup World Series in Cagliari, Italy from April 23-26 canceled.  SailGP in San Francisco from May 2-3 canceled.  European windsurfing championships in Athens, Greece from May 10-16 postponed.  European 49er, 49erFX and Nacra 17 championships in Malcesine, Italy from May 11-17 postponed.  Medemblik Regatta in the Netherlands from June 4-7 canceled.  SailGP in New York from June 12-13 canceled.  Kieler Woche in Kiel, Germany from June 20-28 postponed to Sept. 5-13.  World Cup Series Final in Enoshima, Japan from June 14-21 canceled.  Tour Voile in France from July 3-9 canceled.  SailGP in Cowes, England from Aug. 14-15 canceled.  SailGP in Copenhagen, Denmark from Sept. 11-12 canceled.  SHOOTING  World Cup in New Delhi from March 15-26 postponed to May 5-12 and June 2-9.  Olympic test event in Tokyo from April 16-26 canceled.  European shotgun championships in Chateauroux, France from May 6-20 postponed.  Pan American championships in Lima, Peru from May 8-17 postponed.  European rifle/pistol qualification championships in Plzen, Czech Republic from May 18-25 canceled.  World Cup rifle/pistol in Munich from June 2-9 canceled.  World running target championships in Chateaurox, France from June 9-19 postponed.  SKATEBOARDING  Asian street championship in Singapore from March 17-21 canceled.  Street Pro Tour in Las Vegas from March 24-29 canceled.  Lima Open in Peru from March 16-22 postponed to April 5-11. From March 20 suspended.  Olympic qualifier in Yangcheng, China from April 6-12 postponed to April 13-19. From Feb. 14 suspended.  Olympic qualifier in Nanjing, China from April 14-19 suspended.  Ark League in Samukawa, Japan from April 22-26 suspended.  Street Pro Tour in Beijing from April 28-May 3 canceled.  Dew Tour in Long Beach, California from May 7-10 postponed.  World street championships in London from May 19-24 suspended.  World park championships in Nanjing, China from May 26-31 suspended.  SKATING  World short track speed skating championships in Seoul from March 13-15 postponed. From April 16 canceled.  World figure skating championships in Montreal from March 16-22 canceled.  World synchronized skating championships in Lake Placid, New York from April 3-4 canceled.  SKIING  Alpine World Cup Finals in Cortina d’Ampezzo, Italy from March 18-22 canceled.  Alpine World Cup in Yanqing, China from Feb. 15-16 canceled.  Nordic World Cup in Oslo, Norway from March 6-8, no spectators.  Engadin Skimarathon in Switzerland on March 8 canceled.  Snowboard World Cup in Livigno, Italy on March 10 canceled.  Ski Jumping World Cup in Trondheim, Norway on March 11-12, no spectators.  Alpine World Cup in Are, Sweden on March 12-14, canceled.  Ski Jumping World Cup in Nizhny Tagil, Russia on March 13-15, no spectators.  Ski Jumping World Cup in Vikersund, Norway on March 13-15, no spectators.  Ski Cross World Cup in Veysonnaz, Switzerland on March 14 canceled.  Snowboard World Cup in Winterberg, Germany on March 14-15 canceled.  Alpine World Cup in Kranjska Gora, Slovenia from March 14-15, canceled.  Alpine Europa Cup Finals in Saalbach and Reiteralm, Austria from March 16-22 canceled.  World ski flying championships in Planica, Slovenia from March 17-22 postponed to Dec. 11-13.  Ski jumping World Cup in Chaikovsky, Russia on March 18-20, no spectators.  Slopestyle World Cup in Silvaplana, Switzerland on March 21-22 canceled.  Junior ski cross and snowboard cross world championships in Saint-Lary, France from March 19-25 canceled.  Snowboard World Cup in Špindlerův Mlýn, Czech Republic on March 20-21 canceled.  SNOOKER  WPBSA Tour Championship in Llandudno, Wales from March 17-22 postponed to July 21-26.  China Open in Beijing from March 30-April 5 postponed.  Men’s world championship in Sheffield, England from April 18-May 4 postponed to July 31-Aug. 16.  Women’s world championship in Bangkok from June 22-27 postponed.  SOCCER  European Championship in 12 countries from June 12-July 12 postponed to June 11-July 11, 2021.  Copa America in Argentina and Colombia from June 12-July 12 postponed to June 11-July 11, 2021.  European Champions League: Valencia vs. Atalanta on March 10; Paris Saint-Germain vs. Borussia Dortmund on March 11, no spectators. Competition from March 13 suspended. Final in Istanbul on May 30 postponed.  Copa Libertadores from March 15 suspended.  Asian Champions League: Matches involving Chinese clubs Guangzhou Evergrande, Shanghai Shenhua and Shanghai SIPG postponed to April-May. Beijing FC allowed to play from Feb. 18. Matches involving South Korean clubs Jeonbuk Hyundai Motors, Suwon Samsung Bluewings and FC Seoul to be played with no spectators from March 3. Matches involving Iranian clubs Esteghlal, Persepolis, Shahr Khodro, Sepahan on March 2-3 postponed. All West Zone group matches from March 2 postponed. East Zone matches postponed to May 19-20 (Match Day 3), May 26-27, (Match Day 4), June 16-17 (Match Day 5), and June 23-24 (Match Day 6). Round of 16 postponed to Aug. 11-12 and 25-26, quarterfinals to Sept. 15-16 and 29-30, and the semifinals to Oct. 20-21 and 27-28.  Europa League: Inter Milan vs. Getafe on March 12; Sevilla vs. Roma on March 12, postponed. Inter Milan vs. Ludogorets on Feb. 27; Olympiakos vs. Wolverhampton on March 12; LASK vs. Manchester United on March 12; Wolfsburg vs. Shakhtar Donetsk on March 12; Eintracht Frankfurt vs. Basel on March 12, no spectators. Competition from March 13 suspended. Final in Gdansk, Poland on May 27 postponed.  CONCACAF Champions League from March 13 suspended.  CAF Champions League semifinals from May 1 postponed.  South America World Cup qualifying from March 23 postponed.  Asia World Cup qualifying: China vs. Maldives on March 26 and vs. Guam on March 31 moved to Buriram, Thailand, no spectators. Competition from March 23 postponed.  African Nations Championship in Cameroon from April 4-25 postponed.  European Championship qualifying playoffs from March 26-31 postponed to June 4-9. From April 1 postponed.  Africa Cup of Nations qualifying from March 25 postponed.  Gold Cup qualifying from March 13 suspended.  Women’s European Championship: Qualifying: Montenegro vs. Ireland in Budva on March 11, no spectators. Competition from March 13 suspended. Championship in England from July 7-Aug. 1, 2021 postponed to July 6-31, 2022.  Algarve Cup final in Portugal on March 11: Italy vs. Germany canceled.  CONCACAF Nations League semifinals in Houston and final in Arlington, Texas from June 4-7 postponed.  CONCACAF men’s Olympic qualifying in Mexico from March 13 suspended.  Asian women’s Olympic qualifying Group B tournament relocated from Wuhan to Sydney from Feb. 3-13. China vs. South Korea playoffs on March 6 and 11 postponed to April 9 and 14, and postponed to June 1-10; China home game in Sydney. Vietnam vs. Australia in Cẩm Phả on March 11, no spectators. From April 3 suspended.  English Premier League: Manchester City vs. Arsenal on March 11. Competition from March 13 suspended.  FA Cup quarterfinals on March 21-22 postponed.  La Liga from March 10, no spectators. Competition from March 12 suspended.  Copa del Rey final: Real Sociedad vs. Athletic Bilbao in Seville on April 18 postponed.  Serie A, B, C, D and Women’s Serie A matches in Lombardy and Veneto regions postponed from Feb. 22. Serie A: 6 matches on Feb. 29-March 2 postponed. All matches from March 4, no spectators. Competition from March 9 suspended.  Italian Cup semifinals: Juventus vs. AC Milan on March 4, Napoli vs. Inter Milan on March 5, postponed. Final moved from May 13 to May 20.  Bundesliga from March 11, no spectators. From March 13, suspended.  German Cup semifinals on April 21-22 postponed.  French Ligue 1: Strasbourg vs. Paris Saint-Germain on March 7 postponed. Competition from March 13 suspended. From April 28 canceled.  French Cup final: Paris Saint-Germain vs. Saint Etienne in Paris on April 25 postponed.  French League Cup final: Paris Saint-Germain vs. Lyon in Paris on April 4 postponed.  Chinese Super League, due to start on Feb. 22, delayed.  Iran Pro League from Feb. 24, no spectators. From March 4 suspended.  J.League in Japan from Feb. 25 postponed.  K League in South Korea, due to start on Feb. 29, delayed. On May 8 started, no spectators.  Swiss Super League from Feb. 28 postponed.  V.League in Vietnam from March 7, no spectators. From March 16 suspended.  First League in Bulgaria from March 8, no spectators. From March 13 suspended.  Liga I in Romanial from March 9, no spectators. From March 12 suspended.  Primeira Liga in Portugal from March 10, no spectators. From March 12 suspended.  Ekstraklasa in Poland from March 10, no spectators. From March 13 suspended.  Austrian Bundesliga from March 10 postponed.  Premier League in Egypt from March 10, no spectators. From March 16 suspended.  Superliga in Denmark from March 11 suspended.  Eredivisie in the Netherlands from March 12 suspended. From April 24 canceled.  Pro League in Belgium from March 12, no spectators. From March 20 suspended.  Belgian Cup final: Club Brugge vs. Antwerp in Brussels on March 22 postponed.  Premier Division in Ireland from March 12 suspended.  Major League Soccer in the United States from March 12 suspended.  Premiership in Scotland from March 13 suspended.  Copa Superliga in Argentina from March 13, no spectators. River Plate vs. Atletico Tucuman on March 14 abandoned. Competition from March 17 suspended. From April 28 canceled.  Liga MX in Mexico from March 14, no spectators. From March 15 suspended.  A League in Australia from March 16, no spectators. From March 24 suspended.  Premier Division in South Africa from March 16 suspended.  Premier League in Bangladesh from March 16 suspended.  Super Lig in Turkey from March 19 suspended.  Allsvenkan in Sweden due to start on April 3 delayed.  Higher League in Tajikistan from April 4, no spectators. From April 27 suspended.  Campeonato Brasileiro Série A in Brazil due to start on May 3 suspended.  European Women’s Champions League from March 13 suspended. Final in Vienna on May 24 postponed.  National Women’s Soccer League in United States, due to start on April 18, delayed.  Women’s Super League in England from March 13 postponed.  AFC Cup from March 18 suspended.  Caribbean club championship from April 3 suspended.  Asian men’s futsal championship in Ashgabat, Turkmenistan, from Feb. 26-March 8 postponed to Aug. 5-16.  CONCACAF futsal championship in Guatemala from May 1-10 postponed.  Futsal World Cup in Lithuania from Sept. 12-Oct. 4 postponed to Sept. 12-Oct. 3, 2021.  Qatar Airways International in Doha with Belgium, Croatia, Portugal, Switzerland from March 26-30 canceled.  SOFTBALL  Men’s World Cup in Auckland, New Zealand from Feb. 20-28, 2021 postponed.  SUMO  Spring Basho in Osaka from March 8-22, no spectators.  Summer Basho in Tokyo from May 10-24 postponed to May 24-June 7, canceled.  Nagoya Basho from July 5-19 moved to Tokyo from July 19-Aug. 2.  SURFING  World Surfing Games in El Salvador from May 9-17 postponed to June 6–14. From March 30 postponed.  TABLE TENNIS  World team championships in Busan, South Korea from March 22-29 postponed to June 21-28 postponed to Sept. 27-Oct. 4.  Asian Cup in Hainan, China from Feb. 28-March 1 postponed.  Polish Open in Gliwice from March 11-15, from March 13, Day 3 of 5, suspended.  Italian Open in Riccione from April 1-5 postponed.  Caribbean championships in Havana from April 3-8 suspended.  Asian Olympic qualifying tournament in Bangkok from April 6-12 postponed to 2021.  European Olympic qualifying tournament in Moscow from April 8-12 postponed to 2021.  Latin American Olympic qualifying tournament in Rosario, Argentina from April 15-19 postponed to 2021.  Oceania Olympic qualifying tournament in Brisbane, Australia from April 19-20 postponed to 2021.  Japan Open in Kitakyushu on April 21-26 postponed.  Slovenia Open in Otocec from April 22-26 postponed.  Hong Kong Open from May 5-10 postponed.  South American championships in Cucuta, Colombia from May 6-10 suspended.  Central American championships in San Jose, Costa Rica from May 12-16 suspended.  China Open in Shenzhen from May 12-17 postponed.  South Korea Open in Busan on June 16-21 suspended.  Australian Open in Geelong on June 23-28 suspended.  TAEKWONDO  Asian Championships in Beirut from March 4-6 postponed to May 13-15.  Asian Olympic qualifying tournament in Wuxi, China from April 10-11 moved to Amman, Jordan from June 5-7 postponed.  Pan American Grand Slam in Oregon, Washington from April 11-13 canceled.  European Olympic qualifying tournament in Milan from April 17-19 moved to Moscow from April 16-18. From March 12 postponed.  European Championships in Zagreb, Croatia from May 7-10 postponed.  Greece Open in Chalkida from May 15-17 postponed.  Presidents Cup in Spokane, Washington from May 21-24 canceled.  African Championships in Tunis, Tunisia from May 29-31 canceled.  Austrian Open in Innsbruck from May 30-31 postponed.  Carthage Open in Tunis, Tunisia from June 2-3 canceled.  Presidents Cup in Pape’ete, Tahiti on June 5 postponed.  Tahiti Open in Pape’ete from June 5-7 postponed.  Lux Open in Luxembourg from June 13-14 canceled.  European Small Countries Championships in San Marino from June 27-28 canceled.  World Championships in Wuxi, China in May 2021 postponed.  TENNIS  French Open in Paris from May 24-June 7 postponed to Sept. 20-Oct. 4.  Wimbledon in London from June 29-July 12 canceled.  ATP-WTA: BNP Paribas Open in Indian Wells, California from March 11-22 suspended.  ATP-WTA: Miami Open from March 24-April 5 suspended.  WTA: Zapopan Open in Guadalajara, Mexico from March 16-21 suspended.  ATP: US Men’s Clay Court Championships in Houston, Texas from April 6-12 suspended.  ATP: Grand Prix Hassan II in Marrakech, Morocco from April 6-12 suspended.  WTA: Charleston Open in South Carolina from April 6-12 suspended.  WTA: Copa Colsanitas in Bogota, Colombia from April 6-12 suspended.  ATP: Monte Carlo Masters from April 12-19 suspended.  ATP: Hungarian Open in Budapest from April 20-26 suspended.  WTA: Xi’an Open in China from April 13-19 suspended.  ATP: Barcelona Open from April 20-26 suspended.  ATP: Hungarian Open in Budapest from April 20-26 suspended.  WTA: Porsche Grand Prix in Stuttgart, Germany from April 20-26 suspended.  WTA: Istanbul Open from April 20-26 suspended.  WTA: Prague Open from April 27-May 2 suspended.  WTA: Kunming Open in Anning, China from April 27-May 3 suspended.  ATP: BMW Open in Munich from April 27-May 3 suspended.  ATP: Estoril Open in Portugal from April 27-May 3 suspended.  ATP-WTA: Madrid Open from May-2-10 suspended.  ATP-WTA: Italian Open in Rome from May 10-17 suspended.  WTA: Strasbourg International in France from May 17-23 suspended.  ATP: Geneva Open in Switzerland from May 17-23 suspended.  ATP: Lyon Open in France from May 17-23 suspended.  WTA: Grand Prix De SAR La Princesse Lalla Meryem in Rabat, Morocco from May 17-23 suspended.  WTA: Croatia Open in Bol from June 1-6 suspended.  ATP-WTA: Libema Open in ’s-Hertogenbosch, Netherlands from June 8-14 suspended.  ATP: MercedesCup in Stuttgart, Germany from June 8-14 suspended.  WTA: Nottingham Open in England from June 8-14 suspended.  ATP: Queen’s Club in London from June 15-21 suspended.  ATP: Halle Open in Germany from June 15-21 suspended.  WTA: Birmingham Classic in England from June 15-21 suspended.  WTA: Berlin Open from June 15-21 suspended.  ATP: Mallorca Championships in Spain from June 21-27 suspended.  ATP-WTA: Eastbourne International in England from June 21-27 suspended.  WTA: Bad Homburg Open in Germany from June 21-27 suspended.  WTA: Rogers Cup in Montreal from Aug. 10-16 canceled.  ITF events from March 12 suspended.  Davis Cup: China forfeited World Group I playoff vs. Romania in Piatra Neamt on March 6-7.  Davis Cup: Japan vs. Ecuador qualifier in Miki on March 6-7, no spectators.  Davis Cup: Italy vs. South Korea in Cagliari on March 6-7, no spectators.  Fed Cup Finals in Budapest, Hungary from April 14-19 (with France, Australia, United States, Czech Republic, Russia, Belarus, Spain, Germany, Hungary, Belgium, Slovakia, Switzerland) postponed.  Fed Cup playoffs on April 17-18 (Poland vs. Brazil, Mexico vs. Britain, Serbia vs. Canada, Latvia vs. India, Japan vs. Ukraine, Romania vs. Italy, Argentina vs. Kazakhstan, Netherlands vs. China), postponed:  Fed Cup Asia-Oceania Group I tournament moved from Dongguan, China to Dubai, United Arab Emirates from March 3-7.  Laver Cup exhibition in Boston from Sept. 25-27 canceled.  TRIATHLON  World Series in Abu Dhabi on March 7 postponed.  Asian Cup in Tainan, Taiwan on March 8 postponed.  World Cup in Sarasota-Bradenton, Florida on March 22 canceled.  World Cup in New Plymouth, New Zealand on March 28-29 canceled.  World Cup in Brasilia, Brazil on April 3-5 postponed.  Asian Cup in Beihai, China on April 5 postponed.  Asian Cup in Dexing, China on April 11 postponed.  World Series in Bermuda on April 18-19 postponed.  World Cup in Huatulco, Mexico on April 25-26 postponed.  Oceania Cup in Runaway Bay, Australia on May 1-3 postponed.  World Cup in Valencia, Spain on May 2 postponed.  African Cup in Yasmine Hammamet, Tunisia on May 2 postponed.  Asian Cup in Subic Bay, Philippines from May 2-3 postponed to Nov. 7-8.  Olympic mixed relay qualifier moved from Chengdu, China on May 9 to Valencia, Spain on May 1, postponed.  World Cup in Chengdu, China on May 10 postponed.  Pan American Cup in Ixtapa, Mexico on May 15-16 postponed to Nov. 28.  World Series in Yokohama, Japan on May 16 postponed.  Pan American middle distance championships in Formosa, Argentina on May 23 postponed to Aug. 16.  Asian Cup in Osaka, Japan on May 23 postponed.  World Cup in Arzachena, Italy on May 30 postponed.  European Cup in Olsztyn, Poland on May 30 postponed.  Asian Cup in Sokcho, South Korea on June 6 postponed.  World Series in Leeds, England on June 7 postponed.  Asian Cup in Lianyungang, China on June 13 postponed.  European Cup and Mediterranean Championships in Coimbra, Portugal on June 13 postponed.  African Cup in Lake Kivu, Rwanda on June 13 postponed.  Pan American championships in Santo Domingo, Dominican Republic on June 20 postponed.  European Cup in Holten, Netherlands on June 20 postponed.  European cross championships in Târgu Mures, Romania on June 20 postponed.  Asian Cup in Gamagori, Japan on June 21 postponed.  European cross duathlon championships in Târgu Mures, Romania on June 23 postponed.  African Cup in Larache, Morocco on June 27 postponed.  World Series in Montreal on June 28 postponed.  European middle distance championships in Walchsee, Austria on June 28 postponed.  European championships in Tartu, Estonia from July 3-5 postponed.  Asian Cup in Cholpon-Ata, Kyrgyzstan on July 5 canceled.  Asian Cup in Hualien, Taiwan on July 7 canceled.  Asian Cup in Jiayuguan, China on July 11 canceled.  World Series in Hamburg, Germany on July 11 postponed.  World mixed relay championships in Hamburg, Germany on July 12 postponed.  Oceania long distance championships in Lalomanu, Samoa on Aug. 1 canceled.  World Series Grand Final in Edmonton from Aug. 17-23 canceled.  European Cup in Szentendre, Hungary on Sept. 13 canceled.  VOLLEYBALL  Olympic test event in Tokyo from April 21-26 canceled.  Men’s Challenger Cup in Gondomar, Portugal from June 24-28 postponed.  Women’s Challenger Cup in Zadar, Croatia from June 24-28 postponed.  Nations League due to start on May 22 canceled.  Beach Volleyball  World Tour 3(asterisk) in Bandar Abbas, Iran from March 2-7 postponed.  World Tour 3(asterisk) in Gold Coast, Australia from March 17-22 postponed.  World Tour 4(asterisk) in Cancun, Mexico from March 24-29 postponed.  World Tour 1(asterisk) in Boracay, Philippines from March 26-29 canceled.  World Tour 1(asterisk) in Satun, Thailand from April 8-11 postponed.  World Tour 4(asterisk) in Singapore from April 15-19 canceled.  World Tour 4(asterisk) in Yangzhou, China from April 22-26 postponed.  World Tour 4(asterisk) in Siming, China from April 29-May 3 canceled.  World Tour 1(asterisk) in Tuan Chau Island, Vietnam from May 6-9 postponed.  World Tour 4(asterisk) in Itapema, Brazil from May 6-10 postponed.  World Tour 3(asterisk) in Jurmala, Latvia from May 6-10 postponed.  World Tour 3(asterisk) in Jinjiang, China from May 13-17 canceled.  World Tour 4(asterisk) in Ostrava, Czech Republic from May 20-24 postponed.  World Tour 4(asterisk) in Warsaw from May 27-31 canceled.  World Tour 4(asterisk) in Moscow from June 3-7 canceled.  World Tour 5(asterisk) in Rome from June 9-14 canceled.  World Tour 1(asterisk) in Miguel Pereira, Brazil from June 11-14 postponed.  World Tour 1(asterisk) in Raja Ampat, Indonesia from June 11-14 postponed.  World Tour 1(asterisk) in Ios, Greece from June 12-14 postponed.  World Tour 1(asterisk) in Ventiane, Laos from June 18-21 canceled.  World Tour 5(asterisk) in Gstaad, Switzerland from July 7-12 canceled.  World Tour 4(asterisk) in Espinho, Portugal from July 15-19 canceled.  World Tour 5(asterisk) in Vienna from Aug. 12-16 canceled.  World Tour 5(asterisk) in Hamburg, Germany from Aug. 19-23 canceled.  World championships in Rome in 2021 postponed to June 2022.  WEIGHTLIFTING  East Asian championships in Seoul from Feb. 26-March 3 postponed.  World junior championships in Bucharest, Romania from March 14-24 canceled.  South American championships in Cali, Colombia from March 19-22 postponed.  African championships in Vacoas, Mauritius from April 13-20 postponed to June 15-23. From April 1 postponed.  European championships in Moscow from April 13-21 postponed to June 13-21 postponed to Oct. 31-Nov. 8.  Pan American championships in Santo Domingo, Dominican Republic from April 14-24 postponed.  Asian championships in Nur-Sultan, Kazakhstan moved to Tashkent, Uzbekistan from April 16-25, postponed.  Oceania and Commonwealth championships in Nauru from April 21-25 postponed.  WRESTLING  Asian championships in New Delhi from Feb. 20-23: China, North Korea, Turkmenistan teams withdrew.  Pan American Olympic qualifier in Ottawa from March 13-15, no spectators.  African Oceania Olympic qualifier in El Jadida, Morocco from March 13-15 postponed.  European Olympic qualifier in Budapest, Hungary from March 19-22 postponed.  Asian Olympic qualifier from March 27-29 moved from Xi’an, China to Bishkek, Kyrgyzstan. Kyrgyzstan withdrew as host on Feb. 29, qualifier postponed.  United States Olympic trials in State College, Pennsylvania from April 4-5 postponed.  World Olympic qualifier in Sofia, Bulgaria from April 30-May 3 postponed.  Poland Open in Warsaw from June 3-7 postponed.  OTHERS  Tokyo Olympics from July 24-Aug. 9 postponed to July 23-Aug. 8, 2021.  Tokyo Paralympics from Aug. 25-Sept. 6 postponed to Aug. 24-Sept. 5, 2021.  Tokyo Olympics training of volunteers in Japan postponed from February to May, postponed to 2021.  Tokyo Olympics flame lighting dress rehearsal in Olympia, Greece on March 11; flame lighting on March 12, no spectators. Greek torch relay from March 13 canceled. Japan torch relay due to start March 26 canceled.  Court of Arbitration for Sport in-person hearings, from March 16 suspended.  X Games in Chongli, China from Feb. 21-23 postponed.  Singapore athlete of the year awards on Feb. 26 postponed.  International Boxing Association’s European Continental Forum in Assisi, Italy on Feb. 29 canceled.  International Boxing Association’s African Continental Forum in Casablanca, Morocco from March 13-15 postponed.  World Chess Federation’s presidential council meeting moved from China to United Arab Emirates on Feb. 28-29.  World University cross-country championships in Marrakech, Morocco on March 7 postponed.  NCAA in the United States, all sports from March 12 canceled.  International Weightlifting Federation Congress in Bucharest, Romania on March 13 canceled.  World Conference on Prevention of Injury and Illness in Sport in Monte Carlo from March 12-14 postponed to Feb. 11-13, 2021.  World Anti-Doping Agency Symposium in Lausanne, Switzerland on March 17-18 canceled.  FIFA Council meeting in Asuncion, Paraguay, on March 20 moved to Zurich in June-July.  Association of Southeast Asian Nations Para Games in the Philippines from March 20-28 postponed.  Hong Kong sports stars awards on March 24 postponed.  MCC world cricket committee meeting in Colombo, Sri Lanka on March 28-29 canceled.  XTERRA Asia-Pacific Championships (offroad triathlon, duathlon) in Taiwan from March 28-29 canceled.  Gulf Cooperation Council Games in Kuwait from April 3-14 postponed.  International Equestrian Federation Sports Forum in Lausanne, Switzerland on April 6-7 moved to online.  Asian Football Confederation Congress in Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia on April 16 postponed.  SportAccord summit in Beijing moved to Lausanne, Switzerland, on April 19-24 canceled.  World Sailing general meeting in London on May 2 canceled.  World Taekwondo Extraordinary Council meeting in Lausanne, Switzerland on May 12 moved to online.  International Ski Federation Congress in Pattaya, Thailand from May 17-23 postponed.  International Ice Hockey Federation Congress in Zurich from May 21-23 postponed.  International Gymnastics Federation executive committee in Swakopmund, Namibia from May 26-27 postponed.  International Gymnastics Federation council in Swakopmund, Namibia from May 28-29 postponed.  X Games in Shanghai from May 30-31 canceled.  FIFA Congress in Addis Ababa, Ethiopia on June 5 postponed to Sept. 18 online.  International Skating Union Congress in Phuket, Thailand from June 8-12 postponed to May 31-June 4, 2021.  International Bobsleigh and Skeleton Federation Congress on June 20 moved from Shanghai to Antwerp, Belgium.  World university triathlon championship in Kecskemét, Hungary from June 27-28 canceled.  X Games in Minneapolis, Minnesota from July 16-19 canceled.  International Volleyball Federation Congress in Phuket, Thailand from Oct. 15-17 postponed to Jan. 27-29.  Motorsport Games in Marseille, France from Oct. 23-25 postponed to Oct. 22-24, 2021.  International Hockey Federation Congress in New Delhi from Oct. 28-Nov. 1 postponed to May 2021.  Singapore bans spectators at National School Games from January-August.  University Athletic Association of the Philippines postponed all sports events.  Mediterranean Games in Oran, Algeria from June 25-July 5, 2021 postponed to June 25-July 5, 2022.  World Games in Birmingham, Alabama from July 15-25, 2021 postponed to July 7-17, 2022.  Francophonie Games in Kinshasa, Congo from July 23-Aug. 1, 2021 postponed to July 23-Aug. 8, 2022.  ___  More AP sports: https://apnews.com/apf-sports and https://twitter.com/AP_Sports
2020-05-12	As the nation's premiere infectious disease expert offers a chilling warning of the dangers of prematurely reopening the country, the first global epicenter, Wuhan, China, is drawing up plans to test its entire population for COVID-19.  The consequences for states and communities that don’t follow reopening guidelines “could be really serious,” Dr. Anthony Fauci told the Senate Health, Education, Labor and Pensions Committee on Tuesday. Fauci, director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, is among federal health officials testifying via video.  There are now more than 82,000 deaths and 1.3 million confirmed coronavirus cases in the U.S., according to the Johns Hopkins University data dashboard. Worldwide, the virus has killed more than 291,000 people. More than 4.2 million people have been infected.  Our live blog is being updated throughout the day. Refresh for the latest news, and get updates in your inbox with The Daily Briefing. Scroll down for more details.  Here are some of the most significant developments today:  During a hearing on the coronavirus Tuesday, Sen. Lamar Alexander, R-Tenn., asked about the prospects for treatments or a vaccine be ready in time for colleges planning to start classes in August. Fauci warned relying on that prospect was "a bridge too far."  Wuhan, China, is planning to test all of its 11 million residents for the coronavirus in a matter of 10 days, according to a report. A handful of new cases have been reported in what was once the world's hotspot.  The nation's largest county "with all certainty" will extend stay-at-home orders through August, according to Los Angeles County health director Barbara Ferrer. And that could skewer when and how major league sports return.  What we're talking about today: Men may be more vulnerable to the coronavirus than women. A new study could help explain why.  Some good news: Alexander Hamilton meets Disney+. The "Hamilton" movie will premiere on streaming, instead of a 2021 theatrical release. Bonus: Unlike other recent movie musicals this is a filmed version of the stage production – recorded in June 2016. Get more joyful distractions in your inbox.  Los Angeles County closed through August? Sports leagues could be further delayed  The largest county in the nation is expected to extend stay-at-home orders into August, jeopardizing the chances of multiple sports leagues resuming or beginning seasons in a uniform fashion.  Los Angeles County - home to the Lakers, Clippers, Rams, Chargers, Kings, Dodgers, Major League Baseball's All-Star Game, Sparks, Galaxy, Los Angeles FC, USC and UCLA - will "with all certainty" extend stay-at-home orders for the next three months, county health director Barbara Ferrer told a Board of Supervisors meeting Tuesday.  That would extend past the hoped-for early July start Major League Baseball has proposed to the MLB Players' Association, in addition to the July 14 All-Star Game at Dodger Stadium, which was likely to be postponed anyway.  California has been home to some of the earliest and strictest stay-at-home orders since the pandemic accelerated in March. Gov. Gavin Newsom on Friday eased the state into what he called "early Stage 2" reopening, most notably allowing for retail curbside pickup and delivery. Stage 3 - which includes sports facilities opening for games without fans - was expected to be a more rigorous leap, though Newsom allowed that there may be variance among individual counties.  -- Gabe Lacques  Disney parks in US likely to require masks when properties reopen  Facemasks are expected to be mandatory for workers and guests when Disney parks reopen in the U.S.  In a CNBC interview published on Twitter, Disney CEO Bob Chapek addressed the coronavirus safety precautions that will be required in the era of the pandemic.  “Along with social distancing, one of the things we’re likely going to require is masks for both the cast and the guest,” Chapek said.  In Shanghai Disneyland, which reopened Monday, Disney is limiting visitor numbers, requiring masks and checking for the virus’ telltale fever.  Though no reopening date is set for the American parks, the CEO added the phased reopening of Disney Springs, planned for May 20, is "a good sign." Disney Springs is a large shopping and dining complex located outside of Disney World in Orlando, Florida.  - Charles Trepany  Accidental poisonings from disinfectants continue to rise  For the second consecutive month, accidental poisonings from misuse of disinfectants, bleach and hand sanitizers rose in April compared to last year, according to the American Association of Poison Control Centers.  The AAPCC's National Poison Data System, which scrapes information from poison control centers across the nation, saw a spike of 122% in reported cases of accidental poisonings related to disinfectants, according to Forbes. That included a 77% jump for bleach and a 56% increase for hand sanitizer.  What is unclear is what effect, if any, President Donald Trump's comments during a White House briefing on the possibility of disinfectants helping cure coronavirus had on the reported cases.  California State University system to cancel in-person classes this fall  California State University system chancellor Timothy White announced Tuesday that in-person classes at its 23 campuses would be cancelled and replaced with online instruction for the fall semester.  The move impacts schools such as Fresno State, San Diego State and San Jose State.  White made the announcement during a meeting with board of trustees members.  "This virtual planning approach for the next academic year is necessary because of the evolving data surrounding the progression of COVID 19," White said during the meeting, according to KABC-TV in Los Angeles.  Counterfeit masks reaching frontline health workers in US  An Associated Press investigation has found that millions of medical masks, gloves, gowns and other supplies being used in hospitals across the country are counterfeit, putting lives at risk.  Before the pandemic, federal trade law enforcement agencies were focused on busting knockoffs such as luxury goods and computer software, mostly from China. As America fell sick, the mission shifted to medical supplies. To date, Operation Stolen Promise, spearheaded by Immigration and Customs Enforcement’s Homeland Security Investigations, has netted 11 arrests and 519 seizures. And yet counterfeit goods continue to pour in — not just masks, but also mislabeled medicines, and fake COVID-19 tests and cures, according to the agency.  "These are really bad times for people who are out there trying to do the right thing and be helpful, and they end up being exploited," said Steve Francis, HSI’s assistant director for global trade investigations.  - The Associated Press  What you need to know from the 3-hour Senate coronavirus hearing  Dr. Anthony Fauci of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health; Food and Drug Administration Commissioner Dr. Stephen Hahn; head of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention Dr. Robert Redfield; and Adm. Brett Giroir, the coronavirus “testing czar” at the Department of Health and Human Services, all testified during Tuesday's Senate hearing on the coronavirus response.  Sen. Rand Paul, R-Ky. clashed with Fauci over school reopenings and said child mortality rate from the virus was lower than in adults. "As much as I respect you, Dr. Fauci, I don’t think you’re the end all," Paul said. "I don’t think you’re the one person who gets to make the decision." Fauci responded that he had never made himself "to be the end all and only voice in this” but added that officials shouldn’t be “cavalier in thinking that children are completely immune to the deleterious effects” of the coronavirus.  Sen. Tim Kaine, D-Va., highlighted differences in how South Korea and the U.S. responded to the coronavirus, saying "We've got a long way to go." When Kaine asked about the death toll, Fauci said, "A death rate that high in any manner or form in my mind is unacceptable."  Sen. Chris Murphy, D-Conn., criticized the Trump administration for withholding detailed guidance from states about how to reopen their economies, saying the information that was provided was "criminally vague." In response, Redfield said the guidance would be released “soon.”  Murphy later called it "infuriating" that Trump had said the U.S. "prevailed" over the coronavirus.  Sen. Mitt Romney, R-Utah, criticized Giroir over U.S. testing, saying it was “nothing to celebrate” because the country “treaded water” during the early stages of the pandemic while other countries such as South Korea tested people aggressively to curb the outbreak.  When asked by Sen. Elizabeth Warren, D-Mass, whether the virus was contained, Fauci said the U.S. was headed "in the right direction" but that "we don’t have it completely under control."  Fauci said that while patients treated with Remdesivir recovered 31% faster, he emphasized that the result was "statistically significant, but really modest.  - Bart Jansen, Maureen Groppe and William Cummings  Democrats unveil $3 trillion coronavirus stimulus proposal  State and local governments would share nearly $1 trillion in federal aid to cover coronavirus-related costs and families would get another round of direct payments under a stimulus bill House Democrats unveiled Tuesday.  The more than $3 trillion Health and Economic Recovery Omnibus Emergency Solutions Act, or HEROES Act, also would expand unemployment assistance, boost food stamps and increase emergency grants to small businesses.  The bill is likely to get a cool reception in the GOP-controlled Senate where leaders have said they want to let the first $2.4 trillion of stimulus spending take full effect before moving on another measure that would pile on to the nation’s soaring debt.  "The families who are suffering know that hunger doesn’t take a pause," House Speaker Nancy Pelosi said. "The rent doesn’t take a pause. The bills don’t take a pause. The hardship of losing a job or tragically losing a loved one doesn’t take a pause."  The bill could be brought to the floor for a full vote as early as Friday.  - Ledyard King  52 children diagnosed with inflammatory syndrome in New York City  In New York City, 52 children have been diagnosed with a rare pediatric syndrome possibly linked to the coronavirus, Mayor Bill de Blasio said Tuesday. Another 10 cases are pending, he said, and one child has died.  Children elsewhere in the U.S. and in Europe also have been hospitalized with the condition, known as pediatric multi-system inflammatory syndrome.  “It’s sobering, it’s bluntly frightening,” de Blasio said, “and I want to say to parents out there, if you’re hearing this information about pediatric multi-system inflammatory syndrome and it sounds scary, it does sound scary.”  - Associated Press  Wuhan plans city-wide test for all 11 million residents  Over a 10-day period, the Chinese city of Wuhan plans to administer coronavirus tests to all residents, according to Reuters, which cited an internal document.  Each district was asked to submit by Tuesday a detailed plan for how it could conduct the comprehensive testing in their respective regions. According to BBC News, the document states that older residents and densely-populated regions should be prioritized for testing. The document refers to the testing plan as "The 10-day battle."  Wuhan, which became the first global epicenter to suffer a coronavirus outbreak, reported a cluster of new cases over the weekend. Wuhan lifted a strict lockdown on April 8. According to the Johns Hopkins University data dashboard, Hubei province, where Wuhan is located, has reported 68,134 cases as of Tuesday morning, with 4,512 deaths.  US donating up to 1,000 ventilators to South Africa  The U.S. government is donating up to 1,000 ventilators and accompanying equipment to South Africa to assist that country's battle against COVID-19. The U.S. Embassy tweeted that the gift is the first such global donation from the Trump administration – which has drawn criticism for failing to provide meaningful support to nations in need. The U.S.-built ventilators "reflect state-of-the-art and in-demand" technology and cost about $14 million, with the accompanying equipment and related items pushing the value over $20 million, the embassy said in a statement.  "These ventilators are another example of the American spirit of generosity as we battle this virus at home in the United States and together abroad with our partner countries,” Ambassador Lana Marks said.  More coronavirus news and information from USA TODAY  UK extends 80% furlough payments through October  The United Kingdom's program that pays furloughed workers 80% of their salaries up to about $3,100 per month has been extended through October, the government announced.  Chancellor Rishi Sunak said the plan, set to expire at the end of July, will continue with greater flexibility, allowing for firms to slowly bring staff back to work part time. Under the current setup, furloughed employees cannot work. "As we reopen the economy, we need to support people to get back to work," Sunak said.  WHO picks 'top' vaccine candidates, hopes to speed development  Work is being accelerated on seven or eight "top" vaccine candidates to combat the coronavirus, WHO Director-General Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus said. Tedros, speaking to the U.N. Economic and Social Council, said an effort was underway to compress the timeline of 12 to 18 months that was forecast two months ago – but he provided no new timeline.  Fauci, in testimony Tuesday during a coronavirus hearing before a Senate committee, echoed Tedros' comments but added that if trials are successful, "we hope to know in the late fall and early winter."  The top candidates were selected from more than 100 vaccine projects. The effort is being financed by $8 billion in funding pledged by leaders from 40 countries and organizations, although the U.S. is not among them. Tedros said more funding is needed to expedite development and “to make sure that this vaccine reaches everyone — there’s no one (to) be left behind.”  70% of US could become infected  Coronavirus has shut down the U.S. for two months, but the pandemic is just getting started, says Dr. Michael Osterholm, director of the Center for Infectious Disease Research and Policy at the University of Minnesota. Osterholm said only an effective vaccine can slow the virus before a large enough segment of the population becomes infected and develops some level of immunity. Even if a vaccine works, Osterholm said, it's unknown whether it would provide long-lasting protection.  "This damn virus is going to keep going until it infects everybody it possibly can," Osterholm said at a meeting with the USA TODAY Editorial Board. "It surely won’t slow down until it hits 60% to 70%" of the population."  – Ken Alltucker  US closing in on 10 million coronavirus tests, Trump claims  The U.S. is on track this week to pass 10 million coronavirus tests conducted, President Donald Trump said in announcing that states would receive $11 billion in additional funding for testing. Trump also said daily tests nationwide would increase “substantially’’ from the current amount, which he pegged at about 300,000.  Anyone who gets near Trump or Vice President Mike Pence is routinely tested every day since multiple White House staffers tested positive. The U.S., however, is a long way from providing that amount of testing in workplaces across the nation. Harvard University researchers have concluded the country would need 5 million daily tests by early June.  The 1.3 million-plus confirmed cases of COVID-19 in the U.S. represent one-third of the world total. The U.S. total could rise substantially when testing becomes more pervasive.  – Jeanine Santucci  IRS issues deadline for direct deposit info for stimulus payments  Still waiting on your stimulus stash? The IRS has a new deadline to urge you to act soon if you're considering entering direct deposit information online at "Get My Payment." The Internal Revenue Service wants people to take action by noon Wednesday if they want a shot at receiving stimulus cash more quickly via direct deposit. Bank account information can be entered at "Get My Payment" at IRS.gov.  And in other news, the IRS said automatic payments will be sent soon to those receiving Social Security retirement, disability benefits, Railroad Retirement benefits, Veterans Affairs benefits or Supplemental Security Income. No specific timetable was given.  More COVID-19 headlines from USA TODAY
2020-05-12	AP  CURLING  Women’s world championships in Prince George, Canada from March 14-22 canceled.  Men’s world championships in Glasgow, Scotland from March 28-April 5 canceled.  World mixed doubles and senior championships in Kelowna, Canada from April 18-25 canceled.  CYCLING  Road  Tour de France from June 27-July 19 postponed to Aug. 29-Sept. 20.  Giro d’Italia in Hungary and Italy from May 9-31 postponed to Oct. 3-25.  Spanish Vuelta from Aug. 14-Sept. 6 postponed to Oct. 20-Nov. 8; Netherlands start canceled; Portugal stages dropped.  Tour of Hainan in China from Feb. 23-March 1 postponed.  UAE Tour from Feb. 23-29, after 5 of 7 stages cancelled.  Strade Bianche in Siena, Italy on March 7 postponed to Aug. 1.  Paris-Nice from March 8-15: Mitchelton-Scott, Ineos, Astana, UAE Team Emirates, CCC, Movistar, Jumbo-Visma teams withdrew. From Stage 2 of 8, no spectators. On March 14, Stage 7 of 8, canceled.  GP Larciano in Pistoia, Italy on March 8 canceled.  Tirreno-Adriatico in Italy from March 11-17 postponed to Sept. 7-14.  Istarsko Proljeće in Croatia from March 12-15 canceled.  Drentse Acht van Westerveld (women) in the Netherlands on March 13 canceled.  Bevrijdingsronde van Drenthe in the Netherlands on March 14-15 canceled.  Ronde van Drenthe (women) in the Netherlands on March 15 canceled.  Popolarissima in Italy on March 15 canceled.  Paris-Troyes on March 15 postponed.  Danilith Nokere Koerse in Belgium on March 18 canceled.  Volta ao Alentejo in Portugal from March 18-22 canceled.  Olympia’s Tour in the Netherlands from March 18-22 canceled.  Milan-San Remo on March 21 postponed to Aug. 8.  Omloop van de Westhoek (women) in Belgium on March 22 canceled.  Trofeo Alfredo Binda (women) in Cittiglio, Italy on March 22 postponed to June 2 canceled.  Tour de Normandie in France from March 23-27 canceled.  Volta a Catalunya in Spain from March 23-29 canceled.  AG Driedaagse Brugge-De Panne in Belgium from March 25-26 postponed to Oct. 20-21.  Settimana Coppi e Bartali in Italy from March 25-29 canceled.  E3 BinckBank Classic in Belgium on March 27 canceled.  Gent-Wevelgem in Belgium on March 29 postponed to Oct. 11.  Cholet-Pays de La Loir in France on March 29 canceled.  Dwars door Vlaanderen in Belgium on April 1 canceled.  Giro di Sicilia in Italy from April 1-4 canceled.  Joe Martin Stage Race in Arkansas from April 2-5 postponed.  Tour of Flanders in Belgium on April 5 postponed to Oct. 18.  Roue Tourangelle in France on April 5 canceled.  Tour of the Basque Country in Spain from April 6-11 canceled.  Sarthe-Pays de la Loire in France from April 7-10 canceled.  Scheldeprijs in Belgium on April 8 canceled.  Tour of Morocco from April 9-18 canceled.  Circuit des Ardennes in Belgium from April 10-12 canceled.  Paris-Roubaix on April 12 postponed to Oct. 25.  Tour of Turkey from April 12-19 postponed.  De Brabantse Pijl in Belgium on April 15 canceled.  Tour du Loir-et-Cher in France from April 15-19 canceled.  Amstel Gold Race in the Netherlands on April 19 postponed to Oct. 10.  Tour of the Alps in Italy and Austria from April 20-24 postponed.  Fleche Wallonne in Belgium on April 22 postponed to Sept. 30.  Tour de Bretagne in France from April 25-May 1 canceled.  Liege-Bastogne-Liege in Belgium on April 26 postponed to Oct. 4.  Tour de Romandie in Switzerland from April 28-May 3 canceled.  Tour of the Gila in New Mexico from April 29-May 3 canceled.  Tour de Yorkshire in England from April 30-May 3 postponed.  Eschborn–Frankfurt in Germany on May 1 canceled.  Vuelta Asturias in Spain from May 1-3 postponed.  4 Jours de Dunkerque in France from May 5-10 canceled.  Vuelta a la Comunidad de Madrid from May 7-10 postponed.  Tour of Chongming Island (women) in China from May 7-9 postponed to Oct. 23-25.  Festival Elsy Jacobs (women) in Luxembourg from May 8-10 canceled.  Trofee Maarten Wynants in Houthalen-Helchteren, Belgium from May 9-10 canceled.  Tour of Zhoushan Island in China from May 12-14 postponed.  Tour de Hongrie in Hungary from May 13-20 postponed.  La Classique Morbihan (women) in France on May 15 postponed.  Grand Prix de Plumelec Morbihan in France on May 16 postponed.  Boucles de l’Aulne in Châteaulin, France on May 17 canceled.  Tour of Japan from May 17-24 canceled.  Mercan’Tour Classic Alpes-Maritimes in Valberg, France on May 18 postponed.  Durango-Durango Emakumeen Saria (women) in Spain on May 20 postponed.  Circuit de Wallonie in Charleroi, Belgium on May 21 postponed.  Vuelta a Burgos Feminas (women) in Spain from May 21-24 postponed.  GP Marcel Kint in Zwevegem, Belgium on May 24 postponed.  Thüringen Ladies Tour in Germany from May 26-31 postponed.  ZLM Tour in the Netherlands from May 27-31 canceled.  Tour of Estonia from May 28-30 postponed.  Boucles de la Mayenne in France from May 28-31 postponed.  Ronde van Limburg in the Netherlands on May 30 canceled.  Tour of Taiyuan in China on May 31 postponed.  Critérium du Dauphiné in France from May 31-June 7 postponed to Aug. 12-16.  Tour de Gatineau (women) in Canada on June 4 postponed.  Chrono de la Gatineau in Canada on June 5 postponed.  Tour of Slovenia from June 6-14 canceled.  Tour de Suisse in Switzerland from June 6-14 canceled.  Elfstedenronde in Belgium on June 7 postponed.  Dwars door de Westhoek (women) in Belgium on June 7 canceled.  Women’s Tour in Britain from June 8-13 canceled.  Baloise Belgium Tour on June 10 canceled.  Tour de Korea in South Korea from June 10-14 canceled.  Vuelta Femenina a Guatemala from June 10-14 canceled.  Rund um Köln in Cologne, Germany on June 14 canceled.  Flanders Diamond Tour (women) in Nijlen, Belgium on June 14 canceled.  Adriatica Ionica Race in Italy from June 14-18 canceled.  Tour de Beauce in Canada from June 17-21 postponed.  IWT Jong Maar Moedig in Belgium on June 24 canceled.  Course Cycliste de Solidarnosc et des Champions Olympiques in Poland from June 24-27 postponed.  Tour de Serbie in Serbia from June 25-28 postponed.  Lotto Belgium Tour (women) from June 25-28 postponed.  Tour of Austria from June 26-July 3 canceled.  Giro Rosa (women) in Italy from June 26-July 5 postponed to Sept. 11-19.  Tour du Sénégal from June 27-July 4 postponed.  Gran Premio Città di Lugano in Switzerland on June 28 postponed.  Midden-Brabant Poort Omloop in Gilze, Netherlands on June 28 postponed.  Tour de Pologne in Poland from July 5-11 postponed to Aug. 5-9.  La Course (women) in Paris on July 19 postponed to Aug. 29.  Donostia Klasikoa in San Sebastián, Spain on July 25 canceled.  European championships in Trentino, Italy from Sept. 9-13 canceled.  Sea Otter Classic in Monterey, California from Oct. 1-4 postponed.  Track  Six Day Manchester in England from March 13-15 canceled.  Olympic test event in Tokyo from April 10-12 postponed.  Grand Prix Minsk in Belarus from May 18-21 postponed.  Grand Prix of Germany in Cottbus from May 22-23 postponed.  Grand Prix of Tula in Russia from May 27-29 postponed.  Pan American championships in Lima, Peru from May 27-31 postponed.  Bahnen-Tournee in Oerlikon, Switzerland on May 30 postponed.  Bahnen-Tournee in Singen, Germany from May 31-June 1 postponed.  Mountain Bike  Eliminator World Cup in Dubai on March 6 canceled.  Cape Epic in South Africa from March 15-22 canceled.  UCI World Cup in Lousa, Portugal on March 21-22 postponed.  Eliminator World Cup in Barcelona on March 28 canceled.  Cross-country World Cup in Ascona-Locarno, Switzerland from April 17-18 postponed.  UCI World Cup in Maribor, Slovenia from May 2-3 postponed.  UCI World Cup in Losinj, Croatia from May 9-10 canceled.  European championships in Graz, Austria from May 14-17 postponed.  UCI World Cup in Nove Mesto na Morave, Czech Republic from May 22-24 postponed.  Eliminator World Cup in Villard-De-Lans, France on June 5 postponed.  Cross-country World Cup in Bologna, Italy from June 5-6 postponed.  UCI World Cup in Fort William, Scotland from June 6-7 canceled.  World championships in Albstadt, Germany from June 25-28 canceled.  BMX  South American championships in San Juan, Argentina on March 22 postponed.  Oceania championships in Launceston, Australia on March 25 postponed.  Pan American championships in Lima, Peru on April 4 postponed.  Asian championships in Banyuwangi, Indonesia on May 11 postponed.  Supercross World Cup in Manchester, England from April 18-19 postponed.  Supercross World Cup in Papendal, Netherlands from May 2-3 postponed.  Supercross World Cup in Rock Hill, South Carolina from May 15-16 postponed.  World championships in Houston from May 26-31 canceled.  EQUESTRIAN  Longines Masters of Hong Kong from Feb. 14-16 canceled.  World Cup Finals in Las Vegas from April 15-19 canceled.  Kentucky Three-Day Event in Lexington from April 22-25 canceled.  Badminton Horse Trials in England from May 6-10 canceled.  Dressage Nations Cup in Compiegne, France from May 14-17 canceled.  World Equestrian Festival CHIO Aachen in Germany from May 29-June 7 postponed.  Dressage Nations Cup in Aachen, Germany from June 2-7 postponed.  Dressage Nations Cup in Rotterdam, Netherlands from June 18-21 canceled.  Longines Masters of Lausanne, Switzerland from June 18-21 canceled.  FENCING  Anaheim Grand Prix in California on March 13-15 postponed.  Men’s Saber World Cup in Budapest, Hungary on March 20-22 postponed.  Men’s Epee World Cup in Buenos Aires, Argentina on March 20-22 postponed.  Women’s Saber World Cup in Sint-Niklaas, Belgium on March 20-22, postponed.  Women’s Epee World Cup in Tashkent, Uzbekistan on March 20-22 postponed.  Junior world championships in Salt Lake City, Utah on April 3-11 postponed.  African Zonal Olympic qualifier in Cairo on April 15 postponed.  Asian Zonal Olympic qualifier in Seoul on April 15-16 postponed.  African championships in Cairo from April 16-20 postponed.  Asian championships in Seoul from April 17-22 postponed.  European Zonal Olympic qualifier in Madrid on April 18-19 postponed.  American Zonal Olympic qualifier in Panama City on April 18-19 postponed.  Saber Grand Prix in Seoul from April 24-26 canceled.  Epee Grand Prix in Cali, Colombia from May 1-3 canceled.  Men’s Foil World Cup in St. Petersburg, Russia from May 1-3 canceled.  Women’s Saber World Cup in Tunis, Tunisia from May 8-10 canceled.  Foil Grand Prix in Shanghai from May 15-17 canceled.  Women’s Epee World Cup in Dubai, United Arab Emirates from May 15-17 canceled.  Saber Grand Prix in Moscow from May 22-24 canceled.  European championships in Minsk, Belarus from June 16-21 postponed.  Pan American championships in Asuncion, Paraguay from June 16-21 postponed.  FIELD HOCKEY  Hockey Pro League: China vs. Belgium women from Feb. 8-9 postponed. League from March 13 suspended.  India women’s tour of China from March 14-25 canceled.  Ireland women’s tour of Malaysia in March-April canceled.  AMERICAN FOOTBALL  NFL: International Series in London and Mexico City from Sept. 27-Nov. 1 canceled.  Canadian Football League due to start on June 11 postponed.  GOLF  US PGA Tour  Players Championship in Ponte Vedra Beach, Florida on March 12, Day 1 of 4, canceled.  Valspar Championship in Palm Harbor, Florida from March 19-22 canceled.  WGC-Match Play in Austin, Texas from March 25-29 canceled.  Puntacana Championship in Punta Cana, Dominican Republic from March 26-29 postponed to Sept. 24-27.  Texas Open in San Antonio from April 2-5 canceled.  Masters in Augusta, Georgia from April 9-12 postponed to Nov. 12-15.  Heritage in Hilton Head, South Carolina from April 16-19 postponed to June 18-21, no spectators.  Zurich Classic in Avondale, Louisiana from April 23-26 canceled.  Wells Fargo Championship in Charlotte, North Carolina from April 30-May 3 canceled.  Byron Nelson in Dallas from May 7-10 canceled.  U.S. PGA Championship in San Francisco from May 14-17 postponed to Aug. 6-9.  Charles Schwab Challenge in Fort Worth, Texas from May 21-24 postponed to June 11-14, no spectators.  Rocket Mortgage Classic in Detroit from May 28-31 postponed to July 2-5, no spectators.  Memorial Tournament in Dublin, Ohio from June 4-7 postponed to July 16-19.  Canadian Open in Toronto from June 11-14 canceled.  U.S. Open in Mamaroneck, New York from June 18-21 postponed to Sept. 17-20.  Travelers Championship in Cromwell, Connecticut from June 25-28, no spectators.  WGC-St. Jude Invitational in Memphis, Tennessee from July 2-5 postponed to July 30-Aug. 2.  Barracuda Championship in Truckee, California from July 2-5 postponed to July 30-Aug. 2.  British Open in Sandwich, England from July 16-19 canceled.  Barbasol Championship in Nicholasville, Kentucky from July 16-19 canceled.  Wyndham Championship in Greensboro, North Carolina from Aug. 6-9 postponed to Aug. 13-16.  Northern Trust in Norton, Massachusetts from Aug. 13-16 postponed to Aug. 20-23.  BMW Championship in Olympia Fields, Illinois from Aug. 20-23 postponed to Aug. 27-30.  Tour Championship in Atlanta from Aug. 27-30 postponed to Sept. 3-7.  The Greenbrier in White Sulphur Springs, West Virginia from Sept. 10-13 canceled.  Safeway Open in Napa, California from Sept. 10-13 rescheduled to Sept. 17-20.  Houston Open in Texas from Nov. 12-15 rescheduled to Nov. 5-8.  US LPGA Tour  Honda LPGA Thailand in Pattaya from Feb. 20-23 canceled.  HSBC Women’s World Championship in Singapore from Feb. 27-March 1 canceled.  Blue Bay LPGA on Hainan Island from March 5-8 canceled.  Founders Cup in Phoenix, Arizona from March 19-22 canceled.  Kia Classic in Carlsbad, California from March 26-29 postponed to Sept. 24-27.  ANA Inspiration in Rancho Mirage, California from April 2-5 postponed to Sept. 10-13.  Lotte Championship in Hawaii from April 15-18 canceled.  LA Open in Los Angeles from April 23-26 canceled.  Mediheal Championship in Daly City, California from April 30-May 3 canceled.  Pelican Women’s Championship in Belleair, Florida from May 14-17 postponed to Nov. 12-15 postponed to Nov. 19-22.  Pure Silk Championship in Williamsburg, Virginia from May 21-24 canceled.  ShopRite Classic in Atlantic City, New Jersey from May 29-31 postponed to July 31-Aug. 2.  U.S. Women’s Open in Houston, Texas from June 4-7 postponed to Dec. 10-13.  Meijer Classic in Grand Rapids, Michigan from June 11-14 postponed to Oct. 1-4.  NW Arkansas Championship in Rogers from June 19-21 postponed to Aug. 28-30.  Women’s US PGA Championship in Newtown Square, Pennsylvania from June 25-28 postponed to Oct. 8-11.  Marathon Classic in Sylvania, Ohio from July 9-12 postponed to July 23-26.  Evian Championship in Evian-les-Bains, France from July 23-26 postponed to Aug. 6-9.  International Crown in St. Albans, England from Aug. 27-30 canceled.  Portland Classic in Oregon from Sept. 10-13 postponed to Sept. 17-20.  Volunteers of America Classic in The Colony, Texas from Oct. 1-4 postponed to Dec. 3-6.  Tour Championship in Naples, Florida from Nov. 19-22 postponed to Dec. 17-20.  European Tour  Kenya Open in Nairobi from March 12-15 canceled.  Indian Open in New Delhi from March 19-22 postponed.  Maybank Championship in Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia, from April 16-19 postponed.  China Open in Shenzhen from April 23-26 postponed.  Andalucia Masters in Sotogrande, Spain from April 30-May 3 postponed.  GolfSixes in Cascais, Portugal from May 9-10 canceled.  Made in Denmark in Farso from May 21-24 postponed.  Irish Open in Thomastown from May 28-31 postponed.  Trophée Hassan II in Rabat, Morocco from June 4-7 postponed.  Scandinavian Mixed in Stockholm from June 11-14 canceled.  BMW International Open in Munich from June 25-28 canceled.  Open de France in Paris from July 2-5 canceled.  Scottish Open in North Berwick from July 9-12 postponed.  Czech Masters in Prague on Aug. 20-23 canceled.  European Masters in Crans Montana, Switzerland from Aug. 27-30 canceled.  Asian Tour  Royal Cup in Pattaya, Thailand from March 12-15 postponed.  Bangabandhu Cup in Dhaka, Bangladesh from March 25-28 postponed.  Asia-Pacific Diamond Cup in Chiba, Japan from May 7-10 canceled.  Shinhan Donghae Open in Nara, Japan moved to Incheon, South Korea from Sept. 10-13.  Ladies European Tour  Saudi Ladies International in King Abdullah Economic City from March 19-22 postponed to Oct. 8-11.  Jabra Ladies Open in Evian-les-Bains, France from May 7-9 postponed to June 18-20.  La Reserva de Sotogrande Invitational in Spain from May 14-17 postponed.  Belgian Ladies Open in Wanxe from May 29-31 postponed.  Lalla Meryem Cup in Rabat, Morocco from June 4-7 postponed.  Scandinavian Mixed in Stockholm from June 11-14 canceled.  GYMNASTICS  Artistic World Cup in Melbourne, Australia, from Feb. 20-23: China team withdrew.  All-Around World Cup in Milwaukee on March 7: Russia team withdrew.  Artistic World Cup in Baku, Azerbaijan, from March 14, Day 3 of 4, canceled.  Artistic World Cup in Doha, Qatar on March 18-21 postponed to June 3-6, postponed.  All-Around World Cup in Stuttgart, Germany on March 20-22 canceled.  Aerobic World Cup in Cantanhede, Portugal on March 27-29 canceled.  All-Around World Cup in Birmingham, England on March 28 canceled.  Rhythmic World Cup in Pesaro, Italy on April 3-5 postponed to June 5-7, postponed.  Acrobatic World Cup in Sofia, Bulgaria on April 3-5 postponed.  All-Around World Cup in Tokyo on April 4-5 canceled.  Artistic Jesolo Cup in Italy on April 4-5 canceled.  Rhythmic World Cup in Sofia, Bulgaria on April 10-12 postponed to June 29-21, postponed.  Acrobatic World Cup in Puurs, Belgium on April 10-12 canceled.  Rhythmic World Cup in Tashkent, Uzbekistan on April 17-19 postponed.  Aerobic World Cup in Tokyo on April 18-19 canceled.  Trampoline World Cup in Brescia, Italy on April 24-25 postponed to June 19-20, postponed.  Rhythmic World Cup in Baku, Azerbaijan on April 24-26 postponed.  Artistic women’s European championships in Paris on April 30-May 3 canceled.  Artistic Asian championships in Tokyo on May 2-5 canceled.  Trampoline European championships in Gothenburg, Sweden on May 7-10 canceled.  Pan American championships in Utah Valley, United States on May 7-10 postponed.  Rhythmic Asian championships in Tokyo on May 8-10 canceled.  Rhythmic World Challenge Cup in Portimão, Portugal on May 8-10 postponed.  Aerobic world championships in Baku, Azerbaijan on May 14-16 postponed.  Artistic World Challenge Cup in Varna, Bulgaria on May 14-17 postponed.  Rhythmic European championships in Kyiv, Ukraine on May 21-24 canceled.  Trampoline African championships in Swakopmund Namibia, Namibia on May 27-29 postponed.  Artistic men’s European championships in Baku, Azerbaijan on May 27-31 canceled.  Acrobatic world championships in Geneva on May 29-31 canceled.  Artistic World Challenge Cup in Cairo on June 5-8 postponed.  Artistic World Challenge Cup in Koper, Slovenia on June 11-14 canceled.  Artistic World Challenge Cup in Osijek, Croatia on June 18-21 postponed.  Artistic World Challenge Cup in Mersin, Turkey on June 26-28 canceled.  Trampoline World Cup in Arosa, Switzerland on July 3-4 canceled.  Rhythmic World Challenge Cup in Minsk, Belarus on July 3-5 postponed.  Rhythmic World Challenge Cup in Moscow on July 10-12 postponed.  HANDBALL  Olympic women’s qualifying event in Podgorica, Montenegro from March 20-22 postponed to March 19-21, 2021.  Olympic women’s qualifying event in Lliria Spain from March 20-22 postponed to March 19-21, 2021.  Olympic women’s qualifying event in Györ, Hungary from March 20-22 postponed to March 19-21, 2021.  Olympic men’s qualifying event in Trondheim, Norway from April 17-19 postponed to March 12-14, 2021.  Olympic men’s qualifying event in Paris from April 17-19 postponed to March 12-14, 2021.  Olympic men’s qualifying event in Berlin from April 17-19 postponed to March 12-14, 2021.  HORSE RACING  Dubai World Cup on March 28 canceled.  Grand National in Liverpool, England on April 4 canceled.  Kentucky Derby in Louisville on May 2 postponed to Sept. 5.  1000 and 2000 Guineas Stakes in Newmarket, England on May 2-3 canceled.  Preakness Stakes in Baltimore on May 16 postponed.  Derby and Oaks in Epsom, England on June 5-6 canceled.  ICE HOCKEY  NHL from March 12 suspended.  KHL from March 17 suspended. From March 25 canceled.  Men’s world championship in Switzerland from May 8-24 canceled.  Women’s world championship in Nova Scotia, Canada from March 31-April 10 canceled.  Women’s world championship Division I Group A in Angers, France from April 12-18 canceled.  Women’s world championship Division I Group B in Katowice, Poland from March 28-April 3 canceled.  Women’s world championship Division II Group A in Jaca, Spain from March 29-April 3 canceled.  Men’s world championship Division I Group A in Ljubljana, Slovenia from April 27-May 3 canceled.  Men’s world championship Division I Group B in Katowice, Poland from April 27-May 3 canceled.  Men’s world championship Division IV in Bishkek, Kyrgyzstan from May 3-5 canceled.  Women’s Challenge Cup of Asia in Manila, Philippines from Feb. 23-28 canceled.  Women’s Challenge Cup of Asia Division I in Manila, Philippines from Feb. 23-28 canceled.  National League in Switzerland from March 2 suspended. From March 13 canceled.  Elite League in United Kingdom from March 13 canceled.  Men’s Olympic qualifiers in Bratislava, Slovakia; Riga, Latvia; Norway from Aug. 27-30 postponed to Aug. 26-29, 2021.  Champions Hockey League in Europe due to start on Sept. 3 postponed to Oct. 6.  US-Based Professional Women’s Hockey Players Association tour of Japan from March 4-7 canceled.  JUDO  Paris Grand Slam from Feb. 8-9: China team withdrew.  Dusseldorf Grand Slam in Germany from Feb. 21-23: China team withdrew.  Rabat Grand Prix in Morocco from March 6-8 canceled.  Winterthur European Cup in Switzerland from March 7-8 canceled.  Ekaterinburg Grand Slam in Russia from March 13-15 canceled.  Santiago Pan American Open in Chile from March 14-15 canceled.  Sarajevo European Cup in Bosnia and Herzegovina from March 21-22 canceled.  Lima Pan American Open in Peru from March 21-22 canceled.  Tbilisi Grand Prix in Georgia from March 27-29 canceled.  Antalya Grand Prix in Turkey from April 3-5 canceled.  Asian Oceania championships in Ulaanbaatar, Mongolia from April 17-18 canceled.  Nordic championships in Reykjavik, Iceland from April 25-26 postponed to Sept. 12-13.  Baku Grand Slam in Azerbaijan from May 8-10 canceled.  Orenburg European Cup in Russia from May 16-17 canceled.  Budapest Grand Slam in Hungary from June 12-14 canceled.  Celje-Podcetrtek European Cup in Slovenia from June 20-21 canceled.  Guayaquil Pan American Open in Ecuador from June 20-21 canceled.  African championships in Rabat, Morocco from June 25-27 canceled.  Hohhot Grand Prix in China from June 26-28 canceled.  Pan American championships in Montreal from June 26-28 canceled.  Potsdam European Cup in Germany from June 27-28 canceled.  European championships in Prague from Nov. 8-10 canceled.  KARATE  Karate 1 Premier League in Rabat, Morocco from March 13-15 canceled.  European championships in Baku, Azerbaijan from March 25-29 canceled.  Mediterranean Championships in Nicosia, Cyprus from April 3-5 postponed.  Karate 1 Premier League in Madrid from April 17-19 canceled.  Olympic qualifying tournament in Paris from May 8-10 postponed.  Pan American championships in San Jose, Costa Rica from May 25-30 canceled.  Oceania championships in Paita, New Caledonia from June 12-14 postponed.  Karate 1-Series A in Istanbul from June 19-21 canceled.  Asian championships in Bali, Indonesia from Sept. 4-6 suspended.  Karate 1-Series A Durban in South Africa from Sept. 11-13 canceled.  MODERN PENTATHLON  World Cups in Sofia, Bulgaria from March 25-29 and April 2-5 canceled.  World Cup in Budapest, Hungary from April 29-May 3 canceled.  World Cup Final in Seoul from May 14-17 canceled.  World championships moved from Xiamen, China to Cancun, Mexico on May 25-31 postponed.  World laser run championships moved from Xiamen, China on May 25-31 to Weiden, Germany on Aug. 25-26.  MOTORCYCLING  MotoGP  Qatar Grand Prix in Doha on March 8 canceled.  Thailand Grand Prix in Buriram on March 22 postponed to Oct. 4.  Americas Grand Prix in Austin, Texas on April 5 postponed to Nov. 15.  Argentina Grand Prix in Termas de Rio Hondo on April 19 postponed to Nov. 22.  Spanish Grand Prix in Jerez on May 3 postponed.  French Grand Prix in Le Mans on May 17 postponed.  German Grand Prix in Hohenstein-Ernstthal on June 21 canceled.  Dutch TT in Assen on June 28 canceled.  Finland Grand Prix in Iitti on July 12 canceled.  Aragon Grand Prix in Spain on Oct. 4 moved to Sept. 27.  Valencia Grand Prix in Spain on Nov. 15 moved to Nov. 29.  World Superbikes  Qatar Round in Lusail on March 15 postponed.  Spanish Round in Cadiz on March 29 postponed to Oct. 25.  Dutch Round in Assen on April 19 postponed to Aug. 23.  Italian Round in Imola on May 10 canceled.  Aragon Round in Alcañiz, Spain on May 24 postponed to Aug. 30.  Riviera di Rimini Round in Misano Adriatico, Italy on June 14 postponed to Nov. 8.  German Round in Oschersleben on Aug. 2 canceled.  French Round in Magny-Cours on Sept. 27 postponed to Oct. 4.  ROWING  Boat Race in London on March 29 canceled.  Americas Olympic qualification regatta in Rio de Janeiro from April 2-5 canceled.  World Cup I in Sabuadia, Italy from April 10-12 canceled.  Asia and Oceania Olympic qualifying regatta in Chungju, South Korea from April 27-30 canceled.  European Olympic qualifying regatta in Varese, Italy from April 27-29 canceled.  World Cup II in Varese, Italy from May 1-3 canceled.  Final Olympic qualification regatta in Lucerne, Switzerland from May 17-19 canceled.  World Cup III in Lucerne, Switzerland from May 22-24 canceled.  European championships in Poznan, Poland from June 5-7 postponed to Oct. 9-11.  Henley Royal Regatta in England from July 1-5 canceled.  World championships in Bled, Slovenia from Aug. 16-23 canceled.  RUGBY LEAGUE  Super League: Catalans vs. Leeds on March 14, postponed. Competition from March 16 suspended.  National Rugby League in Australia from March 19, no spectators. From March 23 suspended.  RUGBY UNION  Six Nations: Ireland vs. Italy in Dublin on March 7; Italy vs. England in Rome on March 14; France vs. Ireland in Paris on March 14; Wales vs. Scotland in Cardiff on March 14, postponed.  Women’s Six Nations: Italy vs. Scotland in Legnano on Feb. 23; Scotland vs. France in Glasgow on March 7; Ireland vs. Italy in Dublin on March 8; Italy vs. England in Padua on March 15; Wales vs. Scotland in Cardiff on March 15; France vs. Ireland in Villeneuve-d’Ascq on March 15, postponed.  European Rugby Championship: Georgia vs. Russia on March 14; Romania vs. Belgium on March 14; Switzerland vs. Netherlands on March 14; Spain vs. Portugal on March 15, postponed.  United States Women vs. Barbarians in San Diego on May 3 postponed.  Canada vs. French Barbarians in Montreal on July 4 canceled.  United States vs. French Barbarians in New York on July 11 canceled.  Euopean Rugby Women’s Championship: Spain vs. Russia on April 5; Spain vs. Netherlands on April 11, postponed.  Super Rugby: Sunwolves vs. ACT Brumbies on March 8 moved from Osaka, Japan to Canberra, Australia. Sunwolves vs. Crusaders on March 14 moved from Tokyo to Brisbane, Australia. Jaguares vs. Highlanders on March 14, no spectators. Competition from March 15 suspended.  European Champions Cup playoffs due to start on April 4 suspended.  European Challenge Cup playoffs due to start on April 3 suspended.  English Premiership from March 16 suspended.  Top 14 in France from March 13 suspended.  Pro14: Zebre vs. Ospreys on Feb. 29; Treviso vs. Ulster on Feb. 29, postponed. Competition from March 12 suspended.  Top League in Japan from Feb. 29 postponed. From March 14 suspended. From March 23 canceled.  Major League Rugby in the United States from March 13 suspended. From March 19 canceled.  Hong Kong Sevens from April 3-5 postponed to Oct. 16-18.  Singapore Sevens from April 11-12 postponed to Oct. 10-11.  Langford Sevens (women) in Canada from May 2-3 postponed.  London Sevens from May 23-24 postponed.  Paris Sevens from May 30-31 postponed.  Asia women’s championship in Hong Kong from March 14-22 postponed to May 8-16.  Olympic test event (Asia Sevens Invitational) in Tokyo from April 25-26 canceled.  MORE
2020-05-12	AP  SEOUL, South Korea (AP) — The South Korean women’s golf tour is starting up again with the KLPGA Championship opening on Thursday, an event that will be played without fans on the course.  Women’s golf in South Korea joins Korea’s professional baseball and soccer leagues, which have already restarted in the wake of the coronavirus pandemic.  “The priority is the safety of the players, tournament officials and golf fans and (the event) will be broadcast,” organizers said in a statement.  The tournament at the Lakewood Country Club located east of the capital Seoul was originally schedule for April 30 through May 3.  Organizers said social distancing will be practiced by players and tournament officials. Players will also have hand sanitizers available. It was not clear if players would take coronavirus tests.  The 150-player field is topped by Park Sung-hyun, Kim Sei-young and defending champion Choi Hye-jin.  South Korea's Yonhap news agency reported that Ko Jin-young and Park Sung-hyun, who are No. 1 and No. 3 in the women's world golf rankings, will play an exhibition skins match near Incheon International Airport on May 24, with the players donating their winnings to charities of their choice.  ___  More AP sports: https://apnews.com/apf-sports and https://twitter.com/AP_Sports
2020-05-13	Chris Gregoire and John Kasich  Opinion contributors  Social distancing, stay-at-home orders and closures of schools and non-essential businesses have seemingly stopped America in its tracks. Many Americans are asking the same questions — when will this end and when can we safely get back to life, even if it is a new normal?  The answer: Look abroad.  On April 16, President Donald Trump released a three-part plan for opening America again. According to the plan, states should first meet criteria that includes a downward trajectory of confirmed cases or the percent of positive tests within a 14-day period.  While only a few states currently meet the president’s criteria, more than half have already partially reopened or set plans to reopen by the middle of May. While each state plan may vary, one thing is certain — epidemiological data should drive decision-making. In addition, testing capacity and contract tracing to curtail transmission must be sufficient.  Learn from other countries  One silver lining for the United States is that many East Asian and European countries are temporally ahead of us on their respective pandemic curves and could offer lessons to inform our decision-making. Here are a few from a recent report by the Bipartisan Policy Center:  To loosen social distancing measures, some countries have outlined specific quantitative criteria to guide decision making. In Germany, federal and state officials are continuously monitoring the reproduction rate of COVID-19 to ensure that it stays below 1. Scientists suggest that a reproduction rate under 1 generally means the infection will spread slowly and eventually die out. This could be an important quantitative indicator for the U.S. beyond tracking confirmed cases.  Share your coronavirus story: Contact USA TODAY Opinion's hotline. We may publish your comments.  Many countries are also setting time periods between loosening social distancing measures. For example, Switzerland, Denmark and the Czech Republic plan to allow two to three weeks between opening various sectors of society. This is smart given the incubation period of the virus and the average time between presentation of symptoms and testing.  In addition, some countries are prioritizing opening sectors that have both a low risk of transmission and are also vital to the economy such as construction and manufacturing. With respect to schools, given that the school calendar in East Asian countries runs through the summer months, there may be opportunities for the U.S. to track their experiences.  The ability to loosen social distancing measures is largely dependent on increased testing. Many countries are prioritizing vulnerable populations for testing regardless of whether these patients are symptomatic. For example, Austria recently announced that all personnel and residents of retirement and nursing homes will be tested in the event that there is at least one confirmed COVID-19 case in an institution.  To offer similar widespread testing, our states need more support from the federal government. Specifically, the U.S. will need to triple its testing capacity over the next several weeks to replicate other successful regions such as Veneto, Italy or at least align with the goals of other peer countries.  Increase contract tracing  Contact tracing complements testing by ensuring that individuals exposed to the virus quarantine themselves for 14 days. During its first COVID-19 wave, Wuhan, China required 1,800 contact investigator teams of five people each before the city could reopen. Experts estimate the U.S. needs at least 100,000 contact tracers to help contain transmission.  Congress should focus on addressing this issue in the next supplemental legislation so that the public health system is strengthened to respond to COVID-19. In addition, countries such as Singapore and South Korea have successfully used some form of technology-aided contact tracing. The U.S. should follow suit while maintaining privacy standards.  Overall, not every country’s approach can be applied in the U.S. as our country has different political, social and economic feasibility. However, there are important implications for federal and state government leaders.  Governors should communicate clearly, set transparent, quantitative metrics to guide decision-making, allow sufficient time between phases of opening and consider low-risk and high-yield sectors of the economy when reopening, and consider providing housing for individuals infected to isolate.  Federal officials should standardize metrics, assist with testing, provide funds for contract tracing and bolster the public health infrastructure, launch a public awareness campaign on the use of cloth-based masks, and track schools abroad.  At both the state and national level, private sector innovation should be leveraged to support efforts to safely reopen the country. And all Americans need to continue to adhere to the basics — handwashing, respiratory etiquette, physical distancing and wearing cloth-based masks in public, especially when physical distancing is not possible.  Let’s continue to lead, innovate and communicate to protect America’s health and get our country going again.  Chris Gregoire is a former Democratic governor of Washington; John Kasich is a former Republican governor of Ohio.
2020-05-13	WASHINGTON – Even as health experts say more testing for the coronavirus is needed for states to safely begin lifting the restrictions put in place to slow the outbreak, President Donald Trump has repeatedly claimed the U.S. not only has sufficient testing capacity, but is outpacing the world in the effort.  "In the span of just a few short months, we've developed a testing capacity unmatched and unrivaled anywhere in the world, and it's not even close," Trump told reporters at a White House news briefing Monday. "This is a core element of our plan to safely and gradually reopen America."  Since the outbreak began, the president has tried to paint as positive a picture as possible of the pandemic and his administration's response. Trump has said he was trying to give the public reasons for hope and optimism, but critics have accused him of dangerously downplaying the threat because he was more concerned about the economic impact than the danger to public health.  Despite Trump's efforts to instill optimism, a majority of Americans believe "the worst is yet to come," according to a CNN poll released Tuesday. And only 36% of Americans say they trust the information coming from the president on the coronavirus, compared with 74% who say they trust the CDC and 55% who say they trust CNN.  A closer look at the numbers regarding the president's recent claims reveals the public has reason to be wary of his declarations.  'If people want to get tested, they get tested'  During a March 6 visit to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention in Atlanta, when the outbreak was just beginning in the U.S., the president said, "Anybody that wants a test can get a test."  After Trump repeated that claim at Monday's briefing, Adm. Brett Giroir, the assistant secretary for health at the Department of Health and Human Services, made a slight tweak to the president's wording.  "Everybody who needs a test can get a test," he said.  "Right now in America, anybody who needs a test can get a test in America with the numbers we have," he said. "If you are symptomatic with a respiratory illness, that is an indication for a test and you can get a test. If you need to be contact traced, you can get a test."  Trump agreed that only those with "sniffles" or a sore throat should be tested.  "If people want to get tested, they get tested. But for the most part, they shouldn’t want to get tested," Trump said.  But studies have shown that many infected people never present symptoms, and public health experts have called for enough testing to reveal the asymptomatic carriers of the disease.  Trump said 300,000 tests are now being conducted in the U.S. every day. But last week, a report from the Harvard Global Health Institute found that the U.S. should be doing 900,000 tests a day by May 15 to safely reopen.  According to their model, more than 40 states have not reached the level of testing needed, including four – Colorado, Florida, Georgia and Texas – that have already reopened.  'Ask China':Trump abruptly ends news conference after reporter question on coronavirus testing  'We're testing more per capita'  "We're testing more people per capita than South Korea, the United Kingdom, France, Japan, Sweden, Finland and many other countries," Trump said Monday.  He is correct, according to Our World in Data. The U.S. trailed all those countries except Japan and the U.K. in per capita testing through March. It took the U.S. until mid-April to pass South Korea, which confirmed its first COVID-19 case on the same day, and until April 25 to surpass Finland.  At a Health, Education, Labor and Pensions Committee hearing Tuesday, Sen. Mitt Romney, R-Utah, said surpassing South Korea was "nothing to celebrate" because that country has only lost 256 people to COVID-19, compared with the more than 80,000 deaths in the U.S.  Romney attributed South Korea's low death toll to aggressive early testing, with 140,000 tests done by March 6 when the U.S. had completed just 2,000. South Korea's success had decreased its need for testing.  The U.S. still trails many nations in per capita testing, including Australia, Italy, Russia, Canada, Denmark, Austria, Switzerland, Belgium and Iceland.  Trump also said the U.S. has conducted more than 9 million tests, which he correctly says is the most completed by any nation. That represents a single test for less than 3% of the population.  On occasion, the president has said the U.S. has conducted more tests than all other nations combined. That boast is demonstrably untrue and easily refuted by a glance at the data. The sum of the tests completed in the next three countries with the highest totals – Russian, Germany and Italy – easily surpasses the tests performed in the U.S.  Coronavirus numbers going down 'almost everywhere'  "Coronavirus numbers are looking MUCH better, going down almost everywhere. Big progress being made!" Trump said in a tweet on Monday.  The number of new cases overall, as well as the daily deaths related to the virus, appear to be on the way down as the outbreak has passed the peak in the two worst hot spots: New York and New Jersey.  Overall, there are 16 states where the number of cases has started to decline, according to data compiled by The New York Times.  But the number of daily cases has remained relatively stable in an additional 26 states. Eight other states are seeing the number of new cases rise, including the nation's most populous state, California.
2020-05-13	Dr. Anthony Fauci, whose recommendations on dealing with the coronavirus outbreak have generally been taken as law by U.S. politicians and the American public, is starting to draw doubters.  Fauci, testifying at a Senate hearing Tuesday, warned of "needless suffering and death" if states attempt to reopen too quickly. That drew criticism from GOP Sen. Rand Paul of Kentucky and, later, from Fox News commentator Tucker Carlson.  The news isn't all bad. Some data dashboards appear to show the daily U.S. death toll is flattening. And Los Angeles, despite extending its stay-at-home order, opened its beaches Wednesday.  There are now more than 82,000 deaths and 1.3 million confirmed coronavirus cases in the U.S., according to the Johns Hopkins University data dashboard. Worldwide, the virus has killed roughly 292,000 people. More than 4.2 million people have been infected.  Our live blog is being updated throughout the day. Refresh for the latest news, and get updates in your inbox with The Daily Briefing. Scroll down for more details.  Here are some of the most significant developments from Tuesday:  President Donald Trump's former campaign chairman Paul Manafort has been released from prison and is now in home confinement as the coronavirus spreads through the federal prison system.  During a hearing on the coronavirus Tuesday, Sen. Lamar Alexander, R-Tenn., asked about the prospects for treatments or a vaccine be ready in time for colleges planning to start classes in August. Fauci warned relying on that prospect was "a bridge too far."  Fauci did say a vaccine was "more likely than not" but cautioned about the prospects of a second wave of the virus in the fall. He said it was critical to develop better testing and to identify and trace who is sick and stock up on emergency supplies.  With no end in sight for the coronavirus lockdown and millions of Americans still out of work, House Democrats are proposing another round of stimulus. The bill would spend more than $3 trillion in aid to unemployed and small businesses.  What we're talking about Wednesday: If my coworker has COVID-19, can I file for unemployment? We take on questions about your money.  Some good news:​ The wife of Broadway star Nick Cordero announced her husband is awake after more than a month in a medically induced coma because of complications from the coronavirus.  Fox's Carlson: 'Is Tony Fauci right about the science?'  A Fox News commentator is questioning whether Americans are putting too much faith in the wisdom of Dr. Anthony Fauci, the face of the nation's public health response to the coronavirus outbreak.  "Fauci says, 'The children must stay home or countless people could die,' that’s the message," Tucker Carlson said hours after Fauci, the director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, provided grim testimony on prematurely reopening the nation. "So I’m asking a very simple question, how does he know this exactly? Is Tony Fauci right about the science?"  Carlson said there is "an awful lot of evidence" indicating states should start to loosen restrictions that have paralyzed the nation's economy. Carlson's comments aligned with those of Sen. Rand Paul, R-Ky., who at the hearing suggested Fauci wasn't the "end-all" for coronavirus decisions. Fauci countered that he advises on public health issues alone and doesn't "give advice about economic things."  The national pandemic curves appear to be flattening – for now  The Johns Hopkins and Worldometer data dashboards show the rise of confirmed cases and daily deaths in the U.S. may be slowing. And the Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation at the University of Washington, a leading model, released projections this week that show a steady decline for daily deaths – falling to 100 or less by early August. Is the worst over? What happens as states slowly reopen will tell the tale, experts say.  "Deaths are about who was infected three weeks ago," says Dennis Carroll, who led the U.S. Agency for International Development's infectious disease unit for more than a decade. "With the rapid suspension of (mitigation) measures, we’re in a brave new world."  Surf's up! Los Angeles beaches reopen – minus sunbathing  Los Angeles County beaches reopened Wednesday after a six-week hiatus, but no lollygagging. The county will follow regulations in place for other beaches on the left coast, meaning activities such as walking, running and surfing are cool but gathering, sitting and team sports like volleyball are not. A 6-foot social distance and face coverings are mandatory. Oh, and one more hitch – beach parking lots remain closed. The opening comes hours after public health Director Barbara Ferrer said the county's stay-at-home restrictions, set to end Friday, will likely last for three more months.  Economists brace for latest blast of unemployment news  America’s dispiriting weekly tally of COVID-19-related layoffs is likely to add millions more Thursday. Economists estimate the Labor Department will report that 2.5 million Americans filed new applications for unemployment insurance last week, down from the 3.2 million the prior week. That would push total unemployment claims the past eight weeks to a staggering 36 million. April’s unemployment rate hit 14.7%, highest since the Great Depression, up from 4.4% the prior month, and a 50-year low of 3.5% in February.  – Paul Davison  More coronavirus news and information from USA TODAY  China, Iran hacking could be hampering vaccine efforts  Chinese and Iranian hackers are aggressively targeting American universities, pharmaceutical companies and other health-care firms and could be hampering efforts to find a coronavirus vaccine, U.S. officials told the Wall Street Journal. Since at least Jan. 3, the two nations have waged cyberattacks that are tantamount to war, said the officials, who were not named. The Journal and The New York Times previously reported that the Trump administration could issue a statement as soon as this week planning to accuse China of attempting to hack information from U.S. researchers.  Street vendors across the US demand rights and coronavirus aid  Street vending advocates and vendors from Los Angeles, Chicago, New York and Washington, D.C. will come together Wednesday for a virtual town hall to discuss how to help street vendors amid the coronavirus outbreak.  The four organizations – the Los Angeles Street Vendor Campaign, the Street Vendor Association of Chicago, the Street Vendor Project in New York and Many Languages One Voice in Washington, D.C. – will present a national agenda with "recommendations on how policy must be changed to support the thousands of micro-entrepreneurs who contribute hundreds of millions of dollars to our economies, but are consistently left out of small business support systems," says the news release.  Mohamed Attia of the Street Vendor Project in New York told USA TODAY that they're demanding that the government to "step up" and think about workers in the informal economy.  The groups in Los Angeles, New York and Washington, D.C. have set up emergency relief funds to distribute to vendors. Vendors from each city will also share how the coronavirus pandemic has affected them during the town hall.  – Jessica Flores  Disney parks likely to require masks when properties reopen  Face masks are expected to be mandatory for workers and guests when Disney parks reopen in the U.S. In a CNBC interview published on Twitter, Disney CEO Bob Chapek addressed the coronavirus safety precautions that will be required in the era of the pandemic.  “Along with social distancing, one of the things we’re likely going to require is masks for both the cast and the guest,” Chapek said.  In Shanghai Disneyland, which reopened Monday, Disney is limiting visitor numbers, requiring masks and checking for the virus’ telltale fever.  – Charles Trepany  Amanda Kloots announces husband Nick Cordero has emerged from his coma  Broadway star Nick Cordero has emerged from his coma, wife Amanda Kloots triumphantly announced on Instagram Tuesday to repeated cries of "He's awake!" The star has spent more than a month in a medically induced coma over coronavirus complications.  “I asked the doctor today, ‘Can we say he is awake?'” said Kloots, speaking on Instagram Stories about Cordero while holding their 1-year-old son Elvis “And he is awake."  Over the course of six weeks, Cordero faced several coronavirus complications, including a leg amputation and the insertion of a temporary pacemaker.  – Bryan Alexander  California's latest restrictions could further delay pro, college sports  The largest county in the nation is expected to extend stay-at-home orders into August, jeopardizing the chances of multiple sports leagues resuming or beginning seasons in a uniform fashion. Los Angeles County – home to the Lakers, Clippers, Rams, Chargers, Kings, Dodgers, Sparks, Galaxy, Los Angeles FC, USC and UCLA — will "with all certainty" extend stay-at-home orders for the next three months, county health director Barbara Ferrer told a Board of Supervisors meeting Tuesday.  That would extend past the hoped-for early July start Major League Baseball. Adding to sports woes, California State University system chancellor Timothy White announced that in-person classes at its 23 campuses would be replaced with online instruction for the fall semester. That could jeopardize football and other fall sports at schools such as Fresno State, San Diego State and San Jose State.  Gov. Gavin Newsom on Friday eased the state into what he called "early Stage 2" reopening, most notably allowing for retail curbside pickup and delivery.  – Gabe Lacques and Steve Berkowitz  Accidental poisonings from disinfectants continue to rise  For the second consecutive month, accidental poisonings from misuse of disinfectants, bleach and hand sanitizers rose in April compared to last year, according to the American Association of Poison Control Centers.  The AAPCC's National Poison Data System, which scrapes information from poison control centers across the nation, saw a spike of 122% in reported cases of accidental poisonings related to disinfectants, according to Forbes. That included a 77% jump for bleach and a 56% increase for hand sanitizer.  What is unclear is what effect, if any, President Donald Trump's comments during a White House briefing on the possibility of disinfectants helping cure coronavirus had on the reported cases.  Democrats unveil $3 trillion coronavirus stimulus proposal  State and local governments would share nearly $1 trillion in federal aid to cover coronavirus-related costs and families would get another round of direct payments under a stimulus bill House Democrats unveiled Tuesday.  The more than $3 trillion Health and Economic Recovery Omnibus Emergency Solutions Act, or HEROES Act, also would expand unemployment assistance, boost food stamps and increase emergency grants to small businesses.  The bill is likely to get a cool reception in the GOP-controlled Senate where leaders have said they want to let the first $2.4 trillion of stimulus spending take full effect before moving on another measure that would pile on to the nation’s soaring debt.  – Ledyard King  Walmart, Sam's Club giving hourly employees coronavirus cash bonuses worth $390M in June  Walmart and Sam's Club are giving hourly employees another round of cash bonuses. The retailers announced Tuesday they would give the bonuses worth more than $390 million combined in June to all hourly U.S. employees "to recognize them for their many contributions to communities across the country during this unprecedented time."  The bonus is $300 for full-time workers and $150 for part-time hourly and temporary associates who work in stores, clubs, supply chain and offices if they are employed as of June 5.  The retailers previously gave employees cash bonuses worth a combined $365 million April 2 and handed out quarterly bonuses worth $180 million a month early on April 30.  – Kelly Tyko  What you need to know from the Senate coronavirus hearing  Dr. Anthony Fauci of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health; Food and Drug Administration Commissioner Dr. Stephen Hahn; head of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention Dr. Robert Redfield; and Adm. Brett Giroir, the coronavirus “testing czar” at the Department of Health and Human Services, all testified during a Tuesday Senate hearing on the coronavirus response.  Sen. Rand Paul, R-Ky. clashed with Fauci over school reopenings and said child mortality rate from the virus was lower than in adults. "As much as I respect you, Dr. Fauci, I don’t think you’re the end all," Paul said. "I don’t think you’re the one person who gets to make the decision."  Sen. Tim Kaine, D-Va., highlighted differences in how South Korea and the U.S. responded to the coronavirus, saying "We've got a long way to go." When Kaine asked about the death toll, Fauci said, "A death rate that high in any manner or form in my mind is unacceptable."  Sen. Chris Murphy, D-Conn., criticized the Trump administration for withholding detailed guidance from states about how to reopen their economies, saying the information that was provided was "criminally vague." In response, Redfield said the guidance would be released “soon.”  When asked by Sen. Elizabeth Warren, D-Mass, whether the virus was contained, Fauci said the U.S. was headed "in the right direction" but that "we don’t have it completely under control."  Fauci said that while patients treated with Remdesivir recovered 31% faster, he emphasized that the result was "statistically significant, but really modest."  – Bart Jansen, Maureen Groppe and William Cummings  Wuhan plans city-wide test for all 11 million residents  Over a 10-day period, the Chinese city of Wuhan plans to administer coronavirus tests to all residents, according to Reuters, which cited an internal document.  Each district was asked to submit by Tuesday a detailed plan for how it could conduct the comprehensive testing in their respective regions. According to BBC News, the document states that older residents and densely populated regions should be prioritized for testing. The document refers to the testing plan as "The 10-day battle."  Wuhan, which became the first global epicenter to suffer a coronavirus outbreak, reported a cluster of new cases over the weekend. Wuhan lifted a strict lockdown on April 8. According to the Johns Hopkins University data dashboard, Hubei province, where Wuhan is located, has reported 68,134 cases as of Tuesday morning, with 4,512 deaths.  More COVID-19 headlines from USA TODAY  Contributing: Associated Press
2020-05-13	Zan Dubin-Scott  Opinion contributor  I guess it was the former reporter in me. Los Angeles County announced April 29 that every resident — symptomatic or not — could now get a free coronavirus test. I had no suspicion I had it, but I had been watching the most important event of our era and my life unfold in horrible, vivid color seven days a week for months from afar. I wanted to inch closer. And I had been hearing for weeks how testing is key to our recovery.  L.A. County has borne the brunt of California’s COVID-19 ordeal, with more than 33,000 cases and over 1,600 deaths reported as of Tuesday night. Mothers, fathers, brothers, sisters. We’ve all seen the grief. It’s gut wrenching. Thousands are experiencing that firsthand.  But not everyone is. Many of us are having a different, much more mundane experience. Many of us are just sitting, isolated, watching cable. I wanted to see something with my own eyes. To thank a health care worker, maybe. And I could actually have the virus and be asymptomatic. I haven’t seen my 92-year-old stepmother since this began, but as things begin to loosen up, I’ve begun to want to see Mary Lou. Obviously, if I have it, I won’t. And I’d need to wait until I was no longer contagious.  Also, it could help in a broader way.  Essential for reopening Los Angeles  In announcing the expanded testing, L.A. Mayor Eric Garcetti said it is essential to getting the city back up and running. And I wouldn’t be taking a test away from those who needed it more. “Priority for the same or next-day testing is still given to people with symptoms,” the city announced, adding that testing is also prioritized for medical professionals and other front-line workers who interact with the public.  “Because this disease can be a silent killer, we have carefully built the capacity to get more people tested,” Garcetti said. “No one should have to wait, wonder, or risk infecting others. Don’t leave it to chance. Schedule a test.”  (The city actually had a surplus of tests — even while some areas across the country are experiencing shortages — because it had made procurement a priority, according to the mayor’s office, which is hoping to be reimbursed for testing costs by the Federal Emergency Management Agency.)  So yes, I wanted to do it.  I quickly made my reservation and watched the brief video: It would be a simple mouth swab self-administered from the comfort of my own car. No discomfort, no walking into a doctor’s office. I could do that. I was ready.  What I wasn’t prepared for: an emotional reaction. I was moved. Was it seeing the gowned and masked front-liners in real life? The selfless nurses, techs and volunteers I had seen or heard of over and over, some of them crying, some of them sick, some of them with us no more? Or was it the sense of unity? Scores of Angelenos in one of the most populous counties in the country were doing it with me. (L.A. tested 10,000 in one day.) Surely many of those in the cars in line with me were worried they were sick. For them, this wasn’t altruism or anything else. But I had a sense that others were doing it to help, too, or to make it real.  Coronavirus:Protesters should demand coronavirus safety and a reopened economy. We can have both.  At any rate, it was far easier than I had imagined. I was expecting a one-hour ordeal — or even two. Nope. Probably 20 minutes from start to finish.  I pulled into the sprawling Veteran Affairs grounds, and the snaking began. Signs said "KEEP WINDOWS ROLLED ALL THE WAY UP." All right ... this was serious. And safe. I felt safe.  My first point of contact was a young man holding a sign reminding me to watch the instructional video. Check. Then a sign told me to ready my reservation number and ID. Check. Another sign reminded me to keep my windows closed.  As I neared the check-in area, I could see that the driver of the car ahead of me had written his reservation number on a piece of paper and held it up to his closed window to help the check-in worker. I did the same and got a big thank you for my Boy Scoutedness from the man who also gave me my test kit. Using a 3-foot pole with grabbers on the end of it, he maintained his social distance to deliver the goods through my slightly opened window: a little plastic bag bearing the scary biohazard symbol and containing a surprisingly tiny swab — more like an overgrown toothpick than a Q-tip — and the little vial to place it in when done.  As I advanced further, I got a little nervous. Yes, I had watched the video, but it had been a few days and I didn’t want to screw this up. Would someone help me? Indeed, she would. My windows still closed tight, another angel in a yellow gown, face mask and plastic face shield and gloves, who I could barely hear, began a pantomime: She motioned for me to cough into my elbow (this brings up lung fluid), then open the bag with the goods and extract the smaller bag with the swab. Now, go forth and swab. A little instruction pamphlet also helped: insides of both cheeks, tongue, gums, roof of mouth. After a moment or two, the angel returned and instructed me to place the swab in the vial and place the vial in the bigger scary bag. Done.  I had brought a garden rose to give to one of the workers, but of course, she couldn’t take it. I held it up to the window, we shared our regrets, and she put her hands in prayer position and did a little bow of thanks. I got the feels.  I drove ahead a little more, and another grabber-pole worker extracted my bag. I was done. I was stunned. So quick. Anticlimactic.  Of course, I had to instantly call a friend and share. He happens to be a doctor and couldn’t believe I had taken the test. He would never have done it. Too many false positives, he said.  Oh well, guess there’s that. Not worried. Guess I could get tested again.  Another friend raised the specter of like, CIA surveillance. I’d be part of a Big Brother database. Well, there is that, too, I suppose, though nobody has asked me to enter my results into my cellphone yet, a la South Korea. And hey, they’ve done a pretty good job of squelching this thing (although they had a new cluster of infections last weekend).  So, I thought, I’ll just stay away from Edward Snowden’s Twitter feed for now, wait patiently for my results and think positive — or rather, negative — thoughts.  Coronavirus: People need people, but it's risky to resume social activities so soon  I’m glad I did it. I was impressed with how smoothly it went. Felt a little city pride there. And other friends have plied me for details. Sure, I’d rather have had an antibody test. I’d love to be immune, part of the Newly Prestigious Herd, although nobody knows how long immunity might last. Effing germ. But it has been so odd to experience a momentous albeit horrible event wreaking havoc worldwide — and yet somehow feel removed from it, toilet paper travails, mounting financial challenges and existential dread notwithstanding.  I feel a little bit less remote now. Maybe I’ve done my tiny part to help fill in the overall picture of the thing. And I had a chance to thank one of those angels, even if I had to take home that rose.  As it turns out, my test results were negative. Still not going to visit stepmom, though. L.A. is beginning to ease its stay-at-home orders. But I’m going to wait a little longer. At least a little.  Zan Dubin-Scott, a former staff writer/reporter with the Los Angeles Times, runs ZDS Communications, a public relations agency. Follow her on Twitter: @zandubinscott
